
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06335/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 May 2015                         |On 29 June 2015                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              mrs shabana javed
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Ranjha, instructed by Sky Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and her  date  of  birth  is  23
    March 1976.  She appeals against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    23 April 2014 to refuse her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a
    partner of a points-based migrant, Mr Javed Iqbal under paragraph  319C
    of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on the  basis  that
    he was not satisfied that the marriage  was  subsisting  and  that  the
    parties intended to live with each other in the United Kingdom.

 3.  The  appellant  had  married  the  sponsor  on  9  May  2012  and  had
    subsequently applied for entry  clearance  soon  after  their  marriage
    which was refused owing to a miscalculation  of  the  maintenance.   No
    issue of subsistence was raised by the respondent at that time.

 4. In the decision the Entry Clearance Officer stated that:

         "I note from our records that your spouse has  resided  in  the  UK
         since September 2009 and I am aware that you have never visited him
         in the UK.  You have provided no photographic  evidence  with  your
         with your  application  to  demonstrate  that  you  have  met  your
         sponsor.  You have also  provided  no  documentation  demonstrating
         that you are in regular contact with him  and  are  engaged  in  an
         ongoing relationship.  Given this coupled with the  fact  that  you
         have chosen to live  in  different  countries  pre  and  post  your
         marriage means that I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  marriage  is
         subsisting and that you intend to live with your spouse  throughout
         your stay in the UK."  319C(d)(e).

    Paragraph (d) states:

         "(d) the marriage or civil partnership or relationship  similar  to
             marriage or civil partnership must be subsisting at  the  time
             the application is made.

         (e)  the applicant and the  relevant  points-based  system  migrant
             must intend to live with the other as their  spouse  or  civil
             partner,  unmarried  or  same  sex  partner   throughout   the
             applicant's stay in the UK."

 5. In her bundle submitted to the First-tier Tribunal there was a  witness
    statement of the appellant and the sponsor, some  telephone  schedules,
    copies of photographs at a wedding and remittance receipts.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan determined the matter on the papers at
    Sheldon Court in Birmingham on  11  February  2015  and  dismissed  the
    appeal on both the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 7. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge had overlooked and ignored evidence in  the  form  of  copies  of
    passport pages of the sponsor to confirm the visits to Pakistan to  see
    his wife, misdirected himself in  relation  to  the  telephone  records
    submitted with the application and was wrong to conclude that there was
    only one  money  transfer  receipt  which  postdated  the  respondent's
    decision.

 8. In essence the judge had failed to take into account all  the  evidence
    and had no regard to the statements of the sponsor and  the  appellant.
    The judge  was  inconsistent  with  the  guidance  set  out  in  Goudey
    (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) and  had
    failed to give sufficient reasons, MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen on the basis that  it
    was apparent that the judge did not take account of the evidence.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing Mr Ranjha referred to the bundle  that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and to extensive evidence which was not referred to
    by the judge.   This  included  remittances,  copies  of  the  passport
    showing the appellant's sponsor entering Pakistan on a yearly basis and
    various telephone records.

11. The judge did not take into account Goudey.

12. Ms Isherwood acknowledged that there  was  information  which  was  not
    taken into account by the judge and conceded that this evidence  should
    have been  taken  into  account.   Nonetheless,  with  regards  to  the
    telephone communication records, she submitted that the numbers did not
    correlate.

13. In the circumstances I find that there is an error of law.  It is clear
    that the judge has failed to take into account extensive evidence.   He
    referred to  the  application  made  by  the  wife  in  the  record  of
    submissions but made no finding in relation to that.  The judge did not
    follow Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041.
     There were remittances indicated from 3 April 2013 to January 2014 and
    these were not all alluded to even though  they  appeared  to  commence
    prior to the ECO's decision: indeed the judge stated there was only one
    remittance and that postdated the decision.

14. Mr Ranjha referred to the telephone numbers.

15. I am satisfied that there was significant evidence which had  not  been
    taken into account.  This in effect is a procedural error  and  renders
    the findings of the judge unsafe.

16. Bearing in mind the nature and extent of findings to be made on all the
    evidence presented to the First-tier Tribunal I  remit  the  matter  to
    that Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17. I direct that the matter should be linked to an appeal to be  heard  in
    relation to the appellant's husband, that is  Mr  Javed  Iqbal,  Appeal
    Number IA/21372/2014.  That appeal is due to be heard on 7 July 2015.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 26th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
