
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2016                  |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                             MR SHADULI MEETHAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  (CHENNAI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kanangara, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer, on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
                    ('ECO')


                                  Decision

Introduction


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 14 May 1990. On 13 February
    2015 he applied for a certificate of entitlement to a right of abode in
    the UK. The basis of the  application  was  that  his  grandfather,  Mr
    Mammu,  was  a  British  citizen  whose  daughter,  Mrs  Fathima   (the
    appellant's mother), had been granted a certificate of entitlement to a
    Right of Abode on the basis of her father's British status.  The  Entry
    Clearance officer refused his application on 11 March 2015 on the basis
    that neither of the appellant's parents was a British citizen by  birth
    at the time of the appellant's birth.

 2. The appellant appealed against the ECO's  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In a  decision,  promulgated  on  21  June  2015,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carroll dismissed the appellant's appeal. The First-tier
    Tribunal found that as neither of the appellant's parents was a citizen
    of the United Kingdom at the time of his birth he did not  satisfy  the
    provisions of section 2(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal. On 21  October  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by
    failing to apply the law  correctly  and  in  failing  to  make  proper
    findings. In particular it is  asserted  that  the  appellant  was  not
    relying on section 2(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 ('the 1971 Act')  -
    the applicable provision was section 2(1)(a) of the British Nationality
    Act 1981 ('the 1981 Act'). Further it is submitted that the appellant's
    mother was granted a right of abode. The right of abode  stamp  in  his
    mother's passport and the determination of her appeal was part  of  the
    appeal bundle as was the appellant's aunt's and  his  cousin's  appeals
    determinations. It is asserted that the same law that was applicable to
    his cousin applies to the appellant.

 5. The ECO served a notice under Rule 24 (of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).  The ECO asserts  that  the  appellant's  mother
    obtained her certificate of entitlement to the right of abode by virtue
    of her descent from her father who registered for  British  Citizenship
    in 1966. It is also  asserted  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a
    legitimate expectation based on the fact  that  other  members  of  his
    family have had appeals allowed.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before us we were provided with a skeleton  argument  on
    behalf of the ECO. Mr Kanangara referred to  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. In oral submissions Mr Kanangara clarified that the appellant  was  not
    arguing that a legitimate expectation had arisen as  a  result  of  the
    grant of a certificate of entitlement to a right of abode in respect of
    his cousin. The position of the appellant was that the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Judge Pitt) in his cousin's case correctly applied the  law  and  that
    the law should be applied in the same way to the  appellant.  Therefore
    his appeal should also be allowed.

 8. He submitted that the basis of the  appeal  was  that  the  appellant's
    mother was granted a right of abode under section 2(1)(a) of  the  1971
    Act.  After  questions  from  the  panel  and  after  considering   the
    appellant's  mother's  passport  which  bore   the   endorsement   'Sec
    2(1)(b)(i)', Mr Kanangara submitted that it made no difference  if  the
    appellant's mother was granted a right of abode under  section  2(1)(a)
    or (b) of the 1971 Act. He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  mother's
    father (born in India) had been registered as a British Citizen under s
    6(1) of the British Nationality Act 1948 ('the 1948 Act') in  1954  and
    subsequently in 1966. Therefore because  she  was  born  to  a  British
    citizen  at  the  time  of  her  birth  she  was  entitled  to  British
    citizenship. He submitted that she was a British  citizen  from  birth.
    When pressed, Mr Kanangara was unable to cite any specific  legislative
    provision that conferred British citizenship on the appellant's  mother
    as a right from birth.  He  cited  section  2(1)(a)  of  the  1971  Act
    asserting that the appellant's mother was a British citizen from birth.
    When asked to clarify the precise legislative basis of the  appellant's
    mother's right of abode he submitted that the  appellant's  mother  was
    entitled to a right of abode throughout her  life.  He  submitted  that
    under sections 2(1)(a) and (b) of the 1971 Act the right  of  abode  is
    not obtained by descent. The new version  of  the  1971  Act  makes  no
    reference to obtaining a right of abode by descent. The law was amended
    in 1983 and the heading 'by descent' was removed. It was only under the
    previous version of the 1971 Act that the right of abode obtained under
    the unamended sections was obtained by  descent.  He  referred  to  the
    Tribunal decisions in the bundle and submitted that the  law  had  been
    correctly applied in the case  of  the  appellant's  mother,  aunt  and
    cousin.

 9. Mr Jarvis submitted that there are two circumstances  relevant  to  the
    instant case - either a person is a British citizen or  a  Commonwealth
    citizen. Reference must be made to the previous version of the 1971 Act
    which provides for a right of abode by descent. He submitted that  this
    was the only way that the appellant's  mother  could  have  obtained  a
    right of abode. He explained that the  nexus  between  the  appellant's
    mother and her father provided her with a right of  abode  by  descent.
    The appellant cannot succeed as the only nexus  for  the  appellant  is
    through a descendant. He submitted that the law is clear as to what the
    appellant has to show.

10. To determine if there was an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision we need to establish whether or  not  the  appellant's  mother
    obtained her British citizenship by descent and whether or not she  had
    the status of British citizen at the time of the appellant's birth.  As
    set out above the basis of the appellant's mother's British citizenship
    was not clear. We therefore asked the parties to clarify the basis upon
    which the appellant's mother obtained her right of abode as it was  not
    clear to us how she qualified under the current provisions  in  section
    2(1)(b) of the 1971 Act which refer to the previous provisions  in  the
    1971 Act. Under section 2(1)(d) of the previous version of the 1971 Act
    (the only relevant provision) the appellant's mother  did  not  satisfy
    the criteria set out therein as her father had not been born in the UK.
    We gave directions to the parties  to  provide  the  following  written
    clarification:

         1. The appellant's mother's passport  contains  a  'Certificate  of
         Entitlement to the Right of Abode'  with  a  reference  to  section
         2(1)(b)(i). The parties shall provide written  submissions  setting
         out the basis upon which the appellant's  mother  was  granted  the
         right of abode with reference to the correct  statutory  provisions
         under which she qualified and the basis upon which she qualified.

         2. The  parties  shall  provide  written  submissions  setting  out
         whether or not the grant of the right of abode to  the  appellant's
         mother falls within s14 of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981  -
         'Meaning of British citizen 'by descent' '.

         3. The parties shall provide written  submissions  setting  out  on
         what basis section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971 could apply to the
         appellant's mother in its original form.

11. These submissions were required to be filed by 30 November 2016.

12. Both parties filed written submissions. We are grateful to the  parties
    for setting out in detail the basis of their arguments. We do  not  set
    those arguments out here but refer to them in the analysis of  the  law
    and application to the facts below.

Discussion

13. In order to succeed in his appeal to the Upper Tribunal it is  for  the
    appellant  to  demonstrate  firstly,  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    materially erred in law and secondly, that he  satisfies  the  relevant
    legal provisions entitling him to a certificate  of  entitlement  to  a
    right of abode in the UK.



14. It is  asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  by
    referring to the 1971 Act rather than the 1981 Act. It is  argued  that
    the appellant was not relying on section 2(1) of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 - the applicable provision was  section  2(1)(a)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981. The appellant (unsurprisingly) did not specify on
    his application form the legal provision under which  he  was  applying
    for a certificate of entitlement to the right of abode in the  UK.  His
    application was considered and refused under s 2(1) of  the  1971  Act.
    The basis of the appellant's application was that he qualified for  the
    right of abode on  the  basis  of  his  relationship  to  his  maternal
    grandfather. In answer to question 70 on the application form  'How  do
    you qualify for the right of Abode', the appellant stated 'A citizen or
    (sic) the UK and  Colonies  at  birth  and  with  a  grandparent  born,
    registered, naturalised or adopted  in  the  UK'.  This  is  clearly  a
    reference to the 'Right of Abode' entitlement set out in section  2  of
    the 1971 Act. The First-tier Tribunal refers throughout its decision to
    the 1971 Act. The right of abode is a statutory right, which  a  person
    either has or does  not  have,  depending  on  whether  they  meet  the
    conditions in section 2(1) of the 1971 Act. Section 2 of the  1981  Act
    concerns only acquisition of British citizenship  by  descent  not  the
    requirements for a right of abode. There was no error in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in considering and deciding that the appellant  did
    not satisfy  the  provisions  of  s.2(1)  of  the  1971  Act.  However,
    reference is made to paragraph 9 of the appellant's  skeleton  argument
    recording  the  submission  that   the   appellant   acquired   British
    citizenship by descent under section 2(1)(a) of the 1981 Act. The First-
    tier Tribunal did not consider  this  argument.  At  paragraph  12  the
    reason for this was set out as:


         'This argument does not address the  basis  of  the  ECO's  refusal
         namely that at the time of his birth neither of  his  parents  were
         citizens of the United Kingdom. Indeed at the time of his birth his
         mother did not even hold a Certificate of Entitlement to the  Right
         of Abode...'

15. The appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal is not
    easy to follow. Essentially it was argued that the  appellant's  mother
    was upon her birth entitled to register as a British subject under s  7
    of the 1981 Act  and  that  her  rights  as  a  British  National  were
    subsequently  recognised  when  she  was  granted  a   certificate   of
    entitlement to the right of abode  in  2010.  Clearly  the  appellant's
    mother could not have been entitled to anything under the 1981  Act  at
    the time she was born in 1972 as it had not been enacted. Further,  the
    appellant's mother did not in fact register so whether she  could  have
    done so is immaterial (we have therefore  not  considered  if  she  was
    entitled to registration). However, the issue as to whether or not  the
    appellant's mother was a British citizen at the time of the appellant's
    birth in 1990 was a material issue that was relevant to the appellant's
    right of abode which in turn depends upon the  appellant's  acquisition
    of British citizenship under the 1981 Act. The First-tier Tribunal  did
    not provide any reasons as to why it considered  that  the  appellant's
    parents were not British citizens at the time of his birth. The holding
    of  a  certificate  of  entitlement  to  a  right  of  abode   is   not
    determinative as a certificate is evidence of the entitlement  not  the
    entitlement itself which is (on the facts  of  this  case)  a  relevant
    factor. Although this amounts to an error of law  for  the  reasons  we
    give below it was not material.

16. Essentially, for the purposes of this case, for  the  appellant  to  be
    entitled to a right of abode (under the current version of s.2  of  the
    1971 Act), the appellant must prove that in accordance with s. 2 of the
    1981 Act  he has acquired  British citizenship.  In  order  to  acquire
    British citizenship he must be able to demonstrate that his mother  was
    a British citizen 'otherwise than by descent' and was so at the time of
    his birth. This is the crux of this appeal.  It  was  not  argued  with
    clarity before us or the First-tier Tribunal, hence the  need  for  the
    parties to provide us with written submissions on this point.

17. The appellant was born on 14 May 1990. Rather than the  usual  approach
    of working through citizenship from the 1948 Act to the present day  we
    consider that working backwards is instructive in this case.

18. The current version of section  2  of  the  1971  Act  (insofar  as  is
    relevant to this appeal) provides:

         'Statement of right of abode in United Kingdom.

         (1)A person is under this Act to have the right  of  abode  in  the
         United Kingdom if-

         (a) he is a British citizen; or ...'

19. Section 2 of the British Nationality Act 1981 provides (insofar  as  is
    relevant to this appeal):

         '2 Acquisition by descent.

         (1) A person born outside the United  Kingdom  and  the  qualifying
         territories after commencement shall be a British citizen if at the
         time of the birth his father or mother-

         (a) is a British citizen otherwise than by descent; or...'

Was the appellant's mother a British citizen on 14 May 1990?

20.  British  citizenship  is  a  legal  status  that  was  introduced   on
    commencement of the 1981 Act. In order to determine if the  appellant's
    mother became a British citizen when  the  1981  Act  commenced  it  is
    necessary to consider what her citizenship status was before 1  January
    1983 and whether she was entitled to a right of abode. This is  because
    on  commencement  of  the  1981  Act  British  citizenship  status  was
    conferred automatically reflecting the circumstances of citizens of the
    United Kingdom and Colonies ('CUKC'). It has not been argued  that  the
    appellant's mother had any status other than a CUKC prior to  the  1981
    Act. CUKCs who had the right  of  abode  acquired  British  Citizenship
    automatically at commencement of the 1981 Act (s.11).

21. Section 11 of the 1981 Act provides:

         11. Citizens of  U.K.  and  Colonies  who  are  to  become  British
         citizens at commencement.

          (1) Subject to subsection (2), a  person  who  immediately  before
         commencement-

         (a) was a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies; and

         (b) had the  right  of  abode  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
         Immigration Act

         1971 as then in force,  shall  at  commencement  become  a  British
         citizen."

22. The appellant argues that the appellant's mother was  entitled  to  the
    right of abode under section 2(1)(a) of  the  1971  Act  as  originally
    enacted (in force prior to amendment by the 1981 Act) . This provided:



       2(1)A person is under this Act to have the right of abode, in the
      United Kingdom if-


        a) he is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies who has  that
           citizenship by his birth, adoption, naturalisation or (except as
           mentioned below) registration in the United Kingdom or in any of
           the Islands ; or


        b) he is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies  born  to  or
           legally adopted by a parent who had that citizenship at the time
           of the birth or adoption, and  the parent either-


              i)  then  had  that  citizenship  by  his   birth,   adoption,
                 naturalisation or (except as mentioned below)  registration
                 in the United Kingdom or in any of the Islands ; or
             ii) had been born to or legally adopted by a parent who at  the
                 time of that birth or adoption so had it ; or   ...


23. In order to satisfy s. 2(1) of the 1971 Act as enacted the  appellant's
    mother must have been a CUKC. The appellant has failed to address  this
    issue and has not set out the basis on which the appellant's mother was
    a CUKC. In 1972 when the appellant's  mother  was  born  India  was  no
    longer a colony. No provision in the 1948 Act has been cited that would
    entitle the appellant's mother to become a CUKC simply by virtue of her
    birth in India in 1972. In other words she was not a  CUKC  independent
    of her father's status. The ECO submits  that  the  appellant's  mother
    became a CUKC by virtue of being the descendent of a CUKC under s. 5(1)
    of the 1948 Act (we consider below the issue with regard  to  the  CUKC
    status of the appellant's grandfather).


24. Section 5 of the 1948 Act provided:


         '5.-Citizenship by descent
         (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person born  after
         the commencement of this Act shall  be  a  citizen  of  the  United
         Kingdom and Colonies by descent if his father is a citizen  of  the
         United Kingdom and Colonies at the time of the birth'

25. No other provisions  have  been  cited  to  us.  We  accept  the  ECO's
    submission. The  appellant's  mother's  CUKC  status  was  obtained  by
    descent from the appellant's grandfather.

26. Having established that the appellant's mother was a CUKC  we  move  to
    consider whether she had the right of abode in the UK.

27. The appellant's mother clearly cannot satisfy 2(1)(a) of the  1971  Act
    as enacted as she was not born in the United Kingdom.

28. The appellant argues that his mother cannot  satisfy  s2(1)(b)  because
    the appellant's grandfather did not obtain his citizenship registration
    in the UK-the registration of his citizenship was in 1954 in Singapore.
    If the appellant was correct in this  assertion  then  the  appellant's
    mother did not have a right of abode at all.

29. The ECO explains that section 6(1) of the 1948 Act, as  amended  by  s.
    12(2) of the 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act, provided:

         "6.-(1) Subject  to  the  provisions  of  subsection  (3)  of  this
         section, a citizen of any country mentioned in  subsection  (3)  of
         section one of this Act or a citizen of Eire,  being  a  person  of
         full age and capacity, shall be  entitled,  on  making  application
         therefor to the Secretary of State in the prescribed manner, to  be
         registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom and  Colonies  if  he
         satisfies the Secretary of State either-

         (a) that he is ordinarily resident in the United  Kingdom  and  has
         been so resident throughout the period of twelve  months,  or  such
         shorter period as  the  Secretary  of  State  may  in  the  special
         circumstances of any particular case accept, immediately  preceding
         his application ; or

         (b) that he is in Crown service under His Majesty's  government  in
         the United Kingdom."

30. The ECO submits that, although the appellant's grandfather was  not  in
    the UK as required at s.  6(1)(a)  (he  was  registered  as  a  British
    Subject in Singapore which was a colony at  the  time),  as  he  served
    under the British War Department in Singapore s. 8(1) of the  1948  Act
    allows for an analogous provision  in  Colonies,  protectorates  or  UK
    trust territories:

         '8.-(1) The functions of the Secretary of State under the last  two
         foregoing sections shall in  any  colony,  protectorate  or  United
         Kingdom trust territory be exercised by the Governor  ;  and  those
         sections shall, in their application to any colony, protectorate or
         United Kingdom trust territory, have effect as  if  for  references
         therein to the Secretary of State there were substituted references
         to the Governor, and as if for the reference in the  first  of  the
         said sections to ordinary residence in 'the  United  Kingdom  there
         were substituted a reference to ordinary residence in that  colony,
         protectorate or territory as the case may be.'

31. The appellant's grandfather was in any event subsequently  issued  with
    registration on 19 September 1966 as a CUKC  who  had  been  ordinarily
    resident in the UK for the applicable period. This  was  prior  to  the
    birth of the appellant's mother in 1972.

32. We accept the ECO's submissions.  This  accords  with  the  appellant's
    grandfather's United Kingdom passport,  a  copy  of  which  is  in  the
    bundle. The appellant's grandfather was a CUKC (by registration in  the
    UK) on  4  March  1972  when  the  appellant's  mother  was  born.  The
    appellant's mother would have been entitled to a right of  abode  under
    s.2(1)(b)(i) of the 1971 Act as originally enacted as she  was  a  CUKC
    born to a parent who had that citizenship. We note that  the  basis  of
    the appellant's mother's application for a certificate  of  entitlement
    to a right of abode and subsequent appeal was  based  on  her  father's
    CUKC status - hence the need to prove that she was his  descendant.  We
    also note that the appellant's mother  was  granted  a  certificate  of
    entitlement to a right of abode on the basis  of  s.2(1)(b)(i)  of  the
    1971 Act.

33. As we have found that the appellant's mother was a  CUKC  and  had  the
    right of abode under s. 2 of the 1971 act as enacted she  automatically
    became a British Citizen by virtue of s11 of the 1981 Act on 1  January
    1983 when the Act commenced. She was therefore a British  Citizen  when
    the appellant was born on 14 May 1990.

Was the appellant's mother a British Citizen 'otherwise than by descent'?

34. Although it is clear from the above that the appellant's mother's  CUKC
    status and right of abode were as a result  of  her  descent  from  the
    appellant's grandfather, for the purpose of s. 2 of the  1981  Act  the
    meaning of British citizen by descent is defined in  section  14  which
    provides:

         14 Meaning of British citizen (by descent).




         (1) For the purposes of this Act a British  citizen  is  a  British
         citizen "by descent" if and only if-

         (a)  he  is  a  person  born  outside  the  United  Kingdom   after
         commencement who is a British citizen by virtue of section  2(1)(a)
         only or by virtue of registration under section 3(2) or 9; or

         (b) subject to subsection (2), he is  a  person  born  outside  the
         United Kingdom before commencement who became a British citizen  at
         commencement and immediately before commencement-

         (i) was a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies by  virtue  of
         section 5 of the 1948 Act (citizenship by descent); or

         (ii)was  a  person  who,  under  any  provision  of   the   British
         Nationality Acts 1948 to 1965, was deemed for the purposes  of  the
         proviso to section 5(1) of the 1948 Act to  be  a  citizen  of  the
         United Kingdom and Colonies by descent only, or would have been  so
         deemed if male; or

         (iii) had the right of abode in the United Kingdom by  virtue  only
         of paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section 2 of the  Immigration
         Act 1971 as then in force (connection with United  Kingdom  through
         parent or grandparent), or by virtue only  of  that  paragraph  and
         paragraph (c) of that subsection (settlement in United Kingdom with
         five years' ordinary residence there), or by virtue only  of  being
         or having  been  the  wife  of  a  person  who  immediately  before
         commencement had that right by virtue only of  the  said  paragraph
         (b) or the said paragraphs (b) and (c); or...

35. The ECO asserts that the  appellant's  mother  falls  within  paragraph
    (b)(i) above - i.e. she was a CUKC by virtue of s. 5 of the  1948  Act.
    Section 14(1)(b)(iii) is also applicable as the appellant's mother  had
    the right of abode by virtue only of paragraph (b) of s.2 of  the  1971
    Act as enacted. We consider that the appellant's  mother  falls  either
    within (b)(i) or (b)(iii) or both. The result is that  the  appellant's
    mother is a British citizen by descent within the meaning of s.  14  of
    the 1981 Act.

36.  The  appellant  cannot  therefore  acquire  British   citizenship   in
    accordance with section 2 of the 1981 Act. Further, he does not satisfy
    the requirements of s.2 of the current version of the 1971 Act  and  is
    not entitled to a right of abode in the UK.

37. As was clarified at the  hearing  before  us  the  appellant  does  not
    advance a case based on  legitimate  expectation  arising  out  of  the
    successful appeals of his relatives. The case put was that the law  had
    been correctly applied in those  appeals.  We  are  grateful  for  that
    clarification and consider that it was correct  for  the  appellant  to
    acknowledge that no legitimate expectation arises. We do not  make  any
    comment on the correctness or otherwise of the decisions in relation to
    the appellant's relatives.

38. No anonymity direction is made.





Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law. The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of  the
    ECO stands.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 10 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

