

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06500/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th June 2014                              |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between


                           ROMEISH TE SHAWN SMITH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, Counsel instructed by Guildhall solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant appeals a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
      dismissed his appeal against a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer
      refusing entry clearance as a dependant of his father under  paragraph
      297 of the Immigration Rules. The application had been refused on  the
      grounds that he did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
      in force at the date of the decision namely that his  father  had  not
      shown he had sole responsibility for his upbringing; that he could  be
      adequately accommodated and/or maintained without recourse  to  public
      funds.
         Background


   2. The appellant had first applied for entry clearance to join his father
      as his dependant in 2006. That application had been refused,  the  ECO
      relying on the appellant's residence with his mother for the  previous
      five years and his temporary living arrangements with a maternal aunt.
      The appellant's mother had been interviewed and from that interview it
      was concluded that she had not given consent to the  appellant  moving
      permanently  to  the  UK  or  that  the  sponsor   father   had   sole
      responsibility for the appellant.


   3. The appellant's case was that he  had  no  further  contact  with  his
      mother; that his father had arranged for him to stay with a teacher at
      the school he attended; his father had sole responsibility for him and
      his father took all relevant decisions with regard to  his  upbringing
      and paid all his expenses.

        Error of law

   4. Permission to appeal was granted, in essence, on the grounds  that  it
      was arguable that:


   a) The finding  that  the  mother  and  aunt  remained  involved  in  the
      appellant's upbringing was arguably flawed in that it  relied  heavily
      upon an interview several years old, that there was no  evidence  that
      the mother or aunt were involved in the child's upbringing,  that  the
      judge had speculated as to their  involvement  and  had  unjustifiably
      relied heavily upon an interview with the appellant's mother that  was
      several years old and had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
      rejection of the father's oral evidence.
   b) That having found that the father met his  financial  responsibilities
      in maintaining the appellant, visiting him and providing  support  and
      guidance and the lack of evidence as to the mother's  involvement,  it
      was  incumbent  upon  him  to  find   that   the   father   had   sole
      responsibility.
   c) Failed to adequately consider the financial evidence  before  him  and
      failed to give adequate reasons for finding the appellant would not be
      adequately maintained.
   d) Failed to consider the appellant's  Article  8  rights  and  his  best
      interests.

        Discussion

   5. It was agreed before us  that  the  finding  by  the  judge  that  the
      appellant would be adequately accommodated without recourse to  public
      funds was not subject to challenge. It was  further  agreed  that  the
      challenge on Article 8 grounds "stood or fell" with the issue of  sole
      responsibility.


   6. The judge notes the remittance of funds evidence and the visits by the
      father to Jamaica to see his son. He notes the correspondence from  Mr
      Rattigan (the person with  whom  the  appellant  is  living)  and  the
      father's oral evidence. The judge refers specifically to the  father's
      account that the mother had "stepped away" from  parental  involvement
      when the appellant went to live with his aunt and that this is at odds
      with the account given by the mother in her interview  at  that  time.
      The First-tier Tribunal judge's findings in [24]  and  [25]  that  the
      father  was  not  truthful  in  his  account  were  by  reference   to
      information and evidence at that time ie  the  first  entry  clearance
      application. The judge was clearly comparing evidence from the  father
      given at the hearing as to his view on circumstances  when  the  first
      application for entry  clearance  was  made  and  the  record  of  the
      mother's interview at that time. The judge was  entitled  to  reach  a
      decision on which evidence he preferred as  to  the  circumstances  at
      that time. He has given adequate reasons for such findings and  it  is
      in that context that he views the other more up to date evidence.

   7. The decision the subject of the appeal and the ECM review makes  clear
      reference  to  the  lack  of  evidence  of  the  alleged   change   in
      circumstances. Despite the minor living with Mr Rattigan  and  despite
      Mr Rattigan providing two letters setting out  his  implementation  of
      the father's instructions and guidance, Mr Rattigan  makes  absolutely
      no reference to the lack of involvement of the child's  mother.  There
      is no evidence other than the father's of the lack of  involvement  by
      the mother, despite this having been clearly flagged as  a  matter  at
      issue. This is not to say that the father and appellant are having  to
      prove a negative: given the child has been living with Mr Rattigan for
      some time evidence from him could have been produced; the  father  has
      had contact with the mother in the not  too  distant  past  given  his
      ability to obtain a consent to travel to the UK (although this consent
      does not confirm consent to the child emigrating from Jamaica) and his
      knowledge that she lives with her partner and his consent to the child
      seeing her; there is no evidence from the school as  to  the  mother's
      knowledge or  lack  of  knowledge  or  involvement  with  the  child's
      schooling. The judge in reaching his findings has properly referred to
      these issues and given sustainable reasons for his findings.


   8. Merely because an individual  provides  financial  and  emotional  and
      other support does not  inevitably  result  in  a  finding  that  this
      equates with sole responsibility. The judge properly directed  himself
      as  to  the  relevant  case  law;  his  finding  was  reasonable   and
      sustainable on the basis of the evidence before him. Although  another
      judge may have been satisfied on the evidence produced that the father
      had sole responsibility for the appellant, the findings reached by the
      judge  that  the  father  does  not  have  sole   responsibility   are
      sustainable on the evidence before him. There is no identifiable error
      of law in those findings.

   9. The decision and  the  ECM  review  make  reference  to  the  lack  of
      documentary evidence as to the father's self-employment. Although some
      additional evidence was submitted, no explanation was provided for the
      failure to provide accounts or tax  returns.  Although  a  sponsorship
      declaration was provided and some evidence  of  income  produced,  the
      judge was entitled to have regard to the lack of evidence  that  could
      have been produced but was not. The decision to reject the  submission
      that the appellant would be adequately maintained without recourse  to
      public funds was a decision that the judge could reasonably  reach  on
      the basis of the evidence before him. There is no error of law in that
      finding.

  10. Although the judge makes no specific reference to the  best  interests
      of the minor, it was agreed by Mr Ali  that  in  the  event  that  the
      father did not have sole responsibility for the child,  he  could  not
      succeed on Article 8 grounds. Although  not  totally  subsumed  within
      Article 8 it is plain, on the evidence before the  judge  and  on  the
      basis of his findings as to sole responsibility, that it is simply not
      possible to make a finding that it is in the best  interests  of  this
      appellant to relocate to the UK as a dependant of his  father.  Merely
      because one parent wishes to bring a child up and  remove  that  child
      from the possible involvement of the other parent  is  not  sufficient
      evidence upon which to found a conclusion  that  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of a child to relocate. The  appellant's  father  left  this
      child in Jamaica many years ago; there is inadequate evidence to  show
      that the child does not have contact with  his  mother  and  there  is
      little evidence of any extended family involvement.

        Conclusion


          Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     We do not set aside the decision.

     The appeal by the appellant is dismissed;  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to stand.


                                    Date 28th July 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
