
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/06525/2014
                                                               OA/06526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2015                    | On 27 October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     W H
                                    W H E
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Beijing
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Anglo
                    Chinese Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Eldridge (the Judge), promulgated on 27 April 2015, in
    which he dismissed the Appellants' appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's decisions of 8 May 2014, refusing to grant entry clearance
    to join their parents in the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellants are Chinese nationals and sisters. The  first  Appellant
    was born on 4 May 2006 and the second on 24 July 2004. On 11 March 2014
    applications for entry clearance were  made  for  them  to  join  their
    parents  in  the  United  Kingdom.  At  that  time  their  father   had
    Discretionary Leave to Remain in this country and their  mother  was  a
    British citizen. The applications were considered under  Paragraph  297
    of the Immigration Rules and refused.

The decision of the Judge

 3. At paragraph 13 of his decision the Judge make a number of findings  on
    matters that he stated were either agreed  or  not  in  dispute.  These
    findings include the following:

          a) Neither Appellant had visited the United Kingdom;

          b) They have two siblings in the United Kingdom who are British;

          c) Their mother obtained British citizenship in 2012;

          d) The father had Discretionary Leave to Remain;

          e) The Appellants had not lived with their parents at any stage;

          f) The Appellants had been brought up by their grandparents;

          g) Both Appellants attended school and were healthy;

          h) There is contact between the Appellants and their parents;

          i) There was a single visit by the United Kingdom family to see
             the Appellants in 2014.

 4. In paragraphs 14 and 15 the Judge finds that the grandparents were able
    to continue caring for the Appellants and that the parents did not have
    sole responsibility for their upbringing.  Paragraph  17  contains  the
    conclusions that the appeal failed  under  Paragraph  297  due  to  the
    absence  of  sole  responsibility  and  serious  or  compelling  family
    circumstances. A submission that Paragraph 301 of the Rules applied was
    rejected in paragraphs 18-19 because the father  did  not  have  "leave
    with a view to settlement". Paragraph 21 states that  private  life  is
    not engaged and that the appeals failed under Appendix FM to the Rules.
    Paragraphs 22-30 are dedicated to a consideration of Article 8  outside
    the Rules. After directing himself  to  relevant  case-law,  the  Judge
    finds that the Appellants' mother and two British siblings had not lost
    their Chinese citizenship. Neither Appellant had  lived  for  any  real
    period with their parents. It is said that the best  interests  of  the
    Appellants were not necessarily served by uprooting them from a settled
    life in China and bringing them to the United Kingdom. In addition, the
    Judge found that the Appellants' inability to meet  the  Rules  counted
    against them in accordance with section 117B  of  the  NIAA  2002.  The
    Judge found that the family in this country could in fact go  and  live
    in China if they so chose.



The grounds of appeal

 5. Ground 1 asserts that the Appellants' father did  have  "leave  with  a
    view to settlement" and the Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  otherwise.
    Ground 2 asserts that the Judge failed  to  consider  the  cases  under
    Appendix FM to the Rules. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge made "several
    mistakes" as regards the facts of the cases. It is also said that there
    was not adequate assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the  British
    siblings. There was no assertion that the Respondent's decision was not
    in accordance with the law.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 17 August 2015.

The hearing before me

 7. In respect of Ground 1, I indicated to Mr Kannangara that Paragraph 301
    of the Rules may not have been applicable in any event because  of  the
    effect of Paragraph A280(c) of the Rules. He had nothing to add on this
    point. However, he maintained the argument that the father  had  "leave
    with a view to settlement". In  respect  of  Ground  2,  Mr  Kannangara
    accepted that the Appellants could  not  satisfy  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Rules. On the final Ground, it was said that the Judge  had  failed  to
    assess the best interests of the two siblings in this country, and that
    the best interests of the Appellants themselves had not been adequately
    considered.

 8. Mr Whitwell submitted that Paragraph 301 was not applicable because  of
    Paragraph A280(c) and in any event  the  Discretionary  Leave  was  not
    "with a view to settlement". As to Article 8 outside of the Rules,  the
    Judge's findings were sustainable. He was entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellants' best interests were not best served by coming to the United
    Kingdom.

 9. In reply, Mr Kannangara asked me  to  note  that  family  life  and  an
    interference with that life had been found by the Judge.  In  addition,
    the father still did not have settled status here and  so  any  further
    entry clearance application would fail.

Decision on error of law

10. I have concluded that there are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. There is no merit in Ground 1. First, Paragraph A280(c)  of  the  Rules
    had the effect of precluding  reliance  upon  Paragraph  301  in  these
    cases. Paragraph A280(c) read, as at the date of decision  and  insofar
    as relevant:

         (c)      The following provisions of Part 8 continue to apply on or
         after 9 July 2012, and are not subject to any additional
         requirement listed in (b) above:

             (i) to persons who have made an application before 9 July 2012
             under Part 8 which was not decided as at 9 July 2012; and

             (ii)      to applications made by persons in the UK who have
             been granted entry clearance or limited leave to enter or
             remain under Part 8 before 9 July 2012 and where this is a
             requirement of Part 8, this leave to enter or limited leave to
             remain is extant:

                  ...

                  297-316F

12. The Appellants had not made applications prior to 9 July 2012.

13. I appreciate that the  phrase  "with  a  view  to  settlement"  is  not
    defined, and I am unaware of case-law on the point.  On  the  facts  of
    this case the  Judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellants'  father  had  not  been  granted  leave  "with  a  view  to
    settlement". The father was, as at the date of decision,  only  in  his
    initial period of  Discretionary  Leave.  This  had  two  consequences:
    first, by its nature that leave was wholly outside of the Rules and any
    further grant was not to be assessed against criteria under  the  Rules
    which may lead to settlement. His position was more precarious in  this
    sense, and a further grant subject to a wider range of factors; second,
    in order to be able to seek indefinite leave to remain the father still
    had to obtain a grant of a further three years Discretionary Leave.  In
    light of this it is clear to me, as  it  was  to  the  Judge,  that  to
    suggest that the father's initial grant of leave was "with  a  view  to
    settlement" was stretching the normal and common sense meaning of  this
    term beyond reasonable boundaries.

14. Ground 2 was either disingenuous  or  simply  carelessly  drafted.  The
    Judge did address Appendix FM. In addition, Mr Kannangara has expressly
    conceded that the Appellants could not satisfy its provisions.

15. As to Ground 3, I conclude that there are no material errors as regards
    the facts. Contrary to what is said in the written grounds,  the  Judge
    specifically found that the parents did not  have  sole  responsibility
    for the Appellants' upbringing. The reasons for this finding  have  not
    been challenged and they are clearly adequate in any event.  The  Judge
    also found that the mother and two United  Kingdom-based  siblings  had
    not lost their Chinese citizenship. This finding appears to  have  been
    overlooked by the drafter of the grounds. The Judge was fully  entitled
    to make the finding he did on this issue. Again, contrary  to  what  is
    said in the grounds, the Judge  did  take  adverse  credibility  points
    against the Appellants' mother, both in respect  of  the  grandparent's
    alleged inability to continue caring and in relation to the question of
    who made the important decisions in the Appellants' lives.

16. It is right that the Judge says in paragraph 28  that  the  family  had
    never lived together. In fact the older Appellant lived with her mother
    for some two years before  the  latter  left  China,  and  the  younger
    Appellant was with her mother for three or four months before going  to
    live with her grandparents. However,  one  must  read  decisions  as  a
    whole, and I see from paragraph 27 that  that  Judge  states  that  the
    Appellants had not lived with their parents for "any real  period".  He
    clearly had in mind that the fact that there had been a short period of
    family unity. In addition, on my reading of paragraph 28 the Judge  was
    in reality referring to the family as a whole (including the two United
    Kingdom born siblings). It was of the course the  case  that  they  had
    never lived with the Appellants. There is no error here.

17. In my view there are no material errors in the  Judge's  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules insofar  as  the  Appellants'  own  best
    interests are concerned.  He  directed  himself  properly  to  relevant
    cases, including Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 4 and Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197
    (IAC). In respect of the latter, he specifically directs himself to the
    general principle that the best interests of children normally  lie  in
    being with both parents.

18. The Judge's overall findings of  fact  are  sound  and  cover  relevant
    matters, including the settled and stable circumstances in  which  they
    were living, the  disruption  to  their  lives  if  removed  from  that
    setting, the absence of any real period of living together  with  their
    parents, and the ability of the United Kingdom-based family to move  to
    China to affect reunification there. In addition, the Judge  cited  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Muse [2012] EWCA Civ  10,  paragraph
    23 of which states:

         "The trauma of breaking up a family and  thereby  rupturing  family
         ties  may  be  significantly  greater  than  the  effect   of   not
         facilitating the reunion of a  family  whose  members  have  become
         accustomed to living apart following a  decision  by  part  of  the
         family to live elsewhere."

19. The Judge's reliance upon Muse has not been addressed by the Appellant.
    Neither has the perfectly proper  conclusion  of  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellants' inability to meet the Rules weighs heavily against them  in
    the proportionality exercise.

20. Given the forgoing, the Judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  best
    interests of these particular Appellants did not rest in coming to  the
    United Kingdom to be reunited with their parents and, implicitly, being
    united for the first time with their siblings.

21. The Judge would have  been  equally  entitled  to  have  expressed  the
    conclusion in an alternative way by  stating  that  even  if  the  best
    interests lay in being reunited with their parents (and united for  the
    first time with their siblings), these interests were outweighed by the
    other factors set out in his decision.

22. The fact  that  the  Judge  found  there  to  be  family  life  and  an
    interference caused by the Respondent's decisions is beside the  point.
    These findings cannot  and  do  not  lead  to  a  conclusion  that  the
    assessment of proportionality is flawed.

23. There remains the narrow issue of the best interests of the two British
    siblings in the United Kingdom. Mr Kannangara urged me to conclude that
    the Judge did not deal with this, and that this constituted a  material
    error of law. It is right that the Judge does not expressly  deal  with
    this point in his decision  (i.e.  he  has  not  provided  a  paragraph
    including the preamble, "I now consider the best  interests  of  X  and
    Y"). However, the Judge found that the United Kingdom family unit could
    go to China, a finding that has not in fact  been  challenged  and  was
    open to him. This clearly indicates that the  Judge  had  in  mind  the
    position of the British siblings but nonetheless  concluded  that  they
    could relocate without undue prejudice to their wellbeing. He also  had
    in mind the fact that the British siblings had  never  lived  with  the
    Appellants. Assessing the Judge's in the round,  I  conclude  that  the
    best interests were implicitly considered and I see no error of law  in
    relation to this point.

24. If I am wrong about that, and there was an error, it is not in my  view
    a material one. Assessing materiality is an imprecise science. However,
    an error will only be material if it can properly be said that it could
    have made a difference to the outcome of the appeal. Here, the  Judge's
    findings made and conclusions reached  thereon  are  all  sound.  These
    present very significant hurdles to the success of a claim  outside  of
    the  Rules.  On  the  Judge's  findings,  there   are   no   compelling
    circumstances, a  factor  which  further  decreases  the  prospects  of
    success (see, for example, SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387). There is  a
    finding that the family could move  to  China.  We  know  that  British
    nationality is not a trump card, and the same is true of a child's best
    interests. Having read through the Appellants' bundle of evidence I see
    nothing to indicate a particular importance for the British siblings to
    live  with  the  Appellants,  beyond  an   opportunity   to   establish
    relationships in  this  country  rather  than  in  China.  In  all  the
    circumstances, even if the  Judge  had  expressly  addressed  the  best
    interests of the British siblings, it could not have made a  difference
    to the result.

25. Therefore, the Appellants' appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails, and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Anonymity

26. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellants from serious harm, having regard to the interests of justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date: 21 October 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 21 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
