

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06838/2015
                                                               OA/06839/2015
                                                               OA/06843/2015
                                                               OA/06846/2015
                                                               OA/06847/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                    ENTRY CLARANCE OFFICER - ADDIS ABABA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [Z T]
                                    [A T]
                                    [D F]
                                    [A Y]
                                    [R T]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hans a Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. For the sake of consistency with the  decision  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal I will hereafter refer to the family as the Appellants and
         to the Entry Clearance Officer as the Respondent.

      2. The Respondent refused the Appellants' applications  for  leave  to
         enter as the family members of a refugee on  2  March  2015.  Their
         appeal against  this  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Bradshaw ("the Judge") following a hearing on 1 September 2016.

The grant of permission

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted  permission  to  appeal
         (11 October 2016). He said it is arguable that the Judge failed  to
         make adequate findings on pre-flight family life,  give  inadequate
         consideration to s117 of the Nationality, Immigration,  and  Asylum
         Act 2002, and does not consider why fresh applications could not be
         made.

Respondent's position

      4. Mrs  Peterson  accepted  that  in  relation  to  the  2nd  and  3rd
         Appellants who were the children of the Sponsor, given the findings
         that maternity had been established [16], they did in fact meet the
         requirements of the immigration rules (352D). She  did  not  accept
         that the appeal should have been allowed under  the  rules  as  the
         relevant evidence of maternity had  not  been  submitted  with  the
         application, but that it should be allowed on human rights grounds.
         That is because one must look at article 8 through the prism of the
         rules at the date of hearing. Those rules were then met even though
         they  were  not  when  the  application  was  submitted.  In  those
         circumstances she accepted that there was no material error of  law
         in relation to those Appellants as the appeal had only been allowed
         on human rights grounds. There was of course  no  cross  appeal  in
         relation to whether the immigration rules in relation to  them  had
         been met. I therefore need not  consider  this  matter  further  in
         relation to those 2 Appellants.

      5. In relation to the other Appellants, the  1st  and  5th  Appellants
         were the Sponsor's twin sisters  and  the  4th  Appellant  was  her
         niece. They are all minors. Her submission was that  they  did  not
         meet the requirements of the rules (319(X))  as  it  had  not  been
         established that there were serious and compelling family or  other
         considerations that made their exclusion undesirable  and  suitable
         arrangements had been made for their care, or that  they  could  be
         accommodated  adequately  without  recourse  to  public  funds   in
         accommodation the Sponsor owned or occupied  exclusively,  or  that
         they could be maintained  adequately  without  recourse  to  public
         funds.

Appellants' position

      6. It is accepted that the 1st, 4th and 5th Appellants  did  not  meet
         the maintenance and accommodation requirements of  the  immigration
         rules (319X). Finances can be assessed as she is a refugee entitled
         to public funds. As she did not meet the requirements of the rules,
         the Judge could only base a decision on article 8. It was submitted
         that there had been sufficient findings regarding pre flight family
         life given the findings [11/25] that she  became  their  carers  in
         2010 when her parents died - they having been  the  carers  of  her
         niece from 2007.

Discussion

      7. In relation to the 1st, 4th, and 5th Appellants, I am not satisfied
         that the Judge made a material error of law in relation to  whether
         they were members of the family of  the  Sponsor  before  she  fled
         Eritrea. The findings were adequate.

      8. The Judge did make reference to s117 at [9]. She does  not  however
         indicate whether they would be a burden on the taxpayer,  or  spoke
         English. Those factors are matters that are required  to  be  taken
         into account in the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  and  the
         absence of any consideration of any of those factors is a  material
         error of law.

      9. I not accept that there was  a  material  error  of  law  regarding
         whether  they  can  make  fresh  applications  as  it  appears  the
         applications they have made have not been fully considered.

Conclusion on error of law

     10. I am not satisfied that the Judge made a material error of  law  in
         relation to the 2nd and 3rd Appellants. As they are children living
         in a refugee camp in Ethiopia and are now aged 11 and  9,  I  trust
         that the Respondent will urgently issue appropriate family  reunion
         visas for them to be reunited here with their  mother.  I  bear  in
         mind in this regard the delay in this matter coming  before  me  as
         the applications were made over 2 years ago.

     11. I am satisfied that the Judge made  a  material  error  of  law  in
         relation to the 1st, 4th, and 5th Appellants regarding whether they
         met the requirements  of  [319(x)]  of  the  immigration  rules  as
         article 8 must  be  looked  at  through  their  prism.  There  will
         therefore need to be an assessment of whether  there  were  serious
         and compelling family  or  other  considerations  that  made  their
         exclusion undesirable and suitable arrangements had been  made  for
         their care, whether they could be accommodated  adequately  without
         recourse to public funds in  accommodation  the  Sponsor  owned  or
         occupied  exclusively,  and  whether  they  could   be   maintained
         adequately without recourse to public funds.

     12. Having heard submissions, I was satisfied that it  was  appropriate
         for me to remit the matter to Judge Bradshaw. That was because  the
         error of law related to matters where  discreet  findings  had  not
         been made that were not infected by other findings.



Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law in relation to the 2nd and 3rd
    Appellants.

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in relation to the 1st,  4th,  and
    5th Appellants.

    I set aside  the  decision  in  relation  to  the  1st,  4th,  and  5th
    Appellants only.

    The matter shall be remitted to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bradshaw  on
    the 1st available date on or  after  28  November  2016,  with  a  time
    estimate of 3 hours, a Tigrinyan interpreter being  provided,  and  the
    Appellants being able to file such evidence  as  they  intend  to  rely
    regarding the outstanding issues by 21 November 2016.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
7 November 2016
