
[pic]
SELF-TYPED

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                mr majid ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Pipe, Counsel instructed by Wornham & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge S  D  Lloyd  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court  on  14  January  2015)
    dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  him  entry
    clearance as the proposed civil partner of a person present and settled
    here, on the ground that he had not shown that he  and  AN  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  the  appellant
    requires to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission

 2. On 19 March 2015 First-tier Judge Brunnen granted permission to  appeal
    as it was arguable that, as contended in  the  permission  application,
    the judge had erred in law by not taking account of material evidence.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 3. At the hearing to determine whether an error of law was  made  out,  Mr
    Pipe directed my attention to the documentary evidence  which  he  said
    the Judge had not taken into account and/or in  respect  of  which  the
    judge had made findings which were demonstrably wrong. As a  result  of
    this exercise Mr Richards rightly cut short the  hearing  by  conceding
    that an error of law  was  made  out  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    permission application.

 4. As the parties are in agreement  on  this  issue,  I  only  propose  to
    highlight the two most egregious errors.

 5. The appellant relied on a large number of photographs depicting him and
    his partner together in different places. The date and location of each
    photograph was written in manuscript on the back.  The  judge  held  at
    paragraph [19] that  there  was  nothing  to  confirm  these  dates  or
    locations. But earlier the judge accepted that they had both  travelled
    to Dubai at the same time in  the  summers  of  2012,  2013  and  2014.
    Moreover, the appellant's  bundle  contained  documentary  evidence  of
    hotel and flight bookings consistent with them being in the same  place
    at the same time, and (in the case of hotel bookings) of  them  sharing
    the same bedroom.

 6. The appellant disclosed a large amount of what the judge  described  as
    "electronic communications" as evidence of contact and mutual devotion.
    The judge held at [paragraph 23] that there was nothing which confirmed
    that the correspondence was between the appellant and his sponsor,  and
    that much of it had "little of substance". In  fact,  there  was  ample
    evidence, both within the correspondence itself  and  also  within  the
    application form (which gave full details of their  respective  contact
    details) to confirm that  they  were  communicating  with  each  other.
    Further, the content was self-evidently of a potentially high probative
    value, as they showered each other with kisses, and  generally  behaved
    like lovers extravagantly expressing their affection for each other.

 7. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is unsafe, and  it
    cannot be allowed to  stand.  Mr  Pipe  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    expressed legitimate credibility concerns about other  aspects  of  the
    evidence, and he and Mr Richards were in agreement that the appropriate
    course was for there to a complete rehearing.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision shall be set aside and remade.

Directions

 9. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  in  Birmingham
    for a de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge D S Lloyd. None
    of the findings of fact of the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

