
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/06709/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2014                         |On 6 August 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                        Mr KARITHIGEYAN SELVAPRAGASAM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini, Counsel
      (instructed by Genga & Co Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 30  January  2014
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thanki
           who had  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 9 January 2014.  The determination  covered  both
           the Appellant and his sister.  The brother's appeal was  allowed
           under Appendix FM by the judge.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  7  November
           1991, who had sought leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for
           settlement as an adult dependant child under Appendix FM,  which
           was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Chennai  on  15
           February 2015.  The Appellant's mother had been granted leave to
           enter on review by the Entry Clearance Manager.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Saffer because he considered that it was arguable that care  was
           available for the Appellant in Sri Lanka as although his  mother
           had been granted leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  she  had
           elected to remain with the Appellant.  Additionally,  the  judge
           had not considered what care alternatives existed.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mrs Kenny for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   The
           son's appeal could not be bolted on to that of the mother.   The
           mother did not have to leave Sri Lanka.  It was all  a  question
           of choice  and  the  judge  had  not  weighed  up  the  evidence
           adequately.


      5.    The tribunal did not need to call on Mr Saini.


      6.    The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
           and reserved its determination which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    The grant of permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal was
           in the tribunal's view generous.  As the judge made clear in his
           determination, after  ignoring  the  irrelevant  and  peripheral
           material, there  was  independent  evidence  deserving  of  full
           weight that the Appellant was incapable of  caring  for  himself
           and round the clock care: [24].  The Entry Clearance Officer had
           identified no system of welfare state type care in Sri Lanka nor
           any charities engaged in the accommodation and care  of  persons
           of the level of need  and  dependency  of  the  Appellant.   The
           Appellant had in contrast produced country  background  evidence
           concerning the position of disabled persons in Sri Lanka.  It is
           also well known that the care of seriously  disabled  adults  is
           far more difficult than the care of seriously disabled children.
            It is impossible to see how the judge could  have  reached  any
           conclusion other than that he set out in his determination.


      8.    The Appellant's  grounds  of  onwards  appeal  were  fallacious.
           While it is true that the Appellant's mother  did  not  have  to
           leave Sri Lanka, once the Entry Clearance Manager  had  in  fact
           granted her leave to enter the United Kingdom, the only  logical
           outcome was that the mother would travel to the  United  Kingdom
           to join her husband.  That was the purpose  of  her  application
           and there was no suggestion that the  marital  bond  had  broken
           down.  There was no evidence that anyone else in Sri Lanka would
           have  been  willing  to  take  the  slightest  interest  in  the
           Appellant, other  than  his  sister,  but  she  was  pursing  an
           independent life and  was  away  at  university.   It  would  be
           totally unreasonable to expect her to assume the 24 hour care of
           her brother after her mother's departure.  The weight which  the
           judge attached to the mother's unwillingnes0s to leave Sri Lanka
           without her son (see [25]) was plainly as an indication  of  the
           extent of the son's inability to care for himself.


      9.    The fact that the whole situation of family separation was based
           on family choice was not relevant where the Appellant  satisfied
           the stringent requirements of Appendix FM.


      10.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
           the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
           judge's decision.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






