
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: OA/06023/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 20 May 2014              On 12 August 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Ilyas Taskiran
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondents
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. S. Pangiotogoulou of Counsel instructed by  Trott
                       & Gentry Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Herbert promulgated on 11 February 2014, allowing the appeal of Master
      Taskiran against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  ('ECO')
      dated 2 January 2013 refusing entry clearance for  settlement  as  the
      child of his British citizen mother, Ms Sevda Yaman ('the sponsor').


   2. Although before me the ECO is the appellant and Master Taskiran is the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Master Taskiran  as
      the Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Turkey  born  on  21  May  1995.  On  2
      November 2012 he applied for entry clearance to join his  mother,  the
      sponsor, in the UK. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application
      for reasons set out in  a  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  dated  2
      January 2013, with particular reference to paragraph 297(i), (iv)  and
      (v) of the Immigration Rules.


   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. His appeal was allowed for  reasons
      set out in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.


   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 7 April 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert.


Consideration

   6. The Judge made findings favourable to the Appellant in respect of  the
      requirements of paragraphs  297(iv)  and  (v):  see  determination  at
      paragraphs 26, 27, and 31. These findings are not the subject  of  the
      challenge before me. The Respondent seeks to challenge the  conclusion
      in respect of paragraph 297(i).


   7. The Judge made  favourable  findings  both  in  respect  of  paragraph
      297(i)(e) - 'sole responsibility'  -  and  297(i)(f)  -  'serious  and
      compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make   exclusion
      undesirable etc'. It is, of course, only necessary for  the  Appellant
      to satisfy 297(i) by one of these two 'routes'.


   8.  The  Respondent's  challenge  in  respect  of  the  issue   of   sole
      responsibility is pleaded in the grounds in support of the application
      for permission to appeal on the  basis  of  there  being  "a  lack  of
      evidence to substantiate the sponsor's claim of sole  responsibility".
      Necessarily this is essentially a question of fact for the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  -  as  indeed  is  recognised  in  the  body  of  the
      Respondent's grounds.


   9. The background to the application includes  a  history  of  a  marital
      dispute between the Appellant's parents, and a  deterioration  in  the
      relationship between the Appellant and  his  father.  In  this  latter
      context, it is acknowledged in the Respondent's Notice of  Immigration
      Decision that the Appellant quit his father's house  about  two  years
      prior to the application. It is also acknowledged that the Appellant's
      mother had had the benefit since 2012 of a custody order in respect of
      the Appellant from a Turkish court.


  10. The Judge correctly directed himself as to the burden and standard  of
      proof, and that the relevant date for assessment was at  the  date  of
      the Respondent's decision: paragraph 16.


  11. The Judge also makes it clear in his determination that he had  regard
      to all of the oral and documentary evidence that was before him.


  12. Included in the documentary evidence was  the  custody  document  from
      Turkey, together with a translation (Appellant's bundle pages  18-19).
      This document refers to  the  Appellants  father  "not  want[ing]  the
      Guardianship role", and not resisting the transfer of guardianship  to
      the sponsor; it also refers to the Appellant's view  that  his  father
      and his wife "did not want him with them  anyway";  it  also  confirms
      that the Appellant was not living with his father  at  that  time  but
      with his paternal  grandmother  (although  this  subsequently  changed
      following her death in January 2013).


  13. Mr Saunders  essential  line  of  challenge  is  that  the  supporting
      materials and the sponsor's witness statement speak as to the  contact
      between mother and son, rather than the notion of responsibility,  and
      that otherwise over much  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  Guardianship
      document.


  14. The Judge stated that he took this document as "the  starting  point",
      and made, in my judgement entirely sustainably, a  finding  that  this
      was evidence that parental responsibility had been transferred to  the
      sponsor: see paragraph 18. I  consider  that,  in  turn,  the  Judge's
      finding that since the date of the transfer  of  guardianship  overall
      responsibility rested  with  the  sponsor,  and  not  the  84-year-old
      grandmother with whom the Appellant was then residing  (see  paragraph
      22), was a conclusion open to the Judge on the evidence -  both  as  a
      reasonable inference from the primary finding of fact and on the basis
      of all of the  available  evidence  including  the  testimony  of  the
      sponsor.


  15. In my judgement the Respondent's challenge is really one  based  on  a
      disagreement with the Judge's conclusion, and  does  not  identify  an
      error of approach, or a deficiency of reasoning. Accordingly I find no
      error of law in respect of the conclusion  with  regard  to  paragraph
      297(i)(e). This is sufficient to support the Judge's conclusion  under
      the Immigration Rules.


  16.  Accordingly  in  the  circumstances  it  is   unnecessary   to   give
      consideration to paragraph 297(i)(f) or Article 8 of the ECHR -  which
      are also the subject of  essentially  generalised  challenges  by  the
      Respondent.


  17. I dismiss the Respondent's challenge to the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal, and the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.


Decision

  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
      law and stands.


  19. The appeal of Master Taskiran remains allowed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 August 2014
