
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/06588/2014
                                                               OA/06592/2014
                                                               OA/06594/2014
                                                               OA/04269/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December 2016                          |On 6th January 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                       PATRICIA [M] (first appellant)
                         JOEL [M] (second appellant)
                        PATRICK [M] (third appellant)
                       RICHMOND [M] (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms H Gore, Counsel instructed by R Spio & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Ghana.  They  are  siblings  of  one
    sort or another.  The first two Appellants are twins, both born on 24th
    September 1997.  The remaining Appellants were born on 27th March  2002
    and 5th September 2005 respectively.  The Sponsor, Abdulai Musah is the
    father of the first three Appellants, but not of the fourth  Appellant.
    His wife, Joyce Amoako, is the mother of the first, second  and  fourth
    Appellants, but not  the  third  Appellant.   They  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  the  dependent  children  of  the
    Sponsor, an EU citizen residing in the UK and exercising treaty  rights
    there.  The Sponsor had first come to the UK sometime in 2003  and  his
    wife had joined him in 2006.  The applications  were  refused  for  the
    reasons given in letters of  the  Respondent  dated  24th  March  2014.
    Following an unsuccessful review by an  Entry  Clearance  Manager,  the
    Appellants appealed.  Their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Butler (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham  on  29th  March
    2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated
    12th May 2016.  The Appellants sought leave to  appeal  that  decision,
    and such permission was granted on 23rd September 2016.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. As regards the first two Appellants, the Judge considered their appeals
    under paragraph 297 of HC 395 as they  had  both  parents  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  The Judge found that  these  Appellants
    did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297(v) in that they would
    not be adequately maintained by the parents they were seeking  to  join
    without recourse to public funds.

 4. As regards the remaining Appellants,  the  Judge  considered  paragraph
    297(f) of HC 395 as only one of their parents was present  and  settled
    in the UK.  He found that the Sponsor and  his  wife  were  not  solely
    responsible for them and that there  were  no  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations which made their exclusion  undesirable.



 5. In respect of all Appellants, the Judge  found  that  the  Respondent's
    decision did not amount to a disproportionate breach of their Article 8
    ECHR rights as there was no family life between the various  Appellants
    and the Sponsor and his wife and further that there were no  compelling
    circumstances allowing the Judge to consider family life rights outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. At the hearing, Ms Gore argued that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to these decisions.  As regards the first  two  Appellants,  the
    Judge had decided the issue of adequate maintenance  according  to  the
    financial circumstances of the Sponsor and his wife as at the  date  of
    the application as if it was a Points Based System (PBS) case.  As  the
    Judge stated at paragraph 37 of the Decision, he attached little weight
    to the subsequent evidence of financial circumstances before  him.   If
    he had fully taken into account that evidence, he  would  have  allowed
    the appeals as it clearly showed the capability of the Sponsor and  his
    wife to maintain all of  the  Appellants  without  recourse  to  public
    funds.  As regards the remaining  Appellants,  the  Judge  should  have
    treated them as de facto members  of  the  family.   Finally,  Ms  Gore
    submitted that the Judge had given insufficient reasons for his finding
    of no family life between the  various  parties.   There  was  evidence
    before him of regular contact between the Appellant and the Sponsor and
    the Appellants.

 7. In response, Mr Mills acknowledged that this was not  a  PBS  case  and
    that the test of adequacy of maintenance applied.   Any  error  of  law
    made by the Judge in this respect was not material because even  taking
    account of the evidence to which the Judge attached little weight,  the
    first two Appellants had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  showing  an
    adequacy of maintenance without recourse to  public  funds.   That  the
    Sponsor and his wife had a joint income in excess of benefit levels was
    only a yardstick.  These Appellants had failed to provide a schedule of
    the income and outgoings of the Appellant and his wife.  As regards the
    remaining Appellants, the Judge was correct to consider  their  appeals
    under paragraph 297(f).  It was clear from paragraph 6 of HC  395  that
    there was no such thing as a de facto parent.  These Appellants had  to
    show that their biological parents were dead.  The Judge had come to  a
    conclusion in respect of the third and fourth Appellants open to him on
    the evidence before him and which he fully explained.

 8. Finally, Mr Mills argued that in respect of the Appellants'  Article  8
    ECHR rights, the Judge had correctly concluded on the  evidence  before
    him that there was no family life in the United Kingdom as  opposed  to
    Ghana, and that there were no compelling  circumstances relating to all
    the  Appellants.   The  Judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for  this
    decision.

 9. I find an error of law in the decision of the  Judge  relating  to  the
    first two Appellants.  The Judge had erred in law in wrongly  excluding
    relevant evidence relating to a period after the date  of  application.
    This was not a PBS case and therefore the Judge should have  considered
    all relevant evidence up to the date of decision.  If he had  done  so,
    he  may  well  have  concluded  that  there  was  adequate  maintenance
    available for these two Appellants without recourse  to  public  funds,
    and therefore the error is material.

10. Otherwise I find no error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge.   The
    Judge was correct to apply the provisions of paragraph 297(f) of HC 395
    to the appeals of the third and fourth Appellants.  It  is  clear  that
    they both  had  surviving  parents  in  Ghana.   Further,  the  Judge's
    decision that there were no serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations making the exclusion of the third and fourth  Appellants
    undesirable was one open to him on the evidence before him and which he
    fully explained.  Suffice it to say that the third Appellant lived with
    his mother, and that the fourth Appellant lived with his aunt  and  the
    first and second Appellants in Ghana.

11. Finally, I find no error of law in the Judge's Article 8 ECHR decision.
     The Judge explained why he found no family life in the United  Kingdom
    between the Sponsor, his wife, and the Appellants.  This could  not  be
    considered a perverse decision.  In any event, the  Judge  had  decided
    that the decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 precluded him  from
    considering the Appellants' Article 8 rights, and bearing in  mind  the
    living circumstances of the Appellant  in  Ghana  as  mentioned  by  me
    above, this decision cannot be faulted.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
first and second Appellants did involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law.  I set aside that decision and re-make it below.

The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
third and fourth Appellants did not involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law, and that decision is not set aside.  The appeals to the  Upper
Tribunal of the third and fourth Appellants are dismissed.

Re-made Decision

At the hearing I decided to re-make the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
in respect of  the  first  and  second  Appellants.   I  have  re-made  that
decision on the basis of the evidence which was  before  the  Judge.   There
were no further submissions from the representatives.

Without going into the detail,  I  find  the  documentary  evidence  of  the
financial circumstances of the Sponsor and his wife appearing  at  pages  10
to 23 inclusive and  54  to  71  inclusive  of  the  Appellants'  Bundle  of
Documents satisfies me that there  will  be  adequate  maintenance  for  the
first and second Appellants  following  their  arrival  in  the  UK  without
recourse to  public  funds.   I  re-make  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal by allowing the appeals of the first and second Appellants.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in the  appeal  in  part
by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award in respect  of
the  first  and  second  Appellants.   I  have  had  regard  to  the   Joint
Presidential Guidance Note in such  matters,  and  as  I  have  allowed  the
appeals largely upon evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer, I  make  a
whole fee award in respect of those two Appellants.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

