
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06175/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th April 2015                      |On 23rd April 2015                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr gurjinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pretzell, Counsel instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent (who I shall refer to as the claimant) is a national  of
    Kenya whose appeal was allowed on human rights  grounds  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Higgins in a decision promulgated on 10th December 2014.



 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said by  the  Secretary  of
    State that it was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that an
    Article 8 assessment can only be carried out when there were compelling
    circumstances not recognised under the Rules.  The Tribunal had  failed
    to identify why the  claimant's  circumstances  were  so  compelling  -
    reference was made to Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

 3. Specifically there was no evidence that the family had been  unable  to
    cope without the claimant whilst he was in India.  While his  wife  and
    one of his children may have medical problems  there  was  no  evidence
    that the family here could not help support him in his absence.   There
    was no evidence that the best interests of his youngest child would  be
    affected.  He was able to make contact with them via modern methods  of
    communication and could continue to do so.

 4.  Furthermore  he  was  a  persistent  offender  and   was   not   fully
    rehabilitated and might re-offend once  more  and  cause  harm  to  the
    public.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that an arguable error of
    law arose in the context of the proportionality exercise.

 6. Before me Ms Savage for the Secretary of State relied on  the  grounds.
    The judge had not carried  out  a  proper  analysis  in  the  balancing
    exercise.  He had a duty to provide adequate reasons for  his  decision
    and had failed to do so.

 7. For the claimant Mr Pretzell relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.   The
    judge had found that his wife would  have  considerable  difficulty  in
    looking after her youngest daughter due to her  Parkinson's  and  other
    medical conditions.  The judge had carefully considered the  claimant's
    daughters' positions at  paragraph  16  to  18  of  the  decision.   He
    considered Section 55 of the 2009 Act noting  it  was  plainly  in  the
    interests of the claimant's youngest daughter that she live in the same
    household as the claimant.

 8. The judge had made a clear finding that it would have been unduly harsh
    to have expected either his wife or his children to relocate to  India.
    The proposition that modern means  of  communication  were  capable  of
    replacing the quality  of  genuine  family  life  had  been  repeatedly
    criticised - see the skeleton argument.

 9. Specifically the judge recorded that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    not satisfied him that the claimant's history of offending was such  as
    to render his exclusion conducive to the public  good  (paragraph  24).
    So far as rehabilitation was concerned it appeared to the judge to have
    been "successful" (again paragraph 24).  In the final sentence of  that
    paragraph he had correctly found that bearing in mind the claimant  had
    not committed a crime for some six years by the time he went  to  India
    in April 2013 the conclusion that his exclusion was  conducive  to  the
    public good was not sustainable.

10. The points made by the Secretary of  State  amounted  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the fact finding carried out by the judge.  There was
    no error in law.

11. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

12. As the judge noted Mr Singh is a claimant who left the UK for the first
    time in 31 years on 3rd April 2013.  While he  did  have  a  number  of
    convictions for indecent assault the judge noted that when he  flew  to
    India in April 2013 he had not been convicted of any  criminal  offence
    in the previous six years (paragraph 12).  It is important to note that
    in  paragraph  24  the  judge  found,  for  reasons  given,  that   the
    rehabilitation of the Appellant appeared to have been successful.  That
    finding seems to me to be one that was clearly open to the Judge on the
    evidence presented to him.

13. The judge noted the position of the family.  His wife  has  Parkinson's
    disease.  It was clear to the judge she was in need of care  and  would
    have  considerable  difficulty  in  caring  for  the   youngest   child
    (paragraph 15).

14. In terms of paragraph 16 to 18 the judge  noted  the  position  of  the
    claimant's  children  and  in  particular  (paragraph  17)   that   the
    Appellant's second eldest daughter was badly affected by the fear  that
    her father might not return and that the third eldest daughter was very
    seriously ill (paragraph 18).

15. Given those unchallengeable facts the judge went on to  carry  out  the
    balancing exercise under Article 8.  Specifically he took  account  of,
    as he was obliged to do, Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  He took account of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.   He  specifically  noted  that  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control was in the public interest (paragraph 30).  He took
    into account the fact of the need to deter  others  from  making  false
    representations (paragraph 30).

16. Weighing  up  all  the  facts  the  Judge  said  that  the  balance  of
    proportionality in this case came down on the  side  of  upholding  the
    claimant's rights under Article 8 and he therefore allowed  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

17. While the judge did not say  there  were  compelling  circumstances  it
    seems to me that this is implicit in his reasoning.   He  set  out  the
    vulnerability of the family and the fact that  the  claimant  had  been
    here for some  31  years.   Carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise  he
    correctly took account of the fact that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls was in  the  public  interest.   That  had  to  be
    balanced against the fact that the claimant had established  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his wife and children when he was here
    lawfully.

18. In the particular circumstances of this case the claimant  presented  a
    powerful factual matrix that  he  should  succeed  in  respect  of  his
    fundamental, if qualified  rights  under  Article  8  ECHR.  The  judge
    explained why he considered this to be so. It follows that there is  no
    error of law in the decision which must stand. There does not appear to
    me to be any need for an Anonymity order and I was not  asked  to  make
    one.







Notice of Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

20. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald








