

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 31 July 2017                               |On 01 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                     J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ACCRA)
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves child welfare issues.  For  this  reason,  I  find
that it is appropriate to make an order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr R. Khosla of DJ Webb & Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a young child who appeals,  with  the  assistance  of
    his UK sponsors, against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as an adopted child.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 29 November 2016. After having heard evidence
    from the UK sponsors, and in the absence of a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer,  the  judge  made  a  series  of  findings  relating  to   the
    reliability of the documents produced in support  of  the  appeal  that
    were not raised in the original decision letter. She concluded that the
    evidence was not sufficiently reliable to find that the  appellant  was
    adopted  in  accordance  with  a  decision  taken  by   the   competent
    administrative authority or court in the country  of  origin.  Nor  was
    there sufficient evidence to show that  the  appellant  met  the  other
    requirements of paragraph 310 of the immigration rules.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to put various matters relating to
          the reliability of the documents, that would  later  be  used  to
          make negative findings, to the sponsors to explain in  accordance
          with the Surendran guidelines.


      ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the  principles  outlined
          in the decision in  Buama  (inter-country  adoption  -  competent
          court) Ghana [2012] UKUT 146 in which the Tribunal suggested that
          a challenge to the validity of an adoption order should  be  done
          by way of expert evidence.


4.    The respondent's written  response  under  rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, dated 04 July 2017, stated  that
    she did not oppose the appellant's appeal. Mr Tufan asserted  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.
    However, in relation to the fairness issues raised in  the  grounds  of
    appeal he accepted that there had been a concession on those points.

5.    It appears that there  were  several  issues  raised  in  the  written
    decision that were not put the sponsors to allow them an opportunity to
    explain at the hearing in accordance with the Surendran  guidelines.  I
    accept that this discloses an error of law relating to the fairness  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision. After discussion with both parties at
    the hearing it was agreed that the appropriate course of  action  would
    be to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.
    The appellant is entitled to a First-tier Tribunal hearing at which all
    the issues can be raised, answered and assessed.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
Signed   [pic]   Date  31 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
