
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06451/2014
                                                             & OA/06454/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            ISMAHAN HUSSEIN ABDI
                             & ANAB HUSSEIN ABDI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss J Todd, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, citizens of Somalia, appeal against a determination  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dennis,  dismissing  their  appeals  against
    refusal of entry clearance to settle in the UK with their mother.   She
    is also originally a citizen of Somalia, and now a citizen of the UK.

 2. It was conceded that the case for  the  appellants  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.  They argued  for  a  right  of  admission
    based on their and their mother's rights to family life under Article 8
    of the ECHR, notwithstanding the requirements of the Rules.

 3. The appellants' first ground of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  1(a),
    complains that the judge was wrong to hold at paragraphs 15 and 27 that
    there was no protected family life  for  Article  8  purposes,  because
    there is a  presumption  of  family  life  between  parents  and  minor
    children,  which  could  subsist  even  where   families   "voluntarily
    separate", and no reason to depart from that general rule.

 4. Mr Mullen argued that the  judge's  finding  was  to  the  effect  that
    although family life existed it  was  not  sufficient  to  qualify  for
    Article 8 protection.

 5. I am not satisfied that the judge's finding is to that  effect,  or  at
    any rate that the finding is as clear as it should be.  In my view, the
    finding should have been reached that family  life  did  exist  between
    mother and daughters.  However, I  do  not  think  that  any  error  is
    material, for these reasons:

         (a)      The real question was not whether family life existed  for
         Article 8 purposes, but whether any interference with  that  family
         life was such, taken with all the other circumstances of the  case,
         as to render the decisions appealed against disproportionate.   The
         substance  of  the  judge's  decision  is  clearly  based  on  that
         overarching issue.

         (b)       The  judge  from  paragraph  28   onwards   reaches   his
         conclusions on the alternative that  there  is  family  life  which
         qualifies for Article 8 purposes.

         (c)      It is correct  that  family  life  may  exist  "even  when
         families voluntarily separate", but on the findings this was not  a
         voluntary separation.  It was willingly created by the sponsor.

 6. Ground 1(b) complains that the judge speculated as to the  reasons  for
    the failure of the sponsor's asylum appeal, and reached a  finding  for
    which there was no evidential basis.  I find nothing  in  this  ground,
    for these reasons:

         (a)      The judge's analysis was that the sponsor put  forward  as
         the truth in these proceedings the same account on  which  she  had
         relied in her asylum appeal.  If accepted then as  true,  it  would
         almost certainly have resulted in recognition as  a  refugee.   She
         had not been so recognised, and  so  her  account  must  have  been
         rejected as unreliable.  Miss Todd submitted that was  speculative,
         but it appears to me to be sensible.  No other  likely  alternative
         analysis was suggested.

         (b)       The  sponsor,  who  was   effectively   instructing   the
         proceedings, knew perfectly well why her claim for asylum had  been
         refused.  The reasons were withheld from the judge.  The appellants
         are scarcely in a position to complain about an adverse inference.

         (c)      In response to the grounds of appeal the respondent sought
         to file a  copy  of  the  determination.   It  discloses  that  the
         sponsor's asylum appeal in  2006  did  fail  because  she  was  not
         accepted to be a credible witness or a minority clan member.   Miss
         Todd submitted that the determination should not  be  admitted  for
         purposes of determining error of law, but in  principle  appellants
         should not be permitted to gain from what was at best  concealment,
         if not deceit.

 7. Grounds 1(c), (d)  and  (e)  are  that  the  judge  took  into  account
    irrelevant matters, being (c)  the  outcome  of  the  sponsor's  asylum
    appeal in relation to the existence of family life, (d) the possibility
    of the father of the sponsors being  alive,  which  was  irrelevant  to
    whether there was family life between them and their  mother,  and  (e)
    the question whether the appellant exercised sole responsibility, which
    was relevant to the requirements of the Rules but  not  to  Article  8.
    Those points are too narrowly taken.  The issues they  cover  were  all
    relevant to  the  overall  outcome  of  the  appeal  in  terms  of  the
    reliability of the sponsor's evidence, and whether there  was  truthful
    disclosure of the family circumstances.

 8. Ground 2 is error in the proportionality assessment, in that the  judge
    ought not to have taken the Immigration Rules as a starting point,  and
    ought not to have imposed an exceptionality requirement.

 9. The judge directed himself at paragraph 28 that the Rules  were  likely
    to lead to a proportionate outcome, and that it would "... only  be  an
    unusual case where such circumstances presented themselves as were  not
    contemplated or covered by the  Immigration  Rules  that  [a  decision]
    might be rendered disproportionate."  I see no legal error there.   The
    grounds seize on the use of the words  "exceptional  circumstances"  at
    paragraph 29, but that is selective.  The judge did  not  mention  only
    exceptionality (which has different meaning in different contexts),  he
    said "... there are  no  exceptional  circumstances  or  compelling  or
    serious ones presented reliably before me" (emphasis added).

10. This criticism is at best one of form  and  not  of  substance.   While
    there has been a proliferation of formulae on the  interaction  between
    Article 8 of the ECHR and the Immigration Rules,  what  is  crucial  is
    whether the judge carries out the fact-sensitive  inquiry  required  by
    the case.  The judge's self-directions are  followed  by  weighing  the
    circumstances as they  appeared  before  him,  including  all  relevant
    factors.  It is not shown that the judge's formulation of  the  correct
    approach to Article 8 outside the Rules requires to be corrected in any
    way, or that any further elaboration of  the  relevant  criteria  might
    have led to a different result.

11. Miss Todd mentioned a further matter.   The  appellants  have  a  half-
    sibling, the sponsor's son born in 2006, who is a UK citizen.  She said
    that it would not be reasonable to  expect  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.   However,  the  point  is  not  in  the  grounds;  it  was  a
    circumstance plainly before the judge; there is no reason to  think  he
    did not give it such weight in the overall balance as it deserved;  and
    it would be far fetched to suppose that the best interests of the half-
    brother of the appellants, with  whom  they  have  had  little  if  any
    contact, might be so strongly served by their admission to the UK as to
    make any difference.

12. Miss Todd said that paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was  of
    another nature from the private and family life provisions as  modified
    in July 2012, and so required a different approach to Article 8 outside
    the  Rules.   Mr  Mullen  said  that  the  same  general  approach   to
    proportionality  applied,  that  paragraph  297  did  have  a   broadly
    humanitarian purpose, and that its exploration of the relevant  factors
    roughly equated to a proportionality exercise, if not exhaustive in all
    cases.

13. It would be academic and futile to consider the exact degree  to  which
    paragraph 297 reflects Article 8.  The judge accepted that there was  a
    proportionality assessment to be carried out outside the  Rules,  which
    was the entire thrust of the case.  The extent to which the  appellants
    met or missed the terms of paragraph 297 was relevant to that exercise.



14. Miss Todd also put the argument that  the  appellants  were  in  effect
    being penalised for the adverse features of the immigration history  of
    the sponsor.  It is of course correct that the  appellants  should  not
    suffer for the shortcomings of their parent, but it  is  difficult  for
    them to show the outcome is disproportionate when their actual  history
    has  not  "been  accurately  or  fully  presented   in   either   their
    applications or on appeal" (as put by the judge at paragraph 30 of  his
    determination).

15. If the decision were to be re-made, the appellants sought admission  of
    further evidence, a statement of the sponsor regarding  her  visits  to
    the appellants in Ethiopia in January to February and again in June  to
    August 2015, on which occasions she left with them US$ 400 and US$ 700.
     Her explanation for the source of funds is that  she  "took  out  cash
    here, plus some came from my friends."  I notice from the determination
    that she had made previous visits, and had paid US$ 3000 for one of the
    appellants to have knee surgery.  Her only  admitted  income  has  been
    from working as a cleaner and  from  benefits.   Presently  she  is  in
    receipt of Job Seekers Allowance only.  Her travels and expenditure  do
    not fit well with her claimed economic circumstances.  If re-making the
    decision, in the light of the determination of the asylum appeal and of
    the further evidence presented, I would have been at least as sceptical
    as the original judge as to whether genuine disclosure  of  the  family
    circumstances was being made.  I also  note  that  the  factors  to  be
    weighed in terms of s.117B (2) and (3) of  the  2002  Act,  ability  in
    English and financial independence, would count  significantly  against
    the appellants.  Those matters were mentioned by  the  judge,  although
    not by reference to the statute.  I would have  had  no  difficulty  in
    reaching the same outcome as the First-tier Tribunal.

16. For all these reasons, I find that the appellants have  not  shown  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making
    of any error on a point of law such that the decision ought to  be  set
    aside.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
