
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Phoenix House                |             Decision and reasons    |
|On 12 May 2015                         |Promulgated                          |
|                                       |On 9 June 2015                       |
|                                       |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS NAZMA WQAQAS
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Malik, Legal Representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of  Pakistan  born
      on 8 January 2015.  However, for the sake of convenience I shall refer
      to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary of the State  as
      the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in   the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



   2.   The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mensah  was
      against the decision of the  respondent  dated  30  May  2014  and  11
      November 2014  who  refused  the  appellant's  application  for  entry
      clearance as a spouse under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The
      Judge allowed the appellant's appeal in a decision dated  11  November
      2014.



   3.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Grimmett who stated that it is arguable that the  Judge
      had  erred  in  her  application  of  evidential  flexibility  as  the
      appellant could not provide the 12 months bank statements as required.
      The Judge nevertheless allowed the appeal on the basis that the  Entry
      Clearance Officer should have applied the policy. It is arguable  that
      the Judge erred in allowing the appeal outright on that basis  as  the
      discretion can only be exercised by the respondent not by the Judge.



   4.   Thus the appeal came before me.




   5.   At the hearing before  me  the  parties  agreed  that  there  was  a
      material error of law in the determination.   It was accepted that the
      Judge erred in law when he stated at paragraph 10, "it is correct that
      the appellant did not provide the required  12  months  personal  bank
      statements and for that reason the appellant could not, on the face of
      it, meet the evidential requirements under appendix FM SE". The  Judge
      stated that the sponsor's "minimarket started on 1 May  2013  and  his
      application was made on 12 December 2013. The bank statements provided
      cover the 10 May 2013  through  to  1  November  2013.  Therefore  the
      sponsor provided  all  the  bank  statement  he  could  reasonably  be
      expected to provide at the date of application."




   6.   The Judge that stated at  paragraph  10  "under  the  Border  Agency
      guidance and evidential flexibility under paragraph  (e)  states  that
      where the decision maker is satisfied there is a valid  reason  why  a
      document cannot be  provided,  discretion  exists  not  to  apply  the
      requirements.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer/Manager  has  failed  to
      exercise their discretion in favour of the appellant and circumstances
      where it is in my opinion clear that the appellant could not  file  12
      months  of  bank  statements.  I  allow  the  appeal  on  the  grounds
      discretion should have been exercised differently in that the decision
      maker should have considered the other evidence available". The  Judge
      allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under  Article  8
      "for the same reasons".




   7.   It was accepted by the parties that the Judge made a mistake when he
      said at paragraph 10 that the appellant's sponsor's minimarket started
      on 1 May 2013. The market in fact started in 2012.


            Error of law decision

   8.   There is no suggestion that the First-tier Judge's consideration  of
      the subsistence of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
      sponsor in respect of the Immigration Rules is materially flawed.  The
      respondent did not challenge this finding in the  grounds  of  appeal.
      This finding by the Judge's therefore is upheld.




   9.   The only issue taken by the respondent with  the  determination  was
      that the Judge's findings that the appellant can  meet  the  financial
      requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  by  the  Judge  applying  the
      respondent's evidential flexibility policy, herself when  it  was  for
      the respondent to apply her policy and not the Judge.




  10. I accept that it was not for  the  Judge  to  apply  the  respondent's
      evidential flexibility policy but she should have sent it back to  the
      Secretary of State on the basis that the discretion  be  exercised  by
      her. I find that the Judge by allowing the appeal outright, materially
      erred in law.



  11. There is also an error of law in the determination  of  the  Judge  in
      reaching his decision to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
      Article 8 as he stated "for the same reasons" as he allowed the  Judge
      allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules. The  Judge
      gave no reasons for her decision. The Judge also materially  erred  in
      law in this respect.




  12. In the circumstances, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge and remit the appeal to the Secretary of State awaiting
      her lawful decision.




      DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal succeeds to the limited extent  that  it  be
remitted the Secretary of State for her lawful decision.


Signed by




Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                    The 7th day of June 2015







