
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
OA/06028/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision Promulgated            |
|On 15 May 2017                           | On 31 May 2017                  |
|                                         |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                   MASTER Lucas VINICIUS DOS SANTOS SILVA
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Kotas Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Singer of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of Brazil born  on  4
   April 1999.  However, for the sake of convenience, I  shall  continue  to
   refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary of the  State
   as  the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



2.    The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision  of  the  respondent  dated  24  February  2015  to  refuse  his
   application for indefinite leave to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules.



3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Page  gave  the  Secretary  of  State
   permission to appeal against the decision stating that it is arguable the
   Judge erred in finding that there are serious and  compelling  family  or
   other reasons which  make  the  appellant's  exclusion  from  the  United
   Kingdom undesirable.




4.  Thus, the appeal came before me.



Decision on the error of law




5.  Having  considered  the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  find  the   Judge's
   consideration of the appellant's appeal in  respect  of  the  Immigration
   Rules is materially flawed and based on sympathy for  the  appellant  and
   not on the law. It was accepted  that  the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
   responsibility for the appellant, living in Brazil with his mother, as he
   was. The appellant's mother has always looked after the appellant and the
   appellant's father provided  financial  assistance  for  the  appellant's
   upkeep.




6. The Judge essentially based his decision on the appellant's  evidence  at
   the hearing. The Judge considered the appellant's evidence  that  he  now
   wants to live with his father in this country and go to college. The fact
   that the appellant wants to live with his father  does  not  address  the
   issue as to whether his best interests can no longer be  met  in  Brazil,
   staying with his mother. The Judge did not identify in the decision  what
   exactly constitutes the best interests of a child. Had  he  done  so,  he
   would have found that the best interests of a child lie in being provided
   with housing, food, education and  having  the  care  of  a  parent.  The
   appellant has all these essential ingredients living in Brazil  with  his
   mother. He also did not identify how the appellant's best  interests,  to
   continue to live with his mother in Brazil as he has done for the past 17
   years, would be compromised by his exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom.
   Although I accept that the appellant was much younger when  he  made  the
   application but my reasoning continues to apply even for a  child  of  15
   years. The appellant's father came to the United  Kingdom  and  left  the
   appellant with his mother in Brazil which shows he was confident that  he
   would be looked after by her.




7. The evidence was that the appellant lived with this mother and  sometimes
   with his grandparents in Brazil. They should  have  demonstrated  to  the
   Judge that the appellant has other close relatives in Brazil and not only
   his own mother, to provide him with care. The judge did not identify  any
   evidence which suggested that the  appellant  was  not  being  adequately
   looked after in Brazil. The evidence was that  the  appellant  was  being
   looked after in Brazil, even if he did not  have  his  mother's  complete
   attention and was not her  priority,  as  she  had  a  new  partner.  The
   appellant was about 15 and is now 17 years old and therefore the level of
   a mother attention changes and is a natural progression as the child gets
   older and near  adulthood.  This  cannot  be  considered  compelling  and
   serious such as to make his exclusion in the United Kingdom undesirable.




8. The Judge found the appellant's evidence to be truthful and credible  and
   this no doubt was the case but the success or failure of this appeal does
   not rest on the credibility of the appellant. The Judge gave  no  reasons
   for finding  that  the  appellant  circumstances  have  changed  and  his
   exclusion from this country has now become serious and compelling.




9. The evidence that the Judge of relied upon was  that  the  appellant  now
   wants to go to college and wishes to do so this  country.  Quest  for  an
   education in this country, cannot be deemed to be serious and  compelling
   circumstances unless of course the appellant can demonstrate  that  there
   is no education available to him in Brazil, which is not the case.




10. While I accept that the Judge must consider the  child's  views,  it  is
   still incumbent on him to give reasons  for  why  he  believes  that  the
   appellant's best interests will be for him to live in the United  Kingdom
   instead of continuing to live in Brazil where he has lived all his  life.
   Each case has its own fact-rich issues and the appellant's evidence  that
   his mother's main priority  is  now  her  partner,  does  not  constitute
   serious and compelling circumstances, such as to make his exclusion  from
   this country undesirable. I find that the Judge's reasoning  was  not  in
   accordance with the jurisprudence when he found that the  best  interests
   of the child is to live in his country with his father. He  also  had  to
   find that the appellant's best interests were no longer being catered for
   in Brazil.




11. Although the Judge referred to the case of Mandeba,  he  did  not  apply
   the principles and the guidance given in that case. The appellant in  the
   case Mandeba was an orphan and the Court of Appeal found  that  his  best
   interests are being met in his home country. The appellant, on the  other
   hand, is not an orphan and has  his  mother  and  grandparents  who  have
   always looked after him. His best interests were being met in Brazil  and
   continue to be and do not change because his father now wants him to live
   with him in this country.




12. I conclude that the Judge materially erred in law in his  evaluation  of
   the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules and I  therefore
   set aside the decision. I remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's
   appeal. This resolves the appeal.




 DECISION

The secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

I dismiss the appellant's appeal


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                             This 26th day of May 2017

