
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06695/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November  2015                |On 17th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   A.K.K.
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and stated that she was born
    on 26th May 1996.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (Entry Clearance  Officer)  dated  6th  May  2015  to
    refuse her application to join her father in the United  Kingdom  under
    Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer  took  issue  with  the  birth  certificate
    provided as it was produced 17 years after her claimed date  of  birth.
    Her father, when he made an application to enter the United Kingdom  in
    2011, gave her date of birth as 31st May 1996 not the date given on the
    birth certificate.  It was not accepted that the birth certificate  was
    a true reflection of her age identity or circumstances in Sierra Leone.



 3. Further the Entry Clearance Officer did not accept that the appellant's
    father had sole responsibility for her. Previously  the  father  stated
    that the appellant was living with his mother and  his  uncle  but  the
    appellant stated that she lived with an aunt.  There was no evidence to
    demonstrate the relationship or contact with  the  father.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  taken
    decisions regarding the education and welfare  of  the  appellant.   In
    addition there was no evidence that the mother had  given  consent  for
    the father to remove the appellant to the United Kingdom

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson heard and  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  An application for permission to appeal was made first to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which was refused Judge M Davies but  then  renewed
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The application of permission to appeal set out that the case concerned
    an application by a child to  join  her  father  and  stepmother.   The
    father asserted he had sole responsibility.

 6. It was asserted:

         Ground 1; That the judge mis-stated the evidence on issues.

             (i) In particular it was  stated  that  there  was  inaccuracy
             regarding the claimed FGM.  The judge recorded that the father
             and step mother gave differing dates in respect  of  when  the
             FGM was raised. On re-examination  the  step  mother  conceded
             that it was an issue which could have  been  raised  with  the
             appellant on multiple  occasions.   The  judge  was  wrong  at
             paragraph 41 as it was  never  said  that  the  appellant  had
             actually been the victim of FGM.

             (ii)      The judge's suggestion that the lack of reference in
             Whats App to the problems was  irrational  because  this  post
             dated when the appellant moved out of Musa's home.

             (iii)     The judge described the inconsistency as to when the
             appellant had lived with his mother  (Summer 2010 or  the  end
             of 2011) as 'egregious' but Mr Seelhoff's statement  confirmed
             that the father had corrected his evidence.

             (iv)      The judge had failed to have  regard  that  the  ECM
             accepted there had been a plausible  explanation  with  regard
             the birth certificate.  He failed  to  address  the  extensive
             evidence from the UN which confirmed that Sierra Leone had  an
             efficient and functioning system.  The birth  certificate  was
             evidence of her age.  The judge erroneously inferred that  the
             guardian who swore an affidavit would need to  know  her  true
             date of birth.  It was irrational to find that the certificate
             described as 'delayed' was because the  birth  was  registered
             late.  There were no findings as to  the  reliability  of  the
             passport.  The judge had not taken into account the fact  that
             there was an ebola crisis and therefore a  2015  report  could
             not be supplied.  The age listed at 15 on the 2011/2012 school
             report was not inconsistent with the school report giving  the
             age of 17 on the 2012/2013 report.

             (v) Evidence from the second guardian.  The judge  incorrectly
             drew inferences from the fact that  the  school  reports  were
             emailed by the appellant's second guardian Kara in  2012  long
             before he was the appellant's guardian.   He however  was  the
             only person with access to a  scanner.   Further  to  conclude
             that the guardian had lied on oath  was  unreasonable  as  all
             over the world close family were referred to as uncle.

         Ground 2; The issue of age was not  in  contention  and  the  judge
         should not have raised the  issue  without  it  being  put  to  the
         appellant.

         Ground 3; Failure to have regard to the length of  time  for  which
         the appellant did live with  her  father  (eight  years)  prior  to
         moving to the United Kingdom.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan found that the weight to  be  attached  to
    the appellant's  passport  should  have  been  considered  and  granted
    permission to appeal.  The appellant's representative had  taken  issue
    with Judge Monson's record of the evidence and he, Mr  Seelhof,  having
    served a witness statement to that effect, was directed  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to serve copies of  his  original  notes  at  the  First  tier
    Tribunal.

 8. In a letter dated 27th October 2015 a letter from A Seelhof  Solicitors
    stated

         "We were instructed yesterday that the appellant no  longer  wishes
         to pursue the appeal.

         We have not been expressly instructed to withdraw the appeal but we
         have not been put in funds to prepare of  the  appeal  and  are  no
         longer instructed to attend.  In the circumstances we are not in  a
         position to comply with directions and serve Mr Seelhoff's note  of
         the hearing in the first tier."

 9. There was no appearance at the hearing for the appellant.

10. I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  mis-stated  or  mis-recorded  the
    evidence.  No contrary note of the evidence was supplied in  accordance
    with the direction of the Upper Tribunal.  I  will  briefly  deal  with
    further points however.

11. It was incorrect to claim that the appellant had never claimed to be  a
    victim of FGM and the judge made no error in this respect.  In  part  9
    of the application form the appellant clearly states that she underwent
    FGM.

12. The point in relation to WhatsApp,  as  Ms  Sreeraman  noted,  is  that
    evidence of difficulties  could  have  been  supplied  in  relation  to
    WhatsApp contact prior to moving out and yet was  not.   That  said,  I
    note that the communication dates from as close to the  claimed  moving
    as February 2014 and span several months and yet make no  reference  to
    the alleged problems.

13. In relation to the dates regarding moving out from  his  mother's  home
    not only was there inconsistency in relation to the year but  also  the
    season or time of the year and this is recorded in the  evidence.   The
    father clearly shifts his evidence from the summer of 2010 to  the  end
    of 2011.  It is  not  irrational  for  the  judge  to  comment  on  the
    inconsistency in the evidence.

14. The  judge  adequately  considered  the  facts  surrounding  the  birth
    certificate.  He clearly states at [44]

         "... the birth  certificate  relied  upon  describes  itself  as  a
         'delayed' birth certificate.  The implication of  this  description
         is that the appellant's birth was registered for the first time  in
         November 2013; not (my emphasis)  that  the  appellant  obtained  a
         duplicate birth certificate which was based on an entry made in the
         birth register shortly after the appellant  was  born.   The  Entry
         Clearance Officer reasonably queried the reliability of  the  birth
         certificate as showing the appellant's  correct  age,  as  well  as
         evidencing her true paternity and reasonably asked the appellant to
         produce the evidence that had been used to obtain the  certificate.
         According to Mr Kargbo, Musa (the appellant's then legal  guardian)
         swore an affidavit.  But this affidavit has not been produced.   It
         is in any event unclear how Musa would know  what  the  appellant's
         true date of birth was, since he is only alleged to have become the
         appellant's guardian in or about December 2011."

15. If the evidence is such that the system of registering births in Sierra
    Leone was efficient as claimed in the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal there is even more reason to suppose that any certificate  would
    have been headed duplicate rather than delayed.  The  judge  cannot  be
    said to have made his findings irrationally.  The passport was obtained
    a day after the birth certificate and it must  be  the  case  that  the
    passport would be reliant on  the  birth  certificate.   As  the  judge
    rejected, with adequate reasoning, the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    birth certificate I find that it is not  material  that  there  was  no
    specific finding in relation to the passport. The  judge  reviewed  the
    evidence with regards  the  appellant's  age  and,  putting  aside  the
    question  of  the  final  report,  found  the  two   produced   reports
    inconsistent (and there was no indication that  the  school  system  of
    recording age had changed) but clearly he noted and took  into  account
    the fact that the date of birth was not registered on any of the school
    reports.

16. The point in relation to Mr Kamara sending the school reports  was  not
    that only he had access to a scanner and fax but that he sent a  report
    dated July 2013 in September 2012  [47].   Further  the  report  of  Mr
    Kamara was a formal legal  affidavit  and  the  Judge  is  entitled  to
    observe that he would describe himself accurately.

17. At [52] the judge stated that 'having considered the  evidence  in  its
    totality, I find that the appellant has not discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that she was still a child at the date of application.  For the
    reasons I have given earlier in this  decision,  both  the  documentary
    evidence and the oral evidence relating to the appellant's age and date
    of birth are not reliable'.  The judge was entitled, as he did to  make
    an overall assessment of the evidence, and his reasoning was sound.

18. For the avoidance of doubt the question  of  the  appellant's  age  was
    specifically raised in the reasons for  refusal  letter  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  That the Entry  Clearance  Manager  considered  the
    appellant's  father  might  have  a  plausible  explanation   for   the
    inaccuracy in his said daughter's date of birth when he entered the  UK
    in 2011 does not constrain the  judge  in  finding  otherwise  for  the
    reasons he gave.

19. Putting aside the question of age, overall the judge was not  satisfied
    [53] that the evidence was reliable and that the  appellant  had  shown
    that her father had exercised sole responsibility  rather  than  shared
    responsibility  with  other  relatives  or  legal  guardians  in  whose
    household the judge noted that the  appellant  resided.  Indeed  it  is
    evident from the emails of Mr Kamara that he has,  on  his  own,  taken
    important decisions, such as where the appellant would stay.

20. As I recorded there was no submission of the note of the hearing and  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson made no error of law and
    the decision shall stand.


Signed      Date 3rd November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

