

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06017/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 13 April 2016                              |On 15 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                 AMMAD AHMAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S.B. Iqbal, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen under Appendix FM of
    the immigration rules. The Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  refused  the
    application on the ground that the English  language  test  certificate
    produced in support of the application, which was  obtained  through  a
    company called ETS, was not valid. Since 01 July 2014 ETS was no longer
    licensed by the Home Office to award test certificates for  immigration
    and nationality purposes. Applications made after 22 July 2014 could no
    longer rely on an ETS certificate. The appellant's application was made
    on 19 December 2014 therefore the test certificate was  not  valid  for
    the purpose of the application.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble ("the judge") allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 06 October 2015.  She
    noted that there was no copy of the original  test  certificate  before
    the tribunal so she was unable to assess whether the appellant took the
    initial test at a  time  when  ETS  was  properly  licensed  [15].  She
    accepted that he may not have appreciated that  ETS  subsequently  lost
    its licence. However, it made no material difference. Whether  he  knew
    about it or not the ETS certificate was not valid at the  date  of  the
    application in December 2014 [16]. She accepted that the appellant  sat
    a further test and sent the certificate to the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    16 June 2015. The tribunal  forwarded  a  copy  to  the  respondent  in
    Islamabad on 29 June  2015.  Unfortunately,  by  that  time  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager (ECM) had reviewed the application on  17  June  2015
    and did not have an opportunity to consider the further  evidence.  The
    judge reminded  herself  that  she  was  constrained  to  consider  the
    evidence as it was at the date of the decision [14]. She was unable  to
    take into account the second test certificate and had to conclude  that
    the appellant did not meet the strict requirements of  the  immigration
    rules [17-18].

4.    The judge went on to consider whether  there  were  any  circumstances
    that might engage the appellant's right to family life under Article  8
    outside the immigration rules. She made proper reference to  the  Court
    of Appeal decision in SSHD v SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  which
    recognised that  it  is  possible  for  cases  that  fall  outside  the
    requirements to engage Article 8  but  only  if  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the rules.   She  noted
    that the appellant and his  wife  were  married  in  2008  and  have  a
    daughter who is a British citizen born in 2012. The judge accepted that
    the appellant made the application for entry clearance in  good  faith.
    As soon as he became aware of the fact that there was  a  problem  with
    the English language test  certificate  he  sat  a  test  with  another
    provider. It was unfortunate that the ECM was unable  to  consider  the
    further test certificate at the date when the application was  reviewed
    [20].

5.    In light of this factual background the judge went on  to  assess  the
    case according to the five stage approach outlined in R v SSHD ex parte
    Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58. She made clear  that  she  had  regard  to  the
    public interest considerations outlined in Part 5A of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002").  With  reference  to
    section 117B(2) (English language) she took into account the fact  that
    the appellant passed the required English language test in April  2015.
    The judge took into account the family circumstances and concluded that
    it would be in the child's best interests for her to be brought  up  by
    both parents in the UK [20]. She made clear that  the  child's  welfare
    needs did not stand above other factors  and  could  be  outweighed  by
    countervailing factors, including the need to maintain firm immigration
    control [31]. The judge concluded [33]:

           "It seems to be to be disproportionate, in circumstances  where,
           had  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  seen  the  new  test,   the
           application may have been granted, to refuse the application and
           expect the Appellant to make a fresh application. He has  waited
           to join his wife and daughter long  enough.  Whilst  maintaining
           effective immigration control is a weighty factor,  the  child's
           need to be brought up with both parents, added to the  fact  the
           Appellant has now passed an English test and meets  S117B(2)-(3)
           outweigh in my view that factor on balance, and for the  reasons
           outlined above, I conclude that the respondent's decision is not
           proportionate."

6.    The respondent seeks to appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      (i)   In  taking  into  account  the  further  English  language  test
           certificate dated April 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal  took  the
           role of the  primary  decision  maker.  The  judge  should  have
           "allowed the appeal to the limited extent of remitting  it  back
           to the respondent".

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  taking  into  account  post-
           decision evidence relating to English language: DR  (ECO:  post-
           decision evidence) Morocco [2005] UKIAT 00038 referred.

      (iii) The judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  she
           considered the facts of the case were so compelling  to  warrant
           consideration under Article 8.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

8.    In assessing the appeal under the immigration  rules  the  judge  made
    several references to the legal framework, which indicate that she  was
    well aware of the fact that she could only consider specified documents
    submitted with the application [13] and was constrained to consider the
    situation as it was at the date of the decision in February 2015  [14].
    Indeed, the whole basis upon which she dismissed the appeal in relation
    to the immigration rules relied solely upon her correct analysis of the
    law.

9.    The respondent seeks to challenge the  judge's  findings  relating  to
    the human rights aspect of the appeal. The judge made proper  reference
    to the relevant law. She  made  clear  that  she  considered  the  case
    according to the  five  stage  approach  outlined  in  Razgar  and  her
    references to SS (Congo) and Mostafa (Article  8  in  Entry  Clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 0112 show that she was well aware of the  stringent  nature
    of the human rights assessment outside the rules.

10.   It is clear  that  the  immigration  rules  and  the  public  interest
    considerations which must be taken into account by courts or  tribunals
    when considering proportionality under Article 8(2) both emphasise  the
    public interest in applicants being able to speak a  minimum  level  of
    English. However, some distinctions can be  made  between  the  English
    language requirements contained in the rules and the more wide  ranging
    assessment made outside the rules.

11.   An applicant for leave to remain as the spouse of  a  British  citizen
    must meet the English language requirement contained  in  paragraph  E-
    ECP.4.1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

                      E-ECP.4.1     The  applicant  must  provide  specified
    evidence that they-
                    (a)      are a national of a majority  speaking  country
                 listed in paragraph GEN.1.6;
                     (b)       have  passed  an  English  language  test  in
                 speaking and listening at a minimum  of  level  A1  of  the
                 Common European Framework of Reference for Languages with a
                 provider approved by the Secretary of State;
                         (c) have an academic  qualification  recognised  by
                 UK NARIC to be equivalent to the standard of  a  Bachelor's
                 or Master's degree of PhD in the UK, which  was  taught  in
                 English; or
                     (d)       are  exempt   from   the   English   language
                 requirement under paragraph E-ECP.4.2.

12.    Appendix  FM-SE  sets  out  the  evidential   requirements   for   an
    application for leave to remain as a family member. It is not necessary
    to set out the whole provision but for the purpose of making this point
    the following section of paragraph D is relevant.

            (a) In  deciding  an  application  in  relation  to  which  this
           Appendix states that specified documents must be  provided,  the
           Entry Clearance Officer or Secretary  of  State  ("the  decision
           maker") will consider documents that have  been  submitted  with
           the application, and will  only  consider  documents  after  the
           application where sub-paragraph (b) or (e) applies.

13.   The judge was required to take into account  the  appellant's  ability
    to speak English as part of  her  overall  proportionality  assessment.
    Section 117B(2) NIAA 2002 states:

           (2)  It is in the public interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

14.   The public interest in an applicant being  able  to  speak  a  minimum
    level of English underpins both provisions but the  way  in  which  the
    respondent seeks to achieve compliance under the immigration  rules  is
    by way of a strict set of evidential requirements. A person may be able
    to speak English but if  they  do  not  provide  the  evidence  in  the
    specified format with the application  then  they  will  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  In  contrast,  section  117B(2)
    does not specify any  particular  evidence.  The  provision  serves  to
    emphasise to courts and tribunals making decisions in  the  context  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention the importance of  the  underlying
    public interest consideration. Section 117B(2) makes clear that  it  is
    in the public interest that a person can speak English because they are
    likely to be less of a burden on  taxpayers  and  are  better  able  to
    integrate into society.

15.   The  respondent's  reliance  on  DR  (Morocco)  does  not  assist  her
    argument. It is clear from that decision that a judge  is  entitled  to
    take  into  account  evidence  that  is   relevant   to   circumstances
    "appertaining at the time of the decision". A judge is able to consider
    evidence arising after the date of decision as long as it  is  relevant
    to the circumstances at the date of the  decision.  In  this  case  the
    appellant acted swiftly to take another English language test  as  soon
    as he was informed of the reasons  for  refusal.  The  entry  clearance
    application was refused on 23 February 2015. The new  test  certificate
    was dated 02 April 2015. It is highly  unlikely  that  the  appellant's
    English language ability  was  markedly  different  from  the  date  of
    decision a mere five weeks earlier.

16.   The judge correctly identified the fact that she was  unable  to  take
    into account the new test certificate for the purpose of her assessment
    under the immigration  rules  because  of  the  strict  nature  of  the
    evidential requirements. For the reasons already given I find  that  it
    was open to her to take into account post-decision evidence relating to
    the appellant's ability to speak English, which  was  relevant  to  the
    public interest question she was required  to  consider  under  section
    117B(2). The evidence was sufficiently contemporaneous to  be  relevant
    to the question of whether, at the date of the decision, the  appellant
    was likely to be a burden on taxpayers and was better able to integrate
    into  society.  She  concluded  that   no   weighty   public   interest
    considerations arose because  there  was  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant spoke the required level of English.  I  find  that  she  was
    entitled to take that evidence into account and her approach could  not
    be criticised.

17.   It is not arguable that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  to
    support her conclusion that the decision was  disproportionate  in  all
    the circumstances of the case. She made clear that she  had  considered
    the stringent nature of the test to be applied when considering Article
    8 outside the rules. The best interests of  the  child  are  a  primary
    consideration.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  give  weight  to   those
    considerations. She made clear that they could  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other countervailing factors. Given the importance
    of the right to family life and the best interests of the  child  there
    were, in fact, very  few  weighty  public  interest  considerations  to
    obviate the positive obligation to respect family life in circumstances
    where there was evidence to show that the appellant did, as a matter of
    fact, speak sufficient English. In other  words,  the  public  interest
    considerations underpinning the evidential requirement  to  produce  an
    English language certificate were nevertheless satisfied.

18.   Given the nature of the shortcoming in the application  for  leave  to
    remain it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to require the appellant to make a further application
    simply in order for the further  English  language  certificate  to  be
    considered. In doing so she recognised the core right that Article 8 is
    intended to protect. This point was emphasised by Baroness Hale  in  AS
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 32:

           "30. ...There is some logic in requiring out of country  appeals
           against the refusal of entry clearance  to  be  decided  on  the
           evidence as it was presented to the entry clearance  officer  on
           the ground at the time. But the restrictions on  the  powers  of
           appeal tribunals do not mean that the other  public  authorities
           are except from their duty to act compatibly with the convention
           rights. We have been shown nothing which suggests that they  are
           disabled  from  taking  changes  of  circumstance  into  account
           without requiring a prohibitive  fee  for  a  fresh  application
           every time. It is the fee, as much as anything else,  which  may
           stand in the way of the system  operating  compatibly  with  the
           convention rights. It remains  the  duty  of  all  concerned  to
           respect those rights insofar as statute law allows  them  to  do
           so."

19.   The respondent's grounds of appeal amount to little more than  general
    disagreements with the decision and do not disclose any material errors
    of law. The effect of allowing the appeal on human  rights  grounds  is
    that the ECO must consider how to proceed in light  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. If  satisfied  with  the  further  English  language
    certificate it will be open to the ECO to exercise discretion and grant
    entry under the immigration rules rather than  granting  entry  outside
    the rules but that is a matter for the respondent.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 14 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








