
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/06069/2014
                                                               OA/06071/2014
                                                               OA/06074/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2015                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             Beau Etienne NOUSSI
                             WELCH NOUSSI KAMDEM
                            VIERI TALTO NOUBISSI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is strictly an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  have,
    for the sake of consistency, continued the headings as  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal so that in this decision the original appellants continue
    to be called the appellants.

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp who allowed the  appeals  of
    the three appellants, all citizens of Cameroon, to the extent only that
    he found the original decisions to be not in accordance  with  the  law
    and  he  remitted  the  applications  to  the  respondent  for   lawful
    decisions.

3.   The first appellant had applied for entry clearance to  join  his  wife
    who is a British citizen resident and settled in the  UK.   The  second
    appellant is his stepson, the son of his wife, who is now aged  10  and
    the third appellant is his wife's younger brother who is now  aged  12.
    The Entry Clearance Officer had refused all three applications, each on
    different  grounds  but  based  on  the  relevant  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules.   The  essential  reason  given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  for  allowing  the  appeals  and  remitting  them  was
    essentially, as stated at [15] that "the best interests  of  the  minor
    appellants have not been considered by the respondent" and he stated at
    [16] that "it is clear  that  the  refusal  of  the  first  appellant's
    application  impinges  on  the  interests  of  the  second  and   third
    appellants".

4.   Permission to appeal  was  given  on  29  January  2015  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Omotosho who quoted the first ground seeking  permission
    to appeal and referred to the Upper Tribunal decision in T (Section  55
    BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 which  has  held
    that Section 55 of the 2009 Act does not  apply  to  children  who  are
    outside the United Kingdom.

5.   In making his submissions, Mr Nath relied on the  grounds  and  on  the
    case of T Jamaica.  He also relied on paragraph (iv) of the  head  note
    to T Jamaica which states as follows:

          "Where the appeal can be fairly determined on the  merits  by  the
         judge,  it  is  inappropriate  to  allow  it  without   substantive
         consideration simply for a decision to be made in  accordance  with
         the law."

6.    In  reply  Mr  Nasim  argued  that  remittal  to  the  respondent  was
    appropriate because the decision maker had not considered Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  He acknowledged that no Article  8  claim  had  specifically
    been made by the appellant but argued that it was still  necessary  for
    the Entry Clearance Officer to have considered that aspect.

7.   I am satisfied that there was a material error of  law  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision for the precise reasons set out in the  grounds.
    The case of T Jamaica is clear.  It was the duty of the judge  to  make
    his decisions on all the evidence before him and  not  simply  to  have
    failed to grasp the issues and make decisions on the evidence.  I  note
    also that the appeal of the first appellant (the husband)  was  capable
    of being determined on its  own  but  the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    findings or decision in respect of that appeal.

8.   For the record I have noted that the DNA evidence  of  the  second  and
    third appellants was accepted by the respondent.   No  issue  therefore
    turns on their relationship to the sponsor.

9.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  Regrettably. the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  make
    any decision on any of the evidence and  the  case  must  therefore  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contained a material error of law.   I  set
the decision aside in its entirety.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal in Birmingham for a full rehearing before  any  judge  (other  than
Judge Camp).

No application was made  for  anonymity  and  accordingly  I  make  no  such
direction.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
23 March 2015


