



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                           Mr ketheeshkumar RAMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This application for permission to  appeal  is  brought  by  the  above
    Appellant a citizen of Sri Lanka (date of birth 24.11.1983) against the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Nicholls)  which  in  a
    determination promulgated 18th February 2014 dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of the Entry Clearance  Officer  Chennai  to
    grant him entry clearance as the spouse  of  Krishnaveni  Ketheeshkumar
    "the Sponsor".

 2. The Sponsor, who is also a citizen of Sri  Lanka,  is  present  in  the
    United Kingdom on account of being a dependant  family  member  of  her
    father who has been granted refugee status.

Procedural History

 3. This appeal has a distinct history and it is  necessary  to  recite  it
    here. The Appellant and the Sponsor married in Sri Lanka in  2010.  She
    subsequently gave birth to their child, in the United Kingdom, on  11th
    October 2011.

 4. The Appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  on  2nd  July  2012.  His
    application  was  considered  and  refused  under  the  provisions   of
    paragraph 281 (the old Rules). The date  of  refusal  is  7th  February
    2013.

 5.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application  under   the
    Immigration Rules because the Sponsor, although present in the  UK  was
    not settled there, since her Sri Lankan passport showed her to  possess
    discretionary leave only until 6th June 2015.

 6. The Appellant appealed the refusal; the grounds of appeal state:

         "The Applicant's wife has been present and settled in the UK for  6
         years albeit with discretionary leave until its expiration in 2015.
         It is inevitable that she  would  be  granted  ILR  in  the  future
         because she clearly does  not  lead  an  independent  life  and  is
         reliant on her parents and as  such  should  not  be  compelled  to
         relocate from the UK and expected to fit in, adapt and establish  a
         new livelihood elsewhere with her British born child".

 7. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant conceded that the Appellant could not meet  the
    Immigration Rules and that the only issue before the F-tT  was  whether
    the refusal of entry clearance amounted to a breach of the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  having  heard
    evidence dismissed the appeal both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8.

 8. The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal.  The  application  seeking
    permission was made out of time. In his consideration of whether or not
    to grant permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish said,

         "In a determination promulgated on February 2014  F-tT  J  Nicholls
         dismissed an appeal  under  article  8  against  refusal  of  entry
         clearance as the dependant spouse of a sponsor with  limited  leave
         until 6.6.15 on the grounds  that  no  breach  thereby  arose.  The
         application was submitted a month  and  a  half  out  of  time  the
         special circumstances meriting an extension of time in  respect  of
         which were said to  be  that:  the  appellant  fell  out  with  his
         previous solicitors and it took that long to get the file off them.
         That  does  not  amount  to  special  reasons  because  a   holding
         application could have been submitted. Permission to appeal out  of
         time is refused. The application is not admitted. However,  if  the
         application had been made in time it would have  been  refused  for
         the following reasons.

         The application for permission to appeal asserts that article 8 has
         been incorrectly applied per Razgar -v-  SSHD  (204)  27;  after  6
         years here, there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  sponsor
         returning home to Sri Lanka with his  wife  and  child  where  they
         would be a lot poorer (Singh (2003) EWCA Civ 248).

         It was accepted that the sponsoring wife earns nowhere near  enough
         here to support the family unit while, with the appellant  being  a
         fisherman in Sri Lanka, they will be even  poorer  there.  However,
         nothing in this application indicates  that  article  8  serves  to
         entitle the appellant to live here outside of the Rules".

 9. Despite Judge Frankish clearly indicating in the body of  his  decision
    that permission to appeal out of time was refused  and  despite  saying
    that even if the application had been in time it would still have  been
    refused, nevertheless the head  note  to  the  permission   reads  "PTA
    Granted". Thus the matter comes before me as an error of  law  hearing,
    to determine whether Judge Nicholls' determination discloses  an  error
    such that it needs to be set aside and remade.

The Hearing

10. Before me the Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Lingajothy  and  the
    Respondent by Mr Saunders. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Lingajothy
    sought permission to adduce further evidence under Rule  15(1)  of  the
    Procedure Rules. That further evidence is  listed  and  appended  to  a
    letter from Linga &  Co  dated  9th  June  2014  (the  day  before  the
    hearing). That letter states that a witness statement enclosed,

      i) contains pertinent information  "unincorporated"  in  the  previous
         witness statements provided,

     ii) evidence overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal,

    iii) evidence  which  "unfortunately"  the  Appellant  did  not  provide
         including confirmation of his daughter's play school attendance;  a
         Sponsor's letter for counselling and  the  Appellant's  psychiatric
         report.

11. I reminded Mr Lingajothy that this is an out-of-country appeal. I noted
    that the Appellant was represented by Counsel at the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. Mr Lingajothy failed to persuade me  of  two
    matters. Firstly that the evidence he  now  sought  to  adduce  was  in
    existence at the date of decision and  secondly  that  there  was  good
    reason why it was not placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12. I declined to admit this evidence. It was clear to me that the evidence
    above not only post dated the date of decision, it did  so  by  a  long
    margin and could not therefore have  been  contemplated  by  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  or  indeed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The
    appropriate course if further relevant evidence becomes available is to
    submit a fresh application.

13. Mr Lingajothy's submissions before me centred on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. What they amounted to is this:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in regarding  the  Appellant's  human
         rights under Article 8 because he failed to consider insurmountable
         obstacles of relocation to Sri Lanka for the  Appellant  (sic)  and
         her British born child. I take this to mean that the Sponsor cannot
         relocate to Sri Lanka.

14. The insurmountable obstacles which he put forward are:

    (1)  The Sponsor has been residing in the UK for six years and has been
        and is financially and emotionally dependent on  her  parents  with
        whom she lives.

     (2)      She could not adapt once more to life in Sri Lanka and in any
        event the Appellant does not have the  means  to  support  her  and
        their child there.

    (3)  The Sponsor has no financial resources or incentive to  return  to
        her country of origin.

15. Mr Saunders on behalf of the Respondent submitted that  the  Judge  had
    generously looked at Article 8 outside the Rules when he did  not  need
    to do so. I disagree with  Mr  Saunders  on  that  point.  This  is  an
    application made under paragraph 281 (the old  Rules)  and  furthermore
    Article 8 ECHR was raised in the grounds of appeal and referred  to  in
    the Entry Clearance Manager's review. The  Respondent's  representative
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing certainly seemed to accept  that  an
    Article 8 consideration was permitted. However  in  the  event  nothing
    turns on this.

16. Mr Saunders'  other  submission  amounted  to  this.  The  Judge  fully
    considered all the evidence that was before him in paragraphs 18 to  26
    of a determination which  is exemplary in its thoroughness.  The  Judge
    made findings of fact  which  were  open  to  him.  There  was  nothing
    inadequate in his reasons for finding as he did.  The  Judge  concluded
    that it would not be unreasonable to expect the Sponsor and their child
    to return to Sri Lanka. There was no evidence to show  that  the  child
    was developing other than normally. This case disclosed nothing  of  an
    exceptional nature such as to bring  the  Appellant  within  Article  8
    ECHR. The grounds  seeking  permission  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the full and careful findings made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

Consideration

17. It is common ground that the Appellant and the Sponsor do not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. At the date of application,  the
    Sponsor was not settled within the meaning of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    What was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was one issue only,  that
    of Article 8 ECHR. I note, as did the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor's marriage took place after the  Sponsor  had
    relocated to the UK. The Sponsor has returned to Sri Lanka, by her  own
    account, on three occasions. I note also that the parties have been  in
    continuous contact by telephone and Internet. The Sponsor accepts  that
    she is unable to financially support the Appellant and  their  daughter
    here in the United Kingdom. She herself is dependant financially and  I
    am told emotionally, on her own parents.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed himself  on  the  Razgar  test,
    took into account all the evidence that was available to him  including
    at paragraph 23 the evidence concerning the Appellant's child  and  the
    best interests of the child, but nevertheless concluded that  it  would
    not be disproportionate to refuse the Appellant entry clearance.

19. The "insurmountable obstacles" which Mr Lingajothy referred to  in  his
    submissions, were fully considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

20. The Judge clearly weighed all matters in the balance. For the foregoing
    reasons I find the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    discloses no error of law.

DECISION

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge determination discloses no error of  law.
    This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

