

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
OA/06589/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 7 February 2014                          |On 11 February 2014       |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                          Nariema Mariesa Ramnarine
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Kansal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the appellant by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird in respect
      of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla who  dismissed
      the appeal by way of a determination dated 29 October 2013.   An  oral
      hearing  had  not  been  sought  by  the  appellant  and  no   written
      submissions or further evidence was adduced in support of the appeal.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Guyana born on 6 August 1992.  She
      seeks entry clearance to join her mother, the sponsor, for settlement.
      The application was refused under paragraph 301(ii) of HC 395  on  the
      basis that the respondent was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
      under 18 years of age. It is the respondent's case that the  appellant
      made her application on the wrong form and paid the  wrong  fee  (i.e.
      for her own circumstances). The judge agreed and  concluded  that  the
      Entry Clearance Officer had been entitled to refuse her on  the  basis
      that she was not a minor child as the form required.

   3.       Permission was granted on the basis that  there  may  have  been
      unfairness by the respondent in not alerting the appellant to the fact
      that she had applied on the wrong  form  and  providing  her  with  an
      opportunity to rectify her error.

Appeal hearing

   4.       At the hearing I heard submissions from the parties.  Ms  Kansal
      submitted that the decision of the respondent was unfair and unlawful.
      She submitted that the form completed by the sponsor for the appellant
      was for a child or dependent relative. There was nothing on  the  face
      of it to suggest that the form was the wrong one and that if this  was
      alleged by the respondent, the burden was on  her  to  prove  it.  The
      appellant's date of birth was entered on the form and then the fee was
      requested which was duly paid. It was  unfair  for  the  ECO  to  then
      proceed to consider the application knowing that it had been  made  on
      the wrong form and with the wrong fee. What the ECO should  have  done
      was to invite the appellant to complete the correct  form  and/or  pay
      the appropriate fee. She relied on Naved (Student - fairness -  notice
      of points) Pakistan [2012] UKUT  14  (IAC)  and  Basnet  (validity  of
      application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC).  She submitted that
      common law principles of fairness should have been applied and the ECO
      should have asked for the shortfall in the fee. The appellant had been
      disadvantaged by a poorly designed website, it was not  apparent  from
      the form that it was incorrect and measures should be put in place  to
      prevent the wrong fees being paid.

   5.       Alternatively, Ms Kansal relied on Rule 34 submitting  that  the
      ECO should have treated the application as invalid because  the  wrong
      fee had been paid and returned the fee to the appellant. That way  she
      could have re-submitted the application correctly and paid  the  right
      fee.

   6.       Ms Kansal submitted that the appeal should be  remitted  to  the
      ECO for consideration under paragraph 317.

   7.       Ms Everett submitted that the application was not invalid as  it
      was submitted on a form and a fee was paid. The ECO was not obliged to
      rectify the error and he considered the application as he was entitled
      to do. The judge did not err in concurring with that view.

   8.        In  response  Ms  Kansal  submitted  that  the  ECO  knew   the
      application had been for entry clearance by  an  adult  dependant  and
      that the correct fee and form had not been submitted.

   9.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  10.        I  have  taken  into  account  the  submissions  made  and  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

  11.       There is some confusion in the evidence before me as to how  the
      visa application was made. The appellant  maintains  that  her  mother
      completed the application on line but the visa application form whilst
      confirming online payment states that the  submission  method  was  in
      person (D5). The application at D1 also confirms that  the  submission
      method was "in person", bears the appellant's signature and a date  of
      19 November 2012 (D4) and an endorsement of the  post  with  the  same
      date (D1). Further,  Appendix  1  of  the  visa  application  form  is
      completed by hand.  I  am  therefore  not  clear  as  to  whether  the
      application was made on line or  whether  the  appellant  made  it  in
      person.

  12.       It is difficult to determine what form the appellant should have
      completed without any of the accompanying guidance as  that  is  where
      the information about the relevance of the  form  to  the  applicant's
      circumstances would be found. Although the ECO maintains that the form
      completed by the appellant is incorrect, there is nothing on the  face
      of it to suggest that it is. The  form  is  entitled  Child  or  other
      Dependant of Settled Person. There is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
      dependant must be a minor and  indeed  the  final  page  of  the  form
      requires an applicant to complete one of five  appendices;  the  first
      pertaining to applicants who want to come to the UK as adult dependent
      relatives. It is difficult to understand why this should appear  on  a
      form which is, according to the ECO, applicable to under 18s only.

  13.       I have also considered the submissions  on  validity.  Paragraph
      A34 does not apply to the appellant as she  is  not  seeking  eave  to
      remain in the UK. However, I note that paragraph 34C requires  an  ECO
      to reject as invalid an application that is not made on the  specified
      form or accompanied by the prescribed fee.
  14.       I therefore conclude that the ECO should have done  one  of  two
      things. Either he should have rejected the application as invalid  and
      returned the fee so that the appellant could remake it correctly or he
      should have considered it  substantively  under  paragraph  317  there
      being no obvious reason why the form was the  wrong  one.   I  do  not
      agree with Ms Kansal's submissions on the unfairness point as  if  the
      ECO had rejected the application as invalid, then the appellant  would
      have had the opportunity to remake her application correctly and there
      would have been no unfairness.

  15.       It follows that the judge should have found that the  ECO  acted
      unlawfully.  Which route the ECO chooses to follow  from  the  options
      outlined above, is up to him.

Decision

  16.       The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.  The  decision  is
      set aside. I now re-make it and allow the appeal to the extent that it
      is not in accordance with the law. The appeal is remitted to  the  ECO
      to make a lawful decision.



      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal






      7 February 2014


