



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07732/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                           mr gursharan bir singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Bagral, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufon, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  K  F
    Walters, made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1st April 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born 16.10.1977. He is the  husband
    of Babita Kumar, a British citizen (the  Sponsor).  The  Appellant  and
    Sponsor married in India in March 2010. The Sponsor has three  children
    from a previous marriage.

 3. The Appellant has a chequered immigration history. He  entered  the  UK
    illegally in 2002. He was encountered by the immigration authorities in
    2006 and at that time he gave a false name and date of birth.  He  then
    failed  to  keep  in  contact  with  the  immigration  authorities   as
    instructed to do and in effect went to ground. He was next  encountered
    by the authorities in March 2009; once again he failed to  comply  with
    his responsibility to keep them informed of  his  whereabouts  but  did
    eventually leave the UK by way of voluntary departure  on  5th  January
    2010.

 4. By this time he had formed a  relationship  with  the  Sponsor  and  as
    stated above he and the Sponsor married in India in March 2010.

 5. In 2011, the Appellant applied to return to the United Kingdom  as  the
    spouse  of  his  Sponsor.  That  application  was  refused.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  used  a  different
    identity when he came to the attention of the immigration  authorities,
    had failed to keep  in  contact  with  the  authorities  and  drew  the
    conclusion that he could not be satisfied as to the genuineness of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor in December 2011.

 6. The Appellant lodged a second application for  entry  clearance,  which
    was refused by the Respondent on 7th March  2013.  His  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed by Judge Walters. He now  seeks  permission
    to appeal against Judge Walters' decision.

The Hearing

 7. Before  me,  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Bagral  and  the
    Respondent by Mr Tufon. Ms Bagral's submissions followed the  lines  of
    the grounds seeking permission. She outlined a three-fold challenge  to
    the Judge's determination.

 8. First the Judge  misdirected  himself  on  the  Devaseelan  point.  She
    submitted that this is clear from a reading of the  determination.  The
    Judge properly referred to Devaseelan, but did not apply  the  guidance
    contained  in  it.  Devaseelan  should  be  the  starting  point  in  a
    determination, but if one looks at this determination,  the  Judge  has
    erred in placing far too much emphasis and weight on  the  decision  of
    the first Judge instead of  reaching  his  own  conclusions.  The  vast
    majority of the determination  outlines  and  relies  on  the  previous
    Judge's findings. This is the wrong approach. The hearing before  Judge
    Walters gives the impression of a re-litigation of the facts  found  by
    the previous Tribunal. This error has led the Judge to fail to properly
    consider the fresh evidence which was before him.

 9. This leads to the second and third challenges. There is no analysis  of
    the witnesses' evidence and further there are  inadequate  reasons  for
    any findings made.

10. In support of this Ms Bagral submitted, that the  Judge  took  evidence
    from the Appellant's wife and her daughter. What also needed to be kept
    in mind is the two and a half year gap since the first appeal  hearing.
    Despite hearing that fresh evidence, the  analysis  of  the  witnesses'
    evidence was wholly inadequate. In paragraph 47 the Judge states,

         "...Sadly, however, I find that the Sponsor's  and  her  daughter's
         perceptions and submissions  made  by  for  or  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant, are not borne out by the evidence before me...".

    The problem identified by Miss Bagral is that the Judge failed to  show
    what the evidence before him consisted of. For example, photographs and
    greeting cards were handed in to the Judge at the hearing. He makes  no
    mention of this  - it is possible that evidence which  may  go  to  the
    heart of the issue was ignored.

11. This led the Judge to give inadequate reasons for his  conclusions.  He
    had depended too much on the determination of  the  previous  Tribunal.
    Therefore the determination was not sustainable since the Appellant had
    not received a full and fair hearing.

12. Ms Bagral did accept that the end result for the Appellant may well  be
    the same but made the point is that nevertheless he is  entitled  to  a
    full and fair hearing.

13. Mr Tufon on behalf of the Respondent  sensibly  acknowledged  that  the
    determination contains serious errors. He attempted to persuade me that
    nevertheless the determination was sustainable, but did not  press  the
    point strongly.

14. I am satisfied  for  the  reasons  outlined  by  Ms  Bagral,  that  the
    determination of Judge Walters contains material errors which  requires
    it to be set aside and the decision remade. I am  also  satisfied  that
    because of the inadequate analysis and reasoning in the  determination,
    the Appellant has not received a full and fair hearing.

15. Both parties agreed that if I were to conclude that the decision should
    be set aside for legal error, the appropriate course would be to  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing.  Full  and
    clear findings of fact based on the evidence  before  it  needs  to  be
    made. None of the findings made by Judge Walters are preserved.

DECISION

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  matter
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Walters) for  a  full
    rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

