
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07071/2013
     oa/07072/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th May 2014                                |On 1st August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                miss melania shinga murenga (first appellant)
                 mr adrian tapuwa murenga (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Schwenk, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of Zimbabwe, the  first  Appellant  having
    been born on 12th April 1990 and  the  second  Appellant,  who  is  the
    younger brother of the first Appellant  being  born  on  15th  December
    1994.  The first Appellant had applied for entry clearance as an  adult
    dependant relative under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    second Appellant had applied under paragraph 352D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Entry clearance  was  refused  for  both  Appellants  and  they
    appealed.  The appeals came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devlin
    sitting in Manchester  on  13th  November  2013.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 17th December 2013 both appeals were dismissed under the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 4th February 2014.  On  20th  February
    2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bird  granted  permission  to  appeal.
    Judge Bird noted that  the  ground  alleged  that  the  judge  made  an
    arguable error of law in finding that  at  the  date  of  decision  the
    second Appellant was over 17.  And that the judge wrongly decided  that
    the second Appellant did not meet the requirement of paragraph 352D(ii)
    as at the date of decision and cannot be heard to argue that  he  would
    have done so had his application  been  decided  before  15th  December
    2015.  The Appellants allege that the judge in considering  the  second
    Appellant's age at the date of decision had made an arguable  error  of
    law in that he had failed to take into account the fact that  what  was
    relevant was the Appellant's age at the date of application.  This  was
    in accordance with the Respondent's own policy and directions given  to
    Entry Clearance  Officers  in  the  IDIs  published  in  July  2011  in
    particular Section 5A in Chapter 8.  In granting permission  the  judge
    therefore found that it was arguable that  in  considering  the  second
    Appellant's age as at the date of decision the judge made  an  arguable
    error of law in the assessment of the Appellants' appeal as the  second
    Appellant's age had to be assessed as at the date  of  application  and
    the relevant Rule was paragraph 352D(ii).

 3. Further the Appellants alleged the  judge's  approach  in  relation  to
    Article 8 under the Human Rights Convention  failed  to  properly  take
    into account family life that existed between the  Appellants  and  the
    Sponsor.  Reference was made to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Ghising [2012] UKUT 160.  The judge  in  considering  Article  8  quite
    clearly considered Article 8 in relation to adult dependant children as
    the judge had misled himself in relation to the applicable age  of  the
    second Appellant consequently an arguable error of  law  arose  in  the
    overall assessment of Article 8.

 4. I am greatly assisted in this matter by Mr McVeety conceding there is a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     Both Mr McVeety and Mr Schwenk acknowledge  that  the  judge  got  the
    dates wrong and that the date of application of  the  second  Appellant
    was under 18 and this affects the Article 8 consideration.  Both  legal
    representatives are of the view that the matter will have to be reheard
    afresh and that the correct approach is to remit it to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Having heard their submissions on this I agree.   Directions
    are attached.

The Law

 5.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 6. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Decision and Directions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than Immigration Judge Devlin on  the  first  available  date  28  days
    hence.  None of the findings of fact stand.  E.L.H. 3 hours.

 8. If an interpreter is required the Appellant's  solicitors  must  notify
    the Tribunal at least seven days pre-hearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


