
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/07125/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2017                         |  On 15 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                ROHIMA KHATUN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam of Counsel instructed by Chancery
Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant", is a  citizen
    of Bangladesh born on 10 May 1942.  On 25  May  1982  she  entered  the
    United Kingdom with indefinite leave as a spouse.  On 7  November  1982
    she returned to Bangladesh and has not subsequently come  back  to  the
    United Kingdom and there was no evidence she had previously  sought  to
    come back.  By a letter of 10 February 2015  she  applied  through  her
    then representatives for indefinite  leave  to  enter  as  a  returning
    resident.  The reason given for her failure to  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom within two years of leaving was:-

         "Mrs Rohima Khatun's husband, Mr Azmal Ali, lived with  Mrs  Rohima
         in Bangladesh and he had been ill for  a  long  time  in  that  Mrs
         Khatun could not come back to the United Kingdom within two  years.
         Her husband was passed away in Bangladesh on 05.04.1999.  Moreover,
         Mrs Khatun's health condition was not good in that  she  could  not
         come back to the UK in due course i.e. within two years.   She  was
         also engaged with her unmarried daughter.  ... Though, she has been
         living in Bangladesh but she is depending on her children in the UK
         in all senses. ... Now, she is around 72 years  old  and  has  been
         living alone due to the death of  her  parents  and  husband.   Her
         daughter is married and she  has  been  living  away  from  her  in
         Bangladesh with her own family members in that she  does  not  have
         anybody to look after her in Bangladesh.  Her health condition  has
         been deteriorated in the meantime. ...  Her all sons, daughters-in-
         laws and grandchildren are living in the UK in that  she  needs  to
         live with them smoothly in the UK.  She needs  intensive  love  and
         care in this late stage of her life.  They also want her to  return
         to the UK.   They  are  not  able  to  travel  back  to  Bangladesh
         frequently to look after her and they cannot afford  to  stay  with
         her in Bangladesh".

The Entry Clearance Officer's Decision

 2. On 18 March 2015 the Respondent (the ECO) noted the Applicant had  been
    outside the United Kingdom for over 30 years and had  not  exercised  a
    choice to return following her husband's death in 1999.   The  ECO  was
    not minded to exercise discretion  under  para.19  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which provides that even if  a  person  is  unable  to  meet  the
    criteria of para.18 by reason only of having been away from the  United
    Kingdom too long, he  or  she  might  nevertheless  be  admitted  as  a
    returning resident if, for example, she has lived here for most of  her
    life. Accordingly the ECO refused the application under para.18 of  the
    Immigration Rules and was not prepared  to  exercise  discretion  under
    para.19.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. On 16 April 2015 the Applicant through her then representatives  lodged
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are lengthy and
    focus on her medical condition and her inability to live an independent
    life.  The grounds refer to the two UK pensions she receives but go  on
    to state that she is wholly and solely dependent on her family Sponsors
    in the United Kingdom.  The grounds assert the Applicant satisfies  the
    requirements of an adult dependent relative for entry  clearance  under
    the Immigration Rules.  There are  other  references  to  human  rights
    issues.



The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. By a decision promulgated on 6 December 2016 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal S Aziz allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    reference to  para.19.   This  was  a  decision  subject  to  the  pre-
    Immigration Act 2014 regime but the Judge did  not  make  any  separate
    assessment of the human rights claim referred  to  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

 5. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the  Judge  had
    not adequately taken into account the length of absence from the United
    Kingdom of the Applicant and the absence of any explanation why she had
    not sought earlier to return, particularly following the death  of  her
    husband in 1999.  Her children had been  born  in  Bangladesh  and  had
    subsequently moved to the United Kingdom as a matter  of  choice.   The
    Applicant's daughter (unmarried at the time) could have accompanied the
    Applicant to the United Kingdom at a far  earlier  date.   The  grounds
    also question whether the Applicant was ever granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain and if she was not, then she could not avail herself  of  the
    benefit of paras.18 and 19 of the Immigration Rules.  The  grounds  for
    appeal refer to the determination in HY and FY  (Returning  resident  -
    Meaning of ILR) Iran [2005] UKIAT 00055.  The grounds also refer to the
    visits made by the Applicant's family to Bangladesh and argue  that  it
    was unclear on what basis the Judge had found there were  compassionate
    circumstances to warrant her being  re-united  with  her  sons  in  the
    United Kingdom: see paragraph 46 of the Judge's decision.

 6. On 28 June 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M Holmes granted the
    ECO permission to appeal.  He noted that both parties were  represented
    before the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal and commented that  he  was
    given little assistance or guidance since the  Judge  noted  there  was
    little case law: see  paragraph  40  of  his  decision.   Judge  Holmes
    continued that the decision did not identify any case  law  whatsoever.
    It did refer to the Immigration  Directorate's  Instructions  (IDI)  of
    August 2004 but made no reference to the assistance that could be found
    in Macdonald's Immigration Law & Practice (9th  Edition)  paras.  4.27-
    4.32.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 7. There was no response filed for the Applicant under Procedure Rule  24.
    The Sponsor, one of the Applicant's sons, attended the hearing  but  in
    the event took no part.

Submissions for the ECO

 8. At the start, Ms Ahmad handed up the determination in  HY  and  FY  and
    accepted  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  original  grant  of
    indefinite leave to the Applicant.  She relied on paragraph 9 of HY and
    FY set out in the ECO's grounds for appeal.  The Applicant had left  in
    1982 and had not sought to return  to  the  United  Kingdom  until  the
    application leading to the decision under appeal.  The evidence  before
    the Judge showed the Applicant had not returned earlier  by  reason  of
    choice and the Judge had erred in allowing the appeal.

Submissions for the Applicant

 9. Mr Aslam opened by submitting that HY and FY was not  relevant  to  the
    appeal.  In HY and FY the Applicant had left the United  Kingdom  while
    holding indefinite leave to remain and had returned as a visitor with a
    visit visa.  The Applicant in this  appeal  had  left  with  indefinite
    leave to remain in 1982 and had never  subsequently  returned  and  was
    seeking leave to return as a person with indefinite leave to remain.

10. That the Applicant had only lived in the United Kingdom for five months
    and that she had not chosen to return did  not  disclose  any  material
    error of law in the Judge's decision.  The decision was  comprehensive.
    There was no case law which was relevant.  The only case  law  produced
    by the Respondent had been shown not to be relevant to the appeal.   He
    referred to the IDI mentioned by the Judge.  I pointed out that the IDI
    was at the date of the hearing before the Judge out of date having been
    updated on 19 November 2015.  Mr Aslam correctly pointed out that there
    was little difference in the relevant parts of the IDI.  The Judge  was
    entitled to exercise the discretion under para.19  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the grounds for appeal amounted to a mere  disagreement  with
    him.

Responses

11. Ms Ahmad had no further submissions by way of response.  I enquired  if
    either party had submissions on the passage in Macdonald's  Immigration
    Law & Practice mentioned in the Grant of Permission to Appeal:  neither
    did.  I noted, as already mentioned, that this was a  decision  subject
    to the pre-Immigration Act 2014 regime.

Error of Law Finding and Consideration

12. It was accepted that the Applicant could not meet the  requirements  of
    para.18 of the Immigration Rules which include that she  had  not  been
    away from the United Kingdom for more than two  years.   She  therefore
    sought to rely on para 19 which states:-

         "A person who does not benefit  from  the  preceding  paragraph  by
         reason only of having been away from the United  Kingdom  too  long
         may nevertheless be  admitted  as  a  returning  resident  if,  for
         example, she has lived here for most of her life".

    The IDI in force at the date of the ECO's decision so far  as  relevant
    is quoted in paragraph 35 of the  Judge's  decision.   Caseworkers  are
    instructed to consider the reason  for  the  delay  beyond  two  years,
    whether it was by choice or through  no  fault  of  the  Applicant  and
    whether she could reasonably have been expected to  return  within  two
    years. They are instructed  that  the  longer  a  person  has  remained
    outside the United Kingdom over two years, the more difficult  it  will
    be for her to qualify for admission under the discretion  contained  in
    para.19.  There was no evidence  to  suggest  that  any  of  the  other
    circumstances referred to in para.2.1 of the IDI would or  should  have
    had any impact on the exercise of the para.19 discretion.

13. Given the clarity of the Rules and the IDI, I find that HY and FY is of
    limited relevance.

14. The Judge has not referred to the evidence that the  Applicant  had  no
    choice but to remain in Bangladesh.  There was no evidence  before  him
    when the Applicant's daughter married and what happened  thereafter  to
    prevent the Applicant seeking to return to the United  Kingdom.   There
    was no evidence before the Judge how  family  events  were  celebrated,
    whether the Applicant had wanted  or  sought  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to celebrate or mark the events but for stated reasons had  not
    been able to, or whether the family returned to Bangladesh to celebrate
    or mark the relevant event.

15. There was no evidence of visits made by the family to  Bangladesh,  not
    even in the letter of 4 March 2015 from the Applicant to  be  found  in
    the ECO's unpaginated bundle.  There was no evidence before  the  Judge
    to support the assertion in the grounds of appeal that the  Applicant's
    third son had spent over a year in Bangladesh helping her and that  her
    younger son had visited.  It is impossible to tell in  whose  passports
    the Bangladeshi visa stamps appear in the pages in the ECO's bundle  or
    at page 21 in the Applicant's bundle.  Page 21 is placed between copies
    of the bio-data pages of the passports of the Sponsor (page 20) and Md.
    Altab Hussain (page 22).

16. At paragraph 42 the Judge referred to the circumstances  identified  in
    the IDI but his analysis of  the  relevant  facts  is  inadequate.   At
    paragraph 44 his  finding  that  the  Applicant  had  not  remained  in
    Bangladesh out of  personal  choice  is  unsupported  by  reference  to
    evidence beyond the insufficient evidence referred to at paragraph  42.
    There was no reference to any evidence before the Judge to support  the
    conclusions at paragraph 46 which in part appears to rely on a  finding
    of "compassionate circumstances" which are not referred to  in  para.19
    of the Immigration Rules or the IDI and of  which  the  Judge  made  no
    separate assessment.

17. A reference to compassionate circumstances might have been relevant  in
    an assessment of the appeal under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Any such consideration  would  have  to
    take into account the manner in which the obligations  imposed  on  the
    United Kingdom by Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  extend  to
    persons  outside  the   United   Kingdom:   see   Mundeba   (s.55   and
    para.297(i)(f))DRC [20013] UKUT 88 (IAC). It  is  likely  that  such  a
    consideration would need to look at the position of family  members  in
    the United Kingdom.

18. For these reasons, I have come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge's
    decision failed adequately to set out sufficient factual  evidence  and
    reasons to support his conclusions in such a way that the  ECO  as  the
    losing party would know why the decision was  made  in  favour  of  the
    Applicant and against the ECO.

19. The effect is that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    material errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.  None  of  the
    findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal decision  shall  stand.  It
    was clear neither party was ready  to  proceed  to  a  substantive  re-
    hearing and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh in accordance with Section 12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 10 February 2010 as amended.

Anonymity

20. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh in the
    First-tier Tribunal.
    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   14.
viii. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




















