
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07727/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the papers                                 |On 22 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                           bose cecilia oguinbayo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Parker re-promulgated on 22 May 2017 in which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her entry clearance  as  an  EEA  family
    member was disposed of on the basis that there was no  jurisdiction  to
    hear such an appeal.

 2. In light of Khan v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755, the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal  on
    the basis that it was arguably wrong in law to have concluded  that  it
    did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 3. The parties in this case both accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred
    in law for the reasons set out in Khan, that the decision should be set
    aside  and  the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Respondent therefore requested that the appeal be dealt with under rule
    39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  involved  an
    error of law and that the parties have appropriately consented  to  the
    disposal of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal in the way identified.
     For the reasons set out in Khan, the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal and therefore the decision to  the
    contrary of Judge Parker is set aside and it is  appropriate  that  the
    matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  substantive
    consideration of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date     19th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

