
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/07315/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued on      |
|on 3 October 2013                             |on 8 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              HALW ISIHAQ HERSI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CAIRO

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Mr N Barnes,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

1) The appellant identifies herself as a citizen  of  Somalia,  born  on  16
   June 1996.  On 2  January  2012  she  applied  for  entry  clearance  for
   settlement as the dependent relative  of  her  sister  in  the  UK  under
   paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.

2) The respondent refused the application by notice  dated  13  March  2012.
   The respondent did not accept that the appellant's sister in the  UK  was
   the only person able to care for her.  No evidence had been given of  the
   accommodation available in the UK or her  sister's  ability  to  provide.
   The only evidence of the appellant's identity was a "UNHCR  refugee  card
   ... issued without documentary evidence and in the details you give."  It
   was not accepted that she was less than 18 years of age.   There  was  no
   evidence that the UK sponsor was responsible for her financial well being
   or had input into her health, education and life  decisions.   The  Entry
   Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  wholly
   dependent on her sponsor or that she was not leading an independent life.
    There was no evidence of maintenance and accommodation without  recourse
   to public funds.  The notice does not refer to Article 8 of the ECHR.

Grounds of appeal from the ECO's decision to the FtT.

3) The  grounds were:

     i) There are serious and compelling family considerations which  merit
        the issue of UK entry clearance.


    ii) The appellant maintains that she is 16 years of age as claimed.

      iv)   The appellant maintains she enjoys family life with the  sponsor
        and that refusal of entry clearance breaches her  right  to  family
        life under Article 8 ECHR.

4) There was no ground (iii).  While grounds do  not  have  to  intimate  an
   appellant's case in detail, these lacked any useful specification.

The First-tier Tribunal decision.

5) Judge Clough heard the appellant's appeal on 29  January  2013.   In  her
   determination, promulgated  on  27  February  2013,  the  judge  says  at
   paragraph 11 that she checked a website regarding payments allegedly made
   by the sponsor to the appellant, and found discrepancies which undermined
   the sponsor's evidence.  At paragraph 12 the  judge  notes  discrepancies
   between the sponsor's family information as given at screening  interview
   and at substantive interview.  At paragraph 13 the judge  says  that  the
   case was argued on  Article  8  only.   The  only  documentary  proof  of
   relationship was the untranslated UNHCR refugee registration card,  which
   the respondent had not accepted because the details were supplied by  the
   appellant.  The judge notes that the card gives the appellant's  name  as
   Hallow Hersi "not Halwo Isihaq Hersi or a similar  transliteration".   At
   paragraphs 14 and 15 the judge is unable to find that the  appellant  and
   sponsor are related as claimed, that the appellant  is  living  alone  in
   Cairo or that the sponsor sent her money.  Article 8  was  therefore  not
   engaged, and the appeal was dismissed both  under  the  Rules  and  under
   Article 8.



Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

6)  Ground one is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law  by
   relying upon post-hearing internet research  without  giving  parties  an
   opportunity to make submissions thereon.  Reference is made to EG  (Post-
   hearing internet research) Nigeria [2008] IMM AR 457.

7) Ground two is that the judge erred at paragraph  13  "in  discarding  the
   UNHCR  refugee  registration  document",  because   the   UNHCR   is   an
   international body charged with protection of refugees, and has developed
   detailed procedures.

8) Ground three is that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  exercise  anxious
   scrutiny in finding the registration document to have no probative value.

9) The second and third grounds are linked.  The points were not  argued  to
   the First-tier Tribunal.

10) On 9 April 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers  granted  permission
   to appeal on the post-hearing internet research issue.   The  grant  does
   not seem to extend to the other two grounds, but is perhaps not  entirely
   clear.

The hearing in the UT.

11) Mr Winter advised us at the outset that parties  were  agreed  that  the
   first ground discloses error of law.  He said the case should be remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal.

12) We observed that if the judge's  findings  based  on  internet  research
   were removed from the determination, the findings of non-relationship and
   of discrepancies in family details remain, and it was  difficult  to  see
   how the appeal might have succeeded on  the  evidence  which  was  placed
   before the First-tier Tribunal, and why there should be another  hearing.



13) Mr Winter submitted that the grant of permission might be  construed  as
   giving permission also on  grounds  two  and  three.   He  accepted  that
   permission to appeal on a wider basis could have  been  sought  from  the
   Upper Tribunal, following receipt of the grant, but that  was  not  done.
   He said there had been some legal aid difficulties in the interim.

14) We referred to the various points set out in  the  respondent's  refusal
   notice, summarised above.  Mr Winter conceded that there was no  evidence
   to show that the requirements of the rules could be met, leaving  Article
   8 only.  It had to be accepted that there was nothing  to  show  adequate
   provision of accommodation and maintenance, so the appellant would  enter
   the UK on that understanding.  Her Article 8 case depended  on  her  best
   interests  as  a  child.   In  Egypt  her  only  status  was  her   UNHCR
   registration, and she lived in accommodation provided by UNHCR.   It  was
   unclear whether she lived with a second cousin or  with  a  friend.    Mr
   Winter suggested that the appellant would be on  a  legally  more  secure
   basis in the UK than in Egypt, and would be able to  work.   He  accepted
   that there had been no evidence of any job available to her, and that she
   would have no access to benefits.  However,  he  said  it  reasonably  be
   inferred that in Glasgow she  might  find  jobs  such  as  shop  work  or
   cleaning.  He could not point to anything else  to  demonstrate  how  her
   best interests might be served by her being in the UK,  and  agreed  that
   the same amount of money sent to her in Egypt would go  further  than  in
   the UK.

15) Mr Winter said that if error of law could be derived from grounds 2  and
   3, there might eventually be a finding that the appellant and sponsor are
   related as sisters.  If the determination were to be set aside, he  would
   apply to lead further evidence.  A statement had been obtained  from  the
   sponsor, although only in the last 24 hours.   The  present  finding  was
   that Article 8 was not even engaged, due to  lack  of  relationship,  but
   UNHCR documents are readily  verifiable,  and  the  judge  erred  by  not
   appreciating this,  even  if  the  argument  was  not  made.   The  UNHCR
   publishes detailed guidance on its registration procedure, although  such
   information was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  no  formal
   application (in accordance with procedure rules and practice  directions)
   had been made to introduce it before the Upper Tribunal.   He  understood
   that UNHCR keep photographic  records  and  parentage  details  and  that
   checks made with them might  resolve  the  doubts  raised  by  the  Entry
   Clearance Officer.  The Entry Clearance Officer and the judge  failed  to
   ensure that such checks were carried out.  As the legal aid position  had
   been resolved only within the 24 hours before the Upper Tribunal hearing,
   the appellant had not yet caused any enquiries to be made with the UNHCR.

16) Finally, Mr Winter submitted that the accepted error by the judge  might
   have so influenced her further findings that they were not to  be  relied
   upon.

17) We advised that the appeal would be dismissed.

Our conclusions and reasons.

18) The judge's error was not so much in  her  internet  research  (although
   that is usually undesirable) as in  not  reconvening  the  hearing  after
   having identified the information she did.

19) We note in  passing  that  although  the  judge  fell  into  error,  the
   appellant has not yet suggested that, having been alerted, she is able to
   remedy the deficiencies spotted by the judge.

20) The judge's further findings were not  influenced  by  the  error  about
   internet research.  Even without that error, the appellant could not have
   succeeded on the evidence she placed before the First-tier Tribunal.   On
   the most benevolent view, it  was  incapable  of  making  out  her  case.
   Failure under the Rules meant that it had to be accepted that on  arrival
   in the UK she could not be adequately accommodated and maintained.  There
   was nothing to show that placing her in such a  situation  might  promote
   her interests as compared to  living  in  Egypt  in  receipt  of  similar
   remittances, which on the face of it would put her in a  better  position
   in Egypt than in poverty in the UK.

21) The judge  was  not  bound  to  embark  of  her  own  initiative  on  an
   investigation into UNHCR procedures.  No proper application has been made
   to bring evidence of such procedures into these proceedings.  That  would
   come much too late.  An unrelated  error  of  law  does  not  entitle  an
   appellant to assemble a case which she failed to formulate either to  the
   ECO or to the First-tier Tribunal when she had the chance.

22) The judge's error does not require us to set  the  determination  aside,
   because the appellant could not have succeeded anyway, on  the  case  she
   chose to present.

23) The  appellant's  remedy  is  by  way  of  further  application  to  the
   respondent, if she now has the necessary evidence.  We record that  given
   the inadequacy of the evidence before  her,  the  judge's  findings  were
   necessarily  so  incomplete  that  they  should  not,   without   further
   consideration, be  relied  upon  against  the  appellant  in  any  future
   application.

24) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

25) No order for anonymity has been requested or made.

                               [pic]
                                9 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
