
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07811/2015
                                                               OA/07812/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2017                       |On 13 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                 BAWA SINGH
                                PARKASH KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are married  citizens  of  India  aged  over  65.   They
    brought appeals against decisions of  the  respondent,  dated  2  April
    2015, refusing them entry clearance to join their son, Mr Lakhbir Singh
    Bhat, in the UK as his adult dependent relatives. Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Callow heard the appeals at Taylor House on 3 August 2016
    and, in a decision promulgated on 10 October 2016, dismissed  them.  He
    found the Immigration Rules were not met  and  there  was  no  need  to
    consider article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  separately  outside
    the rules.

 2. Judge Callow's decision was set aside in a  decision  of  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hutchinson, promulgated on 15 June 2017, a copy of which
    is attached as an appendix to this decision.

 3. Judge Callow's decision that the requirements of the Immigration Rules,
    specifically paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM[1], were not  met  was
    upheld.  He  had  erred  by  confining   his   consideration   to   the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of decision but  his  error  was
    not considered material by Judge Hutchinson. It is helpful to  set  out
    Judge Callow's finding (paragraph 11 of his decision):

         "... However,  in  the  event  I  am  in  error  in  reaching  this
         conclusion, it has  not  been  established  in  evidence  that  the
         required level of care in India where the appellants  live  is  not
         available and that there is no person in India who  can  reasonably
         provide it. The unsupported assertion that there  is  no  available
         care in the family village or that  the  appellants  could  not  be
         cared for in one of the many cities in India,  does  not  discharge
         the  requirements  of  the  rule  in  issue.   The   alternate   of
         affordability  does  not  arise  in  this  appeal.  The   financial
         circumstances of the sponsor  to  support  the  appellants  without
         recourse to public funds have  been  established.  Accordingly  the
         appellants' appeals under the Rules fail."

 4. Judge Hutchinson rejected a submission that Judge Callow had failed  to
    recognise that the "required level of care" depended on the  particular
    circumstances of the case and that it was possible to contemplate that,
    having regard  to  cultural  factors,  certain  types  of  personal  or
    intimate care could only reasonably  be  provided  by  an  individual's
    family members[2]. She concluded (paragraph 10),

         "Although I accept that the opinion and recommendation at page 4 of
         the psychological report indicates that the support of  the  second
         appellant's own family would be "central" and that in the  clinical
         psychologist's report medical and financial support was unlikely to
         help them at their current age and that they needed  the  emotional
         support of their own family, I am not satisfied that this discloses
         any error in Judge Callow's alternative assessment that it had  not
         been established that the required level of care was not  available
         in India and that there was no person who could reasonably  provide
         it."

 5. Judge Callow's finding that the requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5
    were not  met  was  thus  preserved.  However,  his  treatment  of  the
    alternative article 8 ground was found to be erroneous  and,  for  that
    reason, the decision was set aside. Judge Callow considered  there  was
    no "gap" between the rules and article 8 such that it was not necessary
    to go on to consider  article  8  outside  the  rules.  However,  Judge
    Hutchinson considered that this approach was erroneous given the age of
    the appellants (87 and 82  respectively)  and  the  evidence  of  their
    ongoing medical conditions. She directed that there  be  a  continuance
    hearing so that the decision could be re-made with respect to article 8
    only. So, the appeal came before me.

 6. I have the respondent's bundle and two  bundles  from  the  appellants,
    which I have considered. I heard oral evidence in English from Mr Bhat,
    the sponsor, and also from his wife, Mrs Charanjit Kaur  Bhat.  I  have
    recorded their evidence in my record of the proceedings  and  taken  it
    into account. I have also recorded the closing submissions made by  the
    representatives and taken them into account. At the end of the  hearing
    I reserved my decision.


   7. The burden of proof is on the appellants and the standard of proof  is
      the ordinary civil standard of  a  balance  of  probabilities.  I  may
      consider the circumstances appertaining as at today.

   8. The appellants must show that they currently  enjoy  protected  rights
      and that there would be a significant interference  with  their  human
      rights as a result of the decisions, although in entry clearance cases
      the correct approach to this issue is to assess whether the  decisions
      amount to an unjustified lack of respect for family life, focusing  on
      the UK's positive obligations to facilitate family reunion (Shamim Box
      [2002] UKIAT 02212). It  is  for  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
      interference is in accordance  with  the  law  and  in  pursuit  of  a
      legitimate aim. I must then assess whether the decisions are necessary
      in a democratic society, including whether they  are  disproportionate
      to the legitimate aim identified.

 9. The representatives  were  in  agreement  that  family  life  had  been
    established in this case and  that  the  determinative  issue  was  the
    proportionality of the decisions.  I  accept  there  is  dependency  as
    between the appellants  and  the  sponsor,  not  limited  to  financial
    dependency, which goes beyond the usual  ties  of  love  and  affection
    which exist between adult children and their parents.


  10. The rules are expressed as providing  a  complete  framework  for  the
      consideration of article 8  but  the  notion  that  they  represent  a
      "complete code" is incorrect. The  approach  in  cases  involving  the
      relationship between the rules and article 8 was previously understood
      to be as explained in the case of SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015]  EWCA
      Civ 387. In particular, the Court considered there was a threshold for
      engaging  article  8  outside  the  rules.  In   general,   compelling
      circumstances would need to be identified, which was lower than a test
      of exceptional circumstances. However, in cases such  as  the  present
      one, in which family life could not be resumed in the  UK  unless  and
      until the rules were met, it is appropriate to apply a similar test to
      exceptional circumstances (see paragraphs 37 and 67).  More  recently,
      the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60,  a  deportation
      case, explained there is no  particular  threshold  which  has  to  be
      reached and the need for there to be 'exceptional  circumstances"  did
      not mean that something out of the  ordinary  had  to  be  shown.   In
      short, the Tribunal must  find  the  facts  and  conduct  a  balancing
      exercise as between the public interest and the  family  life  of  the
      appellant to ensure a proportionate result is achieved.

11. In considering the public interest  justifying  the  interference  with
    family life, I am required by section 117A(2)(a) of  the  2002  Act  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B[3].

12. In Britcits v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368, the Court of  Appeal  dismissed
    an appeal against the refusal of an  application  for  judicial  review
    challenging  the  legality  of  the  adult  dependent  relative   rules
    introduced in July 2012. In  rejecting  a  submission  that  the  rules
    should  be  struck  down  as  disproportionate,  the  Court  held  that
    considerations of the reasonableness of  the  care  available  and  the
    level of care required were  capable,  with  appropriate  evidence,  of
    embracing the psychological and emotional needs of elderly parents.

13. I now turn to the facts. I am satisfied that both the  sponsor  and  Ms
    Bhat assisted the Tribunal to the best of their  ability  by  providing
    truthful and accurate answers to  the  questions  put.  There  were  no
    significant inconsistencies or discrepancies in their  evidence  and  I
    did not understand Mr Bramble to challenge any of  their  evidence.  No
    challenges were made to the three medical reports provided and I accept
    their contents are accurate. I can therefore set out the  following  as
    my findings of fact:

      1) The appellants live  alone  in  a  rural  village  in  the  Punjab,
         Jalandhar District;

      2) The first appellant is 87 and the second appellant is 82;

      3) Their five children all live abroad: the sponsor and three of their
         daughters live in the UK and one daughter lives in the US;

      4) The sponsor, their only son, came to the UK to settle in 1980;

      5) The appellants were granted residency in the US to live with  their
         daughter in 2005  and  2007  respectively  but  the  move  was  not
         successful due to tensions with their daughter's in-laws created by
         the appellants living with her such that the appellants left the US
         in 2009;

      6) After that they made annual visits to the UK until 2013;

      7) There are no close relatives residing in India;

      8) The second appellant has significant mobility problems due to  back
         pain and she requires help to get out of bed and must use  a  stick
         or walking frame to walk even short distances, such as  across  the
         room;

      9) Most of the time the second appellant stays in bed and only gets up
         to use the bathroom;

     10) The first appellant assists the second appellant as best he is able
         with mobilising, taking care of her personal hygiene and dressing;

     11) The first appellant does the housework, laundry and cooking as best
         he is able;

     12) The cause of the second appellant's disability has  been  diagnosed
         as osteoporosis of the spine[4];

     13) The  second  appellant  was  assessed  by  a  psychologist[5],  who
         considered she suffered from  mild  depression  and  anxiety  which
         could not be treated with medication but which required her  to  be
         in a secure, nurturing environment, as would  be  provided  by  her
         family;

     14) The first appellant underwent prostate surgery in May 2017[6];

     15) The appellants are financially dependent on the sponsor;

     16) The sponsor and his siblings are able to visit the  appellants  and
         stay with them for periods of around two weeks but there  are  gaps
         between these visits and most of the time the appellants are alone;

     17) The sponsor telephones the appellants  every  day  and  the  second
         appellant is usually tearful;

     18) The appellants feel lonely and are anxious about their situation;

     19) There are professional care providers in large cities in India  but
         the appellants are unwilling to move to the city where they do  not
         know anyone;

     20) The sponsor might be able to find a servant in the area to help the
         appellants with cooking and housework but the second  appellant  is
         reluctant to have a stranger assisting her with her personal  care;
         and

     21) The sponsor and Ms Bhat would provide a comfortable  home  for  the
         appellants, in which their care needs would be fully met, so as  to
         provide them with a good quality of  life  during  their  remaining
         years.

14. I now apply the law to those findings.

15. Anyone viewing the factual circumstances of this  case,  as  summarised
    above, cannot help but feel sympathy for this  family.  The  appellants
    are living their last years without the benefit of having any of  their
    children  or  grandchildren  near  them.  The  second   appellant,   in
    particular,  has  health  problems  which  have  left  her  reliant  on
    assistance with mobilising and looking after herself. Being  associated
    with old age, the appellants' health conditions are going to get  worse
    and their need for assistance  will  increase.  The  first  appellant's
    ability to undertake care tasks for the second appellant will  diminish
    over time. Their wish to relocate to the UK to be looked after  by  the
    sponsor and his family is entirely understandable.

16. However, such considerations do not equate to a finding that to  refuse
    entry clearance at this time amounts to a breach of fundamental rights.
    Article 8, the right to family life, is not an absolute guarantee.  The
    answer to the question of whether the appeals must be allowed on  human
    rights grounds is to  be  found  by  conducting  a  balancing  exercise
    between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  public  interest   in   maintaining
    immigration controls and, on the other, the  appellants'  interests  in
    enjoying family  life  in  the  UK.  I  am  required  by  law  to  give
    considerable weight to the respondent's view of where the balance  lies
    which has been given expression in the published rules.

17. The representatives were in agreement that the starting point for  this
    appeal was the fact the appellants did not meet the requirements of the
    rules. The rules present a formidable hurdle in such cases but  not  an
    unlawfully high one  (Britcits  v  SSHD).  I  remind  myself  that  the
    decision of Judge Callow under the rules, which has been  preserved  by
    Judge Hutchinson, means that it has not been shown  that  the  required
    level of care cannot be obtained in India because it is  not  available
    and there is no person in India who can reasonably provide it. Put  the
    other way round, the required level of care probably  is  available  in
    India.

18. Having heard oral evidence from the sponsor  and  Ms  Bhat,  it  became
    apparent that the second appellant was reluctant to be cared for  by  a
    stranger and the appellants were reluctant to leave  their  village  in
    order to be cared for in a residential setting in  a  city  where  they
    would not know anyone. Both those feelings are entirely  understandable
    but they shine a clear light on the heart of this case, which  is  that
    the required level of care is available in India,  either  through  the
    provision of a domestic helper or  in  a  care  home  environment,  but
    neither  option  is  ideal  and  all  parties  would  prefer  that  the
    appellants be allowed to join the sponsor's household in  the  UK.  The
    facts fall short of the example given by UTJ Grubb  in  the  unreported
    case cited to Judge Callow.

19. The stark reality is that Parliament has enacted rules which provide  a
    clear answer to circumstances such as these. Public policy is to  limit
    to very few the numbers of adult dependent relatives who  are  entitled
    to join relatives living in the UK in order to protect the public purse
    (see the discussion in Britcits v SSHD).

20.  As  said,  I  am  required  to  have  regard  to  section  117B.   The
    representatives were in agreement that it has  little  impact  in  this
    case because, whilst the appellants do not speak  English,  they  would
    not be expected to as a condition of entry under the rules and,  whilst
    they are not financially independent, they would  be  accommodated  and
    maintained without recourse to public funds. The appellants are not  at
    an age at which they can reasonably be expected to integrate.

21. The harshness of the appellants' circumstances is lessened by the  fact
    their children are able to make fairly regular visits to see  them  and
    they have each other for company and support.

22. Having balanced the respective interests of the parties,  it  is  clear
    that the public interest prevails and the  decisions  to  refuse  entry
    clearance are  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
    immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a material  error  of  law  and
has been set aside. The following decision is substituted:

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed                                  Date 11 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 11 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


_______________________________________________________________________


Appendix


                            "DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants in this case are married citizens of India.   The  first
    appellant was born on 3 June 1930 and the second appellant was born  on
    10 June 1935.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision by the Entry Clearance Officer dated 2 April  2015
    to refuse the  appellants'  entry  clearance  as  the  adult  dependant
    relatives of their son  Lakhbir  Singh  Bhat  the  sponsor,  a  British
    citizen present and settled in  the  UK.  In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 10 October 2016, following a hearing on 3  August  2016,
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Callow  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals both under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

 2. The appellants appeal with  permission.   The  appellants'  grounds  of
    appeal were as follows:

    Ground 1 - that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its  approach  to  the
    evidence on ill-health and frailty of the appellants.

    Ground 2 - that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  consider
    Article 8, ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

Decision on Error of Law and Directions

Immigration Rules

 3. It was submitted that the judge ignored the evidence of the appellants'
    ill-health stating specifically  that  it  was  not  established  on  a
    balance of probabilities that all the circumstances  were  appertaining
    at the date of  the  respondent's  decision.   However  the  appellants
    relied on the fact that Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 was repealed from 20 October 2014 and  therefore  there
    was no barrier to post-decision evidence being admitted by the judge.

 4. Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides
    as follows:

    85 Matters to be consideredE+W+S+N.I.

    This section has no associated Explanatory Notes

    (1)  An appeal under Section 82(1) against a decision shall be  treated
         by the Tribunal as including an  appeal  against  any  decision  in
         respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal under  Section
         82(1).

    (2)  If an appellant  under  Section  82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
         Section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in  the
         statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in
         Section 84 against the decision appealed against.

    (3)  Sub-Section (2) applies to a  statement  made  under  Section  120
         whether the statement was made  before  or  after  the  appeal  was
         commenced.

    (4)  On an appeal under Section 82(1) against a decision  the  Tribunal
         may consider evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant  to
         the substance of the decision, including a matter arising after the
         date of decision.

    (5)  But the Tribunal  must  not  consider  a  new  matter  unless  the
         Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

    (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if -

         (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in  Section
             84, and

         (b)  the Secretary of  State  has  not  previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of-

             (i)  the decision mentioned in Section 82(1), or

             (ii) a statement made by the appellant under Section 120.

 5. Although it was argued on behalf of the appellants that the  judge  was
    wrong to confine himself, as he appeared to do in [11] of the  decision
    and reasons to evidence appertaining at the date of decision, the judge
    made findings in the alternative as  follows  at  the  latter  part  of
    paragraph [11]:

         "However in  the  event  that  I  am  in  error  in  reaching  this
         conclusion, it has  not  been  established  in  evidence  that  the
         required level of care in India where the appellants  live  is  not
         available and that there is no person in India who  can  reasonably
         provide it.  The unsupported assertion that there is  no  available
         care in the family village or that  the  appellants  could  not  be
         cared for in one of the many cities in India,  does  not  discharge
         the  requirements  of  the  Rule  in  issue.   The   alternate   of
         affordability  does  not  arise  in  this  appeal.   The  financial
         circumstances of the sponsor  to  support  the  appellants  without
         recourse to public funds have been  established.   Accordingly  the
         appellants' appeals under the Rules fail."

 6. Mr Sharma on behalf of the appellants submitted (although it has to  be
    said without any great force) that the judge had failed  to  take  into
    consideration that the Upper Tribunal in  the  unreported  decision  of
    Osman OA/18244/2012 had  considered  the  provision  of  E-ECDR.2.5  of
    Appendix FM that appellants must be unable, even with the practical and
    financial help of the sponsor to obtain the required level of  care  in
    the country they are living because -

      a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who  can
         reasonably provide it; or

      b) it is not affordable.

 7. However, Judge Callow set out Upper Tribunal's Grubb's reasoning that:

         "An example where that latter requirement might well  be  satisfied
         would be where the 'required  level  of  care'  needed  requires  a
         particular type of carer, for example a close family  member,  none
         of whom live in the individual's country.  The evidence would  have
         to establish in such a case the need for a particular type of carer
         such as a family member and not simply that the individual required
         personal care from someone ..  it is ..  possible  to  contemplate,
         having regard to cultural  factors,  that  needed  'personal  care'
         involving intimate or bodily contact may require a gender  specific
         carer from the individual's family.  What is the 'required level of
         care' and who may appropriately provide it  will  depend  upon  the
         circumstances and the evidence in any given case."

 8. Although the findings of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb were not binding on
    Judge  Callow  I  am  satisfied  that   he   nevertheless   took   into
    consideration  that  the  "required  level  of  care"  depends  on  the
    circumstances of the individual case and there  was  no  error  in  his
    alternate findings that it had not been established that  the  required
    level of care in India was such that there was no person in  India  who
    could not reasonably provide it.  Mr Sharma was unable to  provide  any
    argument to challenge those alternate findings (and  indeed  they  were
    not challenged in the grounds of appeal).

 9. As Mr Bramble indicated in his submissions the evidence which postdated
    the circumstances of the date of decision (as conceded  by  Mr  Sharma)
    consisted of a medical certificate  at  page  127  of  the  appellants'
    bundle and a psychological assessment  at  pages  128  to  131  of  the
    appellants' bundle.

10. Although I accept that the opinion and recommendation at page 4 of  the
    psychological  report  indicates  that  the  support  of   the   second
    appellant's own family would be "central"  and  that  in  the  clinical
    psychologist's report medical and financial  support  was  unlikely  to
    help them at their current age  and  that  they  needed  the  emotional
    support of their own family, I am not satisfied that this discloses any
    error in Judge Callow's alternative assessment that  it  had  not  been
    established that the required level of care was not available in  India
    and that there was no person who could reasonably provide it.  There is
    no material error in the judge's decision that the requirements of  the
    Rules are not met.

11. As I indicated at the hearing the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to the Immigration Rules does not disclose an error of  law
    and shall stand.

Decision on Error of Law - Article 8

12. It was conceded by Mr Bramble at the  beginning  of  the  hearing  that
    given in particular the ages of the two appellants who are now aged  82
    and 87, whilst the appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules
    Mr Bramble conceded that the judge ought to have undertaken a  separate
    consideration under Article 8 and the judge ought  to  have  undertaken
    fact-finding in relation to the appellants' circumstances.

13. The judge in his decision and reasons in relation to Article  8  relied
    on the case law including R (Sunassee v  Upper  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) & Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWHC 1604 (Admin) which provided that the failure to qualify under  the
    Rules would tend to suggest that the public interest  requires  refusal
    of leave unless some countervailing factors are present which  are  not
    already taken into account under the Rules.

14. The judge went on to find at [14] that the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    had not been met and that no factor had been identified  that  was  not
    covered under the Immigration Rules and that accordingly, as set out in
    Sunassee, there  was  no  "gap"  that  needed  to  be  addressed  in  a
    freestanding Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

15. Richards LJ in SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, said that what
    is in issue in relation to an application for leave to enter is more in
    the nature of an appeal  to  the  state's  positive  obligations  under
    Article 8.  As reaffirmed in MM(Lebanon) [2017] UKSC  10  however,  the
    issue is always whether the authorities  have  struck  a  fair  balance
    between  the  individual  and  public  interests.  I  agree  with  both
    representatives that given in particular the age  of  these  appellants
    and that there was evidence in relation to ongoing medical  conditions,
    the judge fell into error in not undertaking his own assessment of  the
    facts in order to determine whether there were circumstances that might
    warrant a grant of leave under Article 8.

16. As I indicated at the hearing this is a matter which  can  properly  be
    remade  in  relation  to  Article  8  only  in  the   Upper   Tribunal.
    Unfortunately it was unclear precisely what further evidence, including
    medical evidence, was to be relied on on behalf of the  appellants  and
    there were a number of bundles including  a  bundle  produced  for  the
    first  time  by  Mr  Sharma  (although  he  indicated  his  instructing
    solicitors stated it had been submitted to the  Tribunal,  neither  the
    Tribunal nor Mr Bramble had received this  bundle)  in  relation  to  a
    report from Goel Kidney Care and the first appellant  Mr  Bawa  Singh's
    medical conditions.  In addition the Tribunal, but unfortunately not Mr
    Bramble, had been provided with further evidence under cover of  letter
    dated 2 May 2017, which included  a  copy  of  a  doctor's  report  and
    scanned copies of e-tickets in relation to the trip by the sponsor  and
    his wife to visit the appellants.

17. Although it is of some concern that instructing solicitors have ignored
    the directions of the Upper Tribunal in relation to providing,  at  the
    very least, an indexed and paginated bundle of documents including  all
    the material that was before the First-tier Tribunal  together  with  a
    supplementary  index  and  a  paginated  bundle  of  any  proposed  new
    evidence, I was satisfied on this occasion it was in  the  interest  of
    fairness to allow the appellants an adjournment in order to ensure that
    all relevant evidence  in  relation  to  remaking  the  decision  under
    Article 8 is provided.

18. DIRECTIONS:

      a) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  10  October
         2016 in relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  is  preserved.   The
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 8 is set
         aside and will be remade in the Upper Tribunal by any single  Upper
         Tribunal Judge.

      b) The appellants are to file and serve, so that  it  is  received  no
         later than 15 July 2017, a consolidated  indexed  paginated  bundle
         containing all the materials the appellants  wish  to  rely  on  in
         relation to their Article 8 appeal.  The bundle  is  to  separately
         tabulate: (i)  the  evidence  relied  upon  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; and, (ii) the additional evidence that it is  now  sought
         to rely upon before the Upper Tribunal. The bundle must include all
         medical evidence  that  is  relied  on.   A  skeleton  argument  in
         relation to Article 8 is to be provided.

      c) The Tribunal would be assisted by the sponsors giving oral evidence
         at the hearing and it is anticipated that the aforementioned bundle
         will include updated witness statements  from  both,  to  stand  as
         their evidence-in-chief.




   Any failure to comply with these directions  may  lead  the  Tribunal  to
   exercise its powers to decide the appeal without a further oral  hearing,
   or to conclude that the defaulting party  has  no  relevant  information,
   evidence or submissions to provide.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  Immigration
    Rules is upheld.  The decision in relation to Article 8  is  set  aside
    and will be remade.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson"
-----------------------
[1] "The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are the sponsor's
parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be unable, even with
the practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required
level of care in the country where they are living, because-
   a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who can
      reasonably provide it; or
   b) it is not affordable."
[2] This argument drew on an unreported decision of this Tribunal
(OA/18244/2012), which Judge Callow had in fact considered.

[3] Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.

(2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
who can speak English-

    (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b) are better able to integrate into society.

(3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
persons-

    (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b) are better able to integrate into society.


[4] See the report of Dr Shankar, dated 28 April 2015.
[5] See the report of Dr Pershad, dated 21 June 2016.
[6] See the reports of Dr Goel, dated 5-8 May 2017.

