
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/07958/2015
                                                               OA/07959/2015
                                                               OA/07960/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Promulgated                     |
|On November 9, 2016             |On November 11, 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                                    [H K]
                                  HUMA [M]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Kullar (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Parmindar-Singh (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The appellants applied  for
       entry clearance as family dependants. The respondent  refused  their
       applications on April 9, 2015.

    2. The appellants appealed those decisions under section 82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 7, 2015.

    3. The appeals came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Meyler
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on April 4,  2016  and  in  a
       decision promulgated  on  April  11,  2016  the  Judge  refused  the
       appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules.

    4. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on May  4,  2016  submitting
       the Judge had erred by refusing the appeals  despite  the  fact  the
       respondent acknowledged in her refusal letter to having the  missing
       bank statements.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Davidge on September 9, 2016 who found the point arguable.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    7. No anonymity direction has been made.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mrs Kullar relied on the grounds and submitted the Judge had  erred.
       The appellants had submitted all of the documents to the  respondent
       who had not  provided  anything  to  the  Tribunal.  Copies  of  the
       documents submitted were re-produced  in  a  bundle  and  the  Judge
       having accepted the appellants' arguments on all other points  erred
       by finding two documents had not been submitted  because  the  Judge
       overlooked the respondent's own refusal letter. She  submitted  that
       the evidence was before  the  respondent  and  the  Judge  erred  by
       failing to have regard to that part of the respondent's own  refusal
       letter.

    9. Mr Parmindar-Singh accepted the respondent had received documents as
       paragraph  [3]  of  the  refusal  letter  referred  to  the  missing
       documents. The fact the documents appeared in the appellants' bundle
       together with the refusal letter suggests an error was made.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10. The respondent refused the appellants' application for a variety  of
       reasons. These issues were argued before the  FTT  Judge  and  in  a
       detailed decision the Judge gave reasons for accepting the sponsor's
       evidence.

   11. However, on one aspect of the appellants' claims the Judge found the
       Rules had not been met. The Judge found there was a lack of evidence
       for the period June 27 and September 4, 2014.

   12. However, the  respondent's  own  refusal  letter  acknowledged  this
       evidence had been provided and in particular referred to the missing
       bank statements.  In  addition,  the  appellants  claimed  that  the
       documents in their  bundle  mirrored  what  had  been  sent  to  the
       respondent.

   13. Mr Parmindar-Singh  accepted  the  submissions  made  and  in  those
       circumstances I am satisfied that there was an error in law and  the
       Judge's decision should be set aside and remade.

DECISION

   14. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside  the  decision
       under the Immigration Rules.

   15. I remake the decision and allow all appeals  under  the  Immigration
       Rules.


Signed:                                 Dated: 11 November 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated: 11 November 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
