
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07610/2013
                                                             & OA/17871/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th November 2014                           |On 11th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                  AQF & HF

                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel instructed by Thomas Andrew Daodu
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan and are minors.

 2. As these proceedings impact upon the status and welfare of children,  I
    make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pears promulgated on 7th August 2014,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated the 14 and 15 January 2013 to  refuse  the  appellants
    entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules and under the Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. By decision made on 8th of October 2014 permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted. The case appears before me to determine  in
    the first instance whether or not there was a material error of law  in
    the original determination.

 5. The original immigration decisions were taken in January 2013.

Factual background

 6. The first appellant was born in 1996 and the second appellant in  1998.
    They live in Kabul. The father of the appellants died  on  8  September
    2009 and their mother died on the 3 May 2012.

 7. The appellants have an older brother in  the  United  Kingdom,  who  is
    seeking to sponsor their  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.  It  is  the
    appellants' case that the sponsor has been sending money to Afghanistan
    in an effort to support the appellants. The appellants being minors are
    presently living with family friends, described as a child care family.



 8. With the death of the mother application was made for the appellants to
    enter the United Kingdom under paragraph 297. The judge found that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  297.  The  judge
    went on to consider article 8 outside of the rules.

 9. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge has made a  material  error
    of law by seeking to establish credibility issues when the  documentary
    evidence provided supported the assertions that the parents  were  dead
    and the sponsor has  been  sending  money  to  the  appellants.  It  is
    submitted that the appellants met the requirements of paragraph 297 and
    the documents to substantiate that had been submitted. It is  submitted
    that the judge erred in seeking to make credibility  findings  in  such
    circumstances.

10. With regard to the death of the parents that is dealt with in paragraph
    11 of the determination and thereafter in paragraph 25. I  do  not  see
    that in paragraph 25 the judge has challenged the issue of the death of
    the parents. The issue that the judge is raising relates to the  family
    caring for the appellants and whether that  family  were  intending  to
    leave Afghanistan and go to Germany. The assertion  by  the  appellants
    being that the family were going to Germany. As the judge  pointed  out
    the family allegedly only went to Germany more than a  year  after  the
    original decisions. The judge concludes that he is not satisfied on the
    basis of the evidence that the family were genuinely intending going to
    Germany. The judge has pointed out in the light  of  the  evidence  the
    documents from the authorities were not accurate at the time that  they
    were made.

11. Those were findings of fact that were available to  the  judge  on  the
    basis of the evidence. The judge has pointed out inconsistencies in the
    evidence and pointed out that the  documents  produced  otherwise  were
    setting out details that were not accurate at the time that  they  were
    made. The documents are  documents  from  local  authorities  and  from
    police in Kabul. The judge was merely pointing out  that  whilst  those
    documents claimed that no one was caring for the appellant, in fact the
    family  caring  for  the  appellants  were  still  looking  after   the
    appellants at the time of the documents.  In  paragraph  23  the  judge
    notes the change in evidence of the  sponsor  with  regard  to  whether
    there were other individuals, who could look after the appellants.

12. It is further submitted that in considering paragraph 297 and article 8
    the judge has failed to take  account  of  the  best  interest  of  the
    children. However it is to be noted that the sponsor and the appellants
    have not lived together for a number  of  years.  The  appellants  have
    lived all their lives in Afghanistan and the judge was  satisfied  that
    there were other relatives or other persons capable of caring  for  the
    appellants in Afghanistan.

13. Reliance was placed by the representative  upon  the  case  of  Mundeba
    [2013] UKUT 88. Specific  reference  was  made  paragraph  37  and  the
    factors that had to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the  best
    interests of the children in the context of any issue  under  paragraph
    297 and family life. There is a requirement to assess the welfare needs
    of the appellants. The case gives assistance as to  what  is  meant  by
    serious  and  compelling  circumstances.   The  paragraph  specifically
    identifies whether there is evidence of  neglect  or  there  are  unmet
    needs or the arrangements for the children are stable.

14. Judge had considered the circumstances of the appellants. There was  no
    evidence of neglect or abuse. There was an allegation that there was  a
    risk of them being exploited because of their age.  However  the  judge
    was satisfied that there were other family  members  there  that  could
    look after the appellants. The judge was not satisfied that the  claims
    as to the welfare of the appellants otherwise were made out.

15. The judge has properly considered all the evidence and the issues.  The
    judge was entitled to make the  findings  that  he  did.  There  is  no
    material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the  decision  to
    dismiss these appeals on all grounds.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


