
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07527/2012
                                                               OA/07528/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 28 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MR aDAN mOHAMED GAMADID
                          mr aHMED aBDIRAHMAN fARAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms G Loughran of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this determination the parties are hereafter  referred  to  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr Gamadid and Mr Farah are
    known as the appellants and the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Nairobi  is
    referred to as the respondent.

 2. The appellants appealed the respondent's decisions  made  on  21  March
    2012 under paragraph 319V of HC 395 to refuse them leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as the dependent relatives of a  person  with  leave  to
    remain here as a refugee.

 3. The  judge  hearing  the  appeals  dismissed  both  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules but  allowed  them  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    respondent sought permission to appeal and in granting that  permission
    the judge  doing  so  stated  at  paragraph  2  that  the  grounds  for
    permission contend that the judge erred in his Article 8 assessment  as
    follows:

    (1)  by materially misdirecting himself in law, essentially in that  he
         "had no regard at all to the relevant sections of  the  Immigration
         Rules" thus  rendering  his  decision  "incomplete  and  ....  also
         unsustainable as it  failed  to  consider  a  key  element  in  the
         assessment of this case"; and

    (2)  by failing to give reasons or adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters, namely

             "why it would be in their sister's best interests to  live  in
             accommodation with them that  is  not  suitable  for  so  many
             people and why it would benefit  her  to  live  in  conditions
             where the family will struggle to  maintain  everyone  without
             further recourse to public funds"

         and furthermore why it was disproportionate in those  circumstances
         to prevent the appellants' entry.

 4. The judge granting permission found no arguable merit in ground 1 given
    that it was common ground that the appellants could not  succeed  under
    the "Article 8  sections"  of  the  Rules  and  given  that  the  judge
    evidently gave weight to that at paragraph  29  of  the  determination.
    However,  it  was  found  arguable  that  the  judge's  proportionality
    assessment was inadequately reasoned in  all  the  circumstances.   The
    judge  granting  permission  ventured  to  add  the  observation   with
    reference to paragraph 30 of  the  determination  that  the  Article  8
    proportionality  balancing  exercise  remains  a   hard   edged   legal
    assessment and not simply an exercise in sympathy or compassion.

The arguments before me

 5. In oral submissions Mr Norton stated  that  the  facts  were  correctly
    identified by the judge but were not exceptional  or  even  rare.   The
    Immigration  Rules  are  now  a   complete   code,   subject   to   the
    proportionality test and it is unclear from the determination  why  the
    judge found the balance to be so firmly in favour of the appellants.

 6. Miss Loughran submitted that it is clear from MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 that there is still a two-stage test involved.  The First-tier
    Judge reasoned why the appellants could not meet the relevant paragraph
    in the Immigration Rules and went on to consider the second stage.  The
    task that the judge had to undertake is clearly set out in paragraph 29
    of the determination and conclusions were reached in paragraph 30.  The
    judge did not focus on the  compassionate  circumstances  to  base  his
    decision. Where the judge referred to compassionate  circumstances  was
    in relation to his findings of fact under paragraph 319 of  the  Rules.
    The judge gave  adequate  reasons  why  he  concluded  as  he  did  and
    identified the public interest involved.

 7. In Mr Norton's final submissions he said that  the  appeal  had  to  be
    looked at with a certain degree of pragmatism.  There was  no  suitable
    accommodation.  The appellants would be relying on third party support.



Decision

 8. The appellants are citizens of Somalia.  The first appellant  was  born
    on 31 December 1992. The date of birth of the second appellant is given
    as 1 January 1990.  The sponsor suffered  persecution  in  Somalia  and
    fled to the United Kingdom in 2006, claimed  asylum,  and  was  granted
    refugee status on 18 May 2011 following a successful appeal.  When  the
    sponsor came to the United Kingdom she left  behind  her  husband,  her
    daughter and the two appellants.  All the family  members  moved  to  a
    refugee camp on the Kenya/Somalia border and later to Nairobi.  Contact
    was re-established between the sponsor and her family.  All applied for
    leave to enter the United Kingdom and  all  of  the  applications  were
    refused initially by the respondent.  However, following the  lodgement
    of  the  appeals  the  respondent  reconsidered  the  applications  and
    withdrew the decisions in respect of the sponsor's husband and daughter
    who arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27  December  2012  leaving  the
    appellants behind in Kenya.  The refusal decisions in  respect  of  the
    appellants were maintained.

 9. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  balanced  and
    fully reasoned.  The judge found that  the  second-named  appellant  is
    severely disabled having fallen victim to poliomyelitis at the age of 9
    and has since then suffered paralysis from the waist down.   The  first
    appellant is his carer and there is little doubt from  the  description
    given  by  the  judge  that  they  are  living   in   extremely   basic
    accommodation in Nairobi.  The judge found at  paragraph  14  that  the
    appellants are to be regarded as living alone,  having  considered  the
    case of KC and Others [2007] EWCA  Civ  327.   Their  circumstances  in
    Kenya are such as led him to the view that those circumstances are most
    compassionate.  If the appellants were to meet the requirements of  the
    Rules then they needed to show that there was adequate maintenance  and
    accommodation available without recourse to public funds.  Having heard
    the evidence the judge found that the proposals  with  regard  to  both
    matters did not bear the hallmarks of practicality and  concluded  that
    the appellants failed to establish to the relevant  standard  of  proof
    that they could be adequately maintained and accommodated in the United
    Kingdom without recourse to public funds.

10. The remainder of the determination deals in some depth with the Article
    8 position of the appellants and their family members who are  now  all
    in the United Kingdom.  The judge's reasoning for finding that it would
    be disproportionate to refuse the appellants  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom is set out in paragraph 29  of  the  determination.   He
    acknowledges that there is a balance to be struck and that there  is  a
    public interest to be served by not allowing the appellants  to  enter.
    That interest in part relates to the maintenance of  a  fair  and  firm
    system of immigration control  and  the  judge  acknowledges  that  the
    appellants do not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   He
    further acknowledges  that  the  second  appellant's  disability  would
    undoubtedly incur significant extra expense  for  the  National  Health
    Service and other agencies and there is  no  reasonable  prospect  that
    those expenses could be recouped.

11. His  conclusions  concerning  accommodation  and  maintenance  strongly
    suggest that if the appellants  are  allowed  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom there would  be  additional  recourse  to  public  funds  also.
    Nevertheless taking the circumstances of the appellants and  the  other
    members of the family in the round he is of the view that they  are  of
    such a compassionate nature as to outweigh  the  public  interest  that
    would be served by their continued exclusion.   The  respondent  argues
    with the judge's conclusions and reasons for coming to them but on  the
    particular facts of the case the judge was entitled to conclude  as  he
    did and no error has been displayed such that the determination  should
    be set aside.

12. As I announced at the hearing the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge stands, namely that both appeals  are  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

13. No application for an anonymity direction was made and for the  reasons
    as set out in paragraph 1 of the determination I see no good reason  to
    make an anonymity direction now.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


