
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07451/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st June 2015                       |On 12th June 2015                   |
|Prepared 8th June 2015                 |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          MISS Kalimahal Premnaseer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Benfield of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 10th  July  1994.   She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Khan
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 22nd December 2014 in which he dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 21st  May
    2014.  That decision was to  refuse  the  Appellant's  application  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an  adult  dependent  relative
    pursuant to Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The Appellant's application was that she  intended  to  live  with  her
    parents and siblings in the United Kingdom.  Her father  is  a  British
    citizen, her mother, brother and sister were granted entry clearance to
    join him.  The Appellant is currently living with  her  grandmother  in
    Sri Lanka and is financially supported by her UK  based  parents.   The
    Appellant made her application on 1st March 2014 when she was  over  19
    years of age.  The Appellant's two siblings born 19th December 1996 and
    15th February 1999 respectively saw their applications granted as  they
    were both under 18 at the time.

3.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  after  interviewing
    her noting that the Appellant's father  had  left  Sri  Lanka  for  the
    United Kingdom in 2001 and did not  return  to  Sri  Lanka/India  until
    2010.  In that period the Appellant established an  independent  family
    unit. The Appellant had stated she  was  previously  studying  but  had
    ceased her course in India in 2011 since when she had not worked.   The
    Respondent noted that no reason had been put  forward  as  to  why  the
    Appellant could not seek work or continue with higher  education.   The
    Appellant was fit and healthy and did not  require  long-term  personal
    care.  Whilst she might have  a  desire  to  be  with  her  family  the
    Respondent could see no exceptional or compelling reasons why she could
    not continue to reside in Sri Lanka as she had been since her  father's
    departure in 2001.   The  Appellant  could  not  bring  herself  within
    Section E-ECDR2.4 as she had no requirement for long-term personal care
    and could not bring herself within E-ECDR2.5 for the same reason.

The Article 8 Claim

4.   The Appellant  argued  that  the  Respondent's  decision  breached  her
    rights under Article 8 (right to respect for private and  family  life)
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The burden of establishing
    that rested upon the Appellant and the standard of proof was the  usual
    civil standard of balance of probabilities.  In the  skeleton  argument
    dated 20th December 2014 submitted for the hearing before Judge Khan on
    22nd December Counsel conceded on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules could not be met  in  respect  of
    the  evidence  required.   The  Tribunal  was  therefore  requested  to
    consider the Appellant's application under Article 8 outside the  Rules
    in the light of what were described as the compelling and compassionate
    family circumstances in the case.   Family  life  could  exist  between
    adult children and their parents.  The threshold  for  interference  to
    engage Article 8 was not an especially high one, the issue was  one  of
    proportionality.

5.   The relevant factors weighing on the Appellant's side were:

    (a)  That the Appellant, her mother and siblings had been living  in  a
         precarious  situation  between  2001  and  the  present  having  to
         repeatedly leave Sri Lanka to seek safety in India.   As  a  result
         the Appellant required a stable family  life  in  which  she  could
         develop as a young adult.

    (b)  She was living in poor conditions with  her  maternal  grandmother
         who was in old age and ill health.

    (c)  There was a negative impact on the younger children who  had  been
         separated from the Appellant.

    (d)  She was unable to work or study due to concerns for her safety.

    (e)  Her father was able to adequately  maintain  and  accommodate  her
         without recourse to public funds and the whole family were  anxious
         and worried about her safety  in  Sri  Lanka  due  to  the  current
         situation in the country and the absence of family support.

The Hearing at First Instance

6.   At the hearing before Judge Khan evidence was  given  by  both  of  the
    Appellant's parents who said that the Appellant  suffered  from  asthma
    attacks and had been to hospital to have oxygen.  The Appellant had not
    mentioned her asthma condition in her application because  she  thought
    her application would be refused due to illness.   When  the  Appellant
    and her grandmother went shopping they were assisted by a driver.   The
    Sponsor sent money every month and the Appellant took a rickshaw to the
    collection point about two miles away from where she lived  to  collect
    it.   The  Appellant's  grandmother  accompanied  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant's mother had visited Sri Lanka in September 2014 but had  not
    been back since because of financial problems and the lack of safety in
    Sri Lanka.  The Appellant's mother told Judge Khan that  the  Appellant
    was able to do simple things but "she is ill she cannot even [wash  her
    own face] and has to be helped by neighbours".  The Appellant  had  not
    thought about her illness seriously and had not  mentioned  it  in  her
    application form.  When the Judge pressed the Appellant's mother on why
    the Appellant had not  mentioned  her  illness  or  the  visit  to  the
    hospital the Appellant's mother made no reply.

7.   The Judge found that  both  the  Appellant's  parents  had  exaggerated
    their evidence particularly in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  alleged
    inability to look after herself and her illness.   Whilst  the  parents
    had claimed that the Appellant suffered from asthma  and  had  attended
    hospital the Appellant had made no mention of that and  the  Judge  did
    not find either witness to be credible or  consistent.   The  Appellant
    could not meet Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  and  she  had  no
    medical condition.  The Judge noted the evidence as to the  Appellant's
    collection of funds sent from the UK and reminded  himself  again  that
    both  of  the  Appellant's  parents  had  exaggerated  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in  Sri  Lanka.   As  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy
    Appendix FM the Judge went on at paragraph 33 to  consider  the  matter
    outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.  He wrote:

         "She is now  over  18  years  of  age.   She  is  living  with  her
         grandmother.  According to the Appellant's own evidence she has  no
         medical condition.  The Sponsor came  to  the  UK  and  gained  his
         indefinite leave on the basis of the legacy  policy.   The  Sponsor
         has been visiting the Appellant in Sri Lanka.  I  have  [not]  been
         given any reason whatsoever as to why the Appellant's family  could
         [not] return to Sri Lanka to continue with their family life there.
          Article 8 is a qualified right and does not give the choice to  an
         applicant or Sponsor to exercise their  family  life  in  a  member
         state."

8.   I pause to note here that in quoting from paragraph 33 of  the  Judge's
    determination I have inserted the word "not" in two places.  It appears
    that there was a typographical error in the determination at  paragraph
    33.  Reading the determination as a whole it is clear  what  the  Judge
    intended to say in paragraph 33 but unfortunately what actually emerged
    on the page did not exactly reflect what the Judge intended.  There was
    no dispute before me as to what the Judge meant at paragraph  33.   For
    the sake of convenience therefore I have amended the paragraph  as,  it
    seems clear to me, the Judge intended it to read.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing that there was  no
    analysis of Article 8 outside the  Rules  or  any  application  of  the
    Razgar step by step approach.   There  was  no  account  taken  of  the
    position of the Appellant's two minor siblings, I pause  to  note  here
    that one of the siblings had in fact just turned 18 at the date of  the
    hearing before Judge Khan.  The grounds added that the Judge had failed
    to take note of the Appellant's  medical  condition.   Her  asthma  had
    deteriorated since the rest of  the  family  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom and the Appellant would wish to adduce further medical evidence
    on that.

10.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 24th March 2015.  In granting permission  to
    appeal the Judge criticised the reference to new  medical  evidence  in
    the letter which accompanied the application for permission  to  appeal
    stating that it was most unlikely that serving new  evidence  that  was
    not before the Judge would establish an error of law on his part.

11.  Judge Cruthers  also  commented  that  the  Appellant  and  her  family
    members should be  aware  that  it  was  generally  very  difficult  to
    establish a disproportionate breach of Article 8 in this type of  entry
    clearance appeal and referred to the case of AAO [2011] EWCA  Civ  840.
    In that case (by coincidence an appeal from Judge  Khan  the  Judge  in
    this case) the Court of Appeal stated at paragraph 47:

         "When consideration is given to the weakness of family life in this
         case and to the lack as it seems to me of any positive  duty  which
         imposes on the United  Kingdom  an  obligation  which  goes  beyond
         making systematic allowance for a right of entry which is  governed
         both by carefully composed Immigration Rules such as Rule  317  and
         an overriding consideration of Article 8 on a case by  case  basis,
         it  is  not  possible  to  say  that  there  has  either  been   an
         interference with family life or a lack of respect for family  life
         which amounts to a breach of Article 8 or would amount to a  breach
         of Article 8 but for justification on the basis of proportionality.
          ...  Any such interference or lack of respect would  be  justified
         by the principles of immigration control by  what  would  otherwise
         amount to the imposition on the  admitting  state  of  the  use  of
         public resources to maintain the immigrant".

12.  Judge Cruthers'  conclusion  was  that  as  Judge  Khan  had  addressed
    Article 8 only through the eight lines of paragraph 33 (see paragraph 7
    above) it was arguable that the Appellant and her family  members  were
    entitled to a more fully reasoned treatment of any Article 8 case  that
    she might have.  He added the rider that the Appellant should not  take
    this grant of permission  "as  any  indication  that  the  appeal  will
    ultimately be successful".

13.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  10th
    April 2015 stating that the grounds advanced by the  Appellant  were  a
    mere disagreement with the negative outcome of the appeal and  did  not
    establish a material arguable error of law  that  would  be  considered
    capable of having a material impact upon the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    The Judge at first instance had provided adequate  reasons  to  support
    his findings in respect of Article 8.

The Hearing Before Me

14.  At the hearing before me the issue was whether there was such an  error
    of law in the determination that it fell to be set aside and the matter
    reheard.  If there was not then the determination would stand.  For the
    Appellant Counsel who had appeared at first  instance  argued  that  on
    advice at the appeal hearing the concession  had  been  made  that  the
    Appellant could not  meet  the  Rules  as  was  said  in  the  skeleton
    argument.  The Respondent's argument had been that she  failed  to  see
    how Article 8 was engaged as there was no  family  life  and  thus  any
    interference was proportionate.   The  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether there was family life and if there was whether the interference
    was proportionate.

15.  The Judge had erred at paragraph 5 of his determination  where  he  had
    reported the Appellant as claiming that she  met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  The reasoning at  paragraph  33  was  wholly  inadequate.
    There were no relevant findings.  The Appellant's father having come to
    the United Kingdom in 2001 as an  asylum  seeker  had  eventually  been
    granted indefinite leave to  remain  under  the  legacy  programme  and
    thereafter granted British citizenship.  The Appellant had been heavily
    reliant on her mother and family unit for essential support.  There was
    family life between them and there needed to be a reasoned analysis  of
    the interference with it.  This would be so that the losing party would
    know why they had lost.  There was no analysis by the Judge as  to  why
    the balancing exercise came down on the Respondent's favour.

16.  Citing the case of MK [2013] UKUT 00641 counsel  submitted  that  there
    was a duty on the Tribunal to give reasons.  The head note to MK read:

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

17.  It was impossible  to  properly  appeal  in  the  absence  of  adequate
    reasoning.  There had to be some weighing of both parties' arguments in
    the balancing exercise.  There was evidence from  the  parents  on  the
    negative impact on the younger children.  The ability of the Sponsor to
    maintain and accommodate the Appellant was a factor  the  Judge  should
    have  weighed.   The  Judge's  reasoning  could  not  be  said  to   be
    sufficient.  The Appellant could not understand from the  determination
    whether the Judge had found Article 8 engaged or not.

18.  In reply for the  Respondent  it  was  acknowledged  that  the  Judge's
    findings under Article 8 were brief but they were adequate.   In  order
    to allow the appeal the Judge would need to have good reason to make  a
    freestanding assessment of the  application  outside  the  Rules.   The
    Judge was not persuaded that those factors existed in this  case.   The
    Judge had not found the witnesses to be credible. The  Appellant  could
    look after herself and there was no evidence of  a  medical  condition.
    This was a case of an adult living with her grandmother who  needed  to
    establish why if the case hinged on family life her  relationship  with
    her family in the United Kingdom went  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.
    The Judge could only work from the evidence put forward.  He was unable
    to see what there was about this Appellant's case which meant  that  he
    should consider it outside the Rules.  There  was  no  reason  why  the
    family could not return to Sri Lanka so there was thus some  acceptance
    of the existence of family life but Article 8 was  a  qualified  right.
    If the family wished to be together they could do so in Sri Lanka.   To
    succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules was a high threshold and  the
    circumstances in this case did not cross that threshold.  There was  no
    reason for the Judge to give lengthy reasons because there could be  no
    other outcome.

19.  Finally in reply Counsel stated that the Judge had  considered  Article
    8 but it was very brief and inadequate.  It was not a requirement  that
    the Judge should write pages  of  reasons  but  adequate  reasons  were
    required.

Findings

20.  The Appellant has lodged a  reasons  based  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    decision to dismiss her appeal outside the Immigration Rules.   It  was
    conceded in Counsel's skeleton argument and in submissions to the Judge
    that the Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    because she had insufficient evidence to show that the requirements  of
    Appendix FM could be met.  It is worth recalling that the  requirements
    are that the Appellant must need long-term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday tasks and be unable to obtain that required level of  care  in
    Sri Lanka.  The concession in the skeleton argument was thus  not  that
    the Appellant did not require personal care etc. but that there was  no
    evidence to show that she required it.  Coupled with the fact that when
    the Appellant's  parents  gave  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition which was said to have  deteriorated  and  required  hospital
    treatment, it is not surprising that the  Judge  in  his  determination
    should have stated at paragraph 5 that the Appellant's case  was  based
    on her claim that she did meet the Immigration Rules.   The  concession
    made by Counsel was somewhat undermined by the oral  testimony  of  the
    Appellant's witnesses. The Judge was concerned  about  the  Appellant's
    witnesses' evidence on the Appellant's condition  noting  that  it  was
    exaggerated.  The Appellant's condition whatever it might  be  did  not
    prevent her from travelling  two  miles  by  rickshaw  to  collect  the
    monthly payments from her father based in the United Kingdom.  The need
    the Appellant might have for care was  an  issue  raised  in  the  oral
    evidence which the Judge had to deal with and did so.

21.  It is fair to say that the Judge's conclusion that  the  appeal  should
    be dismissed under Article 8 was brief but the issue is whether it  was
    adequate.  The Judge was clear that  he  was  dealing  with  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  It was not necessary for the  Judge  to
    set out the detailed jurisprudence on  dealing  with  Article  8  cases
    outside the Immigration Rules.  That jurisprudence indicates that there
    do need to be compelling circumstances  for  an  applicant  to  succeed
    outside the Immigration Rules.

22.  In the case of SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court of  Appeal  held
    that it could not be maintained as a general proposition that leave  to
    remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  should  only  be  granted  in
    exceptional cases.  However  in  certain  specific  contexts  a  proper
    application of Article 8 may itself make it clear that the  legal  test
    for grant of leave to enter outside the Rules should indeed be  a  test
    of exceptionality.  The Court of Appeal went on to say at paragraph  32
    that if the Respondent had sought to  formulate  Immigration  Rules  to
    reflect a fair balance of interests under Article 8 in the general  run
    of cases falling within their scope the Rules themselves would  provide
    significant evidence about the relevant public interest  considerations
    which should be brought into account when a Tribunal sought to strike a
    proper balance of interests under Article 8.

23.  The Tribunal was required to give the new Rules greater weight than  as
    merely a starting point for the consideration of the proportionality of
    an interference with Article 8  rights.   At  paragraph  33  the  Court
    stated that compelling circumstances would need  to  be  identified  to
    support the claim for a grant of leave to remain outside the new Rules.
     The position was slightly different where the application (as  in  the
    instant case before me) was an application for leave  to  enter.   That
    was more in the nature of an appeal to the state's positive obligations
    under Article 8 rather than enforcement on the negative duty  as  would
    be in the leave to remain cases.  Thus the requirements upon the  state
    under Article 8 were less stringent in a leave to enter context than in
    a leave to remain context.  Article 8 did not confer an automatic right
    of entry and imposed no general obligation on the state  to  facilitate
    the choice made to reside in it ( appoint made by Judge Khan).  A court
    would be slow to  find  an  implied  positive  obligation  which  would
    involve imposing on the state significant additional expenditure.

24.  The interests of a child would not be a trump card.  The  state  had  a
    wider margin of  appreciation  in  determining  the  conditions  to  be
    satisfied before leave to enter was granted in contrast to the position
    in relation to decisions regarding leave to remain.  The leave to enter
    Rules maintain their reasonable relationship with the  requirements  of
    Article 8 in the ordinary run of cases.  The Court of Appeal noted that
    it remained possible to imagine cases where the individual interests at
    stake were of a particularly pressing nature such that a good claim for
    leave to enter could be established outside the Rules.  Such cases will
    arise where an applicant for leave to enter could show that  compelling
    circumstances existed which required the grant of such leave.

25.   Bearing  this  jurisprudence  in  mind  it  can  be  seen   from   the
    determination  of  Judge  Khan  that  he  could  find   no   compelling
    circumstances such that the Appellant should be granted leave to  enter
    outside the Rules.  I would agree with the Respondent's submissions  to
    me (which I have set out above at paragraph 18) in this context.

26.  It  is  possible  to  criticise  Judge  Khan's  determination  for  not
    specifically setting out the Razgar questions and  then  going  through
    them step by step.  What the Judge was concerned with in this case  was
    whether there were  compelling  circumstances  such  that  this  appeal
    should be allowed outside the  Rules.   For  the  reasons  he  gave  at
    paragraphs 30 to 33 he did not find such compelling circumstances.  The
    Appellant had no evidence of a medical condition, she was living with a
    grandmother and was able to  travel  some  two  miles  to  collect  the
    monthly remittances from her  father.   The  Judge  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's parents to be credible witnesses,  the  Appellant's  mother
    had not been able to answer an important question put  to  her  by  the
    Judge by way of clarification.

27.  There was no reason why family life could not  be  continued  elsewhere
    that is to say why the family could  not  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant's mother and siblings had  only  recently  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom and the Appellant's father might have made a  claim  for
    asylum in the past but his grant was on the basis of a legacy provision
    that is to say that his case had been outstanding for a period of time.
     The Appellant's father had been able to travel to Sri Lanka to see his
    family there and there appeared to be  no  particular  reasons  why  he
    should not return with the rest of the family.  The Judge  found  there
    was no reason  why  the  family  could  not  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  a
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence. The  father's  asylum
    claim had been refused and he had returned voluntarily to Sri Lanka  to
    visit his family suggesting there was no fear of persecution.

28.  If family life could be continued elsewhere  Article  8  would  not  be
    engaged and there would be no interference  with  family  life  by  the
    decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant  entry  clearance.  The  issue  of
    proportionality would not  then  arise.   The  criticism  made  of  the
    Judge's approach and the fact that he did not follow the Razgar step by
    step approach precisely, is in my view  a  matter  more  of  form  than
    substance.

29.  The Judge recognised that Article 8 was a qualified right and  did  not
    give a choice to an Appellant where to exercise her  family  life.   To
    that extent it might be argued that the Judge had accepted  that  there
    was family life in this case albeit it was a  relationship  between  an
    adult Appellant, her two parents, and two  siblings  one  of  whom  was
    herself over 18 at the date of hearing.  If the Article was engaged the
    key question would then be whether the decision to refuse the Appellant
    was proportionate. In the absence of compelling circumstances, this was
    an appeal that was bound to  fail  at  the  proportionality  stage  (as
    implied by the grant of permission to appeal).  It  did  not  meet  the
    criteria in an out of country leave to enter case as explained  in  the
    recent Court of Appeal decision of SS Congo.  The Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for his finding that there were  no  compelling  circumstances.
    Thus either the case did not engage Article 8  as  the  Respondent  had
    argued and the  Judge  had  found  that  the  family  life  could  been
    continued  elsewhere,  or  if  it  did   there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances which tipped the balance in the Appellant's favour at the
    proportionality stage.  I do not find therefore there  was  a  material
    error of law in the Judge's consideration of this appeal and I  dismiss
    the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction was made at first instance and I  make  no  anonymity
direction in this case.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal was dismissed and no fee order can  therefore  be  made  in  this
case.



Signed this 11th  day of June  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
