
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07438/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               zahida parveen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills
For the Respondent:    Ms Rutherford


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is brought by the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hawden-Beal) promulgated on 12th March 2015,  in  which
    she allowed Zahida Parveen's appeal against the  refusal  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer to issue a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of
    Abode under Section  2(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  the
    Immigration "Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of  Abode  in  the
    United Kingdom) Regulations 2006 as  amended.   I  shall,  hereinafter,
    refer to the Appellant as "the Secretary of State" and  the  Respondent
    as "the Claimant".

 2. It was the Claimant's case that she had been born, in the  UK,  on  9th
    December 1969.  She said that her parents were Adalat Khan (father) and
    Sabre Bi (mother), who were both nationals of Pakistan.  The nub of her
    claim was that she had been born in the UK on a date prior  to  January
    1983.

 3. It is fair to say that there were some complications with the evidence.
     There were documents which had different spellings of  the  Claimant's
    name, there were two  Pakistani  passports  issued  in  her  name,  one
    indicating her birth place as being Mirpur AK and one indicating it  as
    being Bradford.  DNA testing had confirmed that her mother is Sabre  Bi
    but had not confirmed her father as being Adalat Khan.  The judge heard
    some oral evidence concerning the identity of Sahida Parveen.   It  was
    the Secretary of State's case that she was not the person  named  in  a
    birth certificate as having been born in Bradford and that she had  not
    shown she had been born in the UK at all.

 4. Judge Hawden-Beal, having heard the oral  evidence,  having  considered
    the documentary evidence and having been addressed  by  representatives
    for both parties, allowed the appeal for reasons which are set  out  in
    her determination.  At paragraph 5 of that  determination  she  stated,
    correctly, that in immigration appeals, the burden of proof  lies  upon
    the  Appellant  and  that  the  standard  is  that  of  a  balance   of
    probabilities.  She  said  the  same  thing  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    determination  but,  at  paragraph  36,  the  final  paragraph  of  the
    determination, stated that "to the lower standard  of  proof"  she  was
    satisfied that Zahida Parveen had been born in Bradford on 9th December
    1969  and  was,  in  consequence,  a  British  citizen  such  that  the
    Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode which she  had  sought
    ought to have been issued to her.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The first ground was  to  the  effect  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected herself as to the standard of proof.  That was said  to  be
    of particular importance  because  the  question  of  credibility  "was
    paramount".  It was also contended that the judge had  speculated  with
    respect  to  a  number  of  favourable  findings  from  the  Claimant's
    perspective and that she had failed to properly reconcile discrepancies
    within the evidence.  Mr Mills acknowledged that the latter two grounds
    were, essentially, "reasons challenges" though, of course that  is  not
    to say that such challenges cannot succeed.

 6. There was an oral hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  which  had  been
    convened to explore whether there was an error of law  in  the  judge's
    determination and to go on to remake the decision in  the  event  of  a
    finding that there was.

 7. Mr Mills, in submissions, acknowledged that there had  been  points  in
    the determination where the judge had identified the  correct  standard
    of proof which was, of course, the balance of probabilities.   However,
    her reference to the "lower standard of proof" at paragraph  36  caused
    sufficient doubt as to whether she had  properly  applied  the  correct
    standard throughout.  Some of her generous findings, from the point  of
    view of the Claimant, might suggest that she had, indeed, been applying
    the lower standard.  As to the other grounds, the evidence  before  the
    judge had been "all over the place". The Claimant herself had sought to
    rely upon documents which contained different spellings of her name and
    different dates of birth and she had made a previous application for  a
    visit visa in 2005 relying upon a passport which suggested she had been
    born in Pakistan.  Although the judge had found the  oral  evidence  of
    one Mr Akbar, who had seen the  Claimant  from  time  to  time,  to  be
    persuasive, the judge's conclusions bordered  on  the  perverse.   When
    pushed further as to that Mr Mills contended that the conclusions  were
    actually perverse.

 8. Ms Rutherford contended that the judge had carefully gone  through  all
    of the evidence which had been presented to  her.   There  was  nothing
    apart from the wording in paragraph 36 to suggest that she had  applied
    an incorrect standard of proof.  The findings that she had reached  had
    been open to her on the evidence.  It had been open to  her  to  accept
    the evidence  of  Mr  Akbar.   There  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    authenticity of the birth certificate issued in the UK upon  which  she
    had relied and the mere fact that Adalat Khan, named as her  father  in
    that certificate, has turned out not to be, does  not  mean  the  birth
    certificate was not properly issued.

 9. Mr Mills, responding, acknowledged he was unable to point  to  anything
    specific which suggested  an  incorrect  standard  of  proof  had  been
    applied, other than what was said in paragraph 36, but  maintained  the
    point  that  what  he  regarded   as   speculative   explanations   for
    difficulties with the evidence, advanced by the  judge,  supported  the
    proposition that she was applying the wrong standard.  It was true that
    the genuineness of the birth  certificate  relied  upon  had  not  been
    placed in issue but what the Secretary of State was saying was that  it
    had not been shown that the Claimant was the person named in that birth
    certificate as having been born in Bradford in the UK.  The  judge  had
    skated over the DNA evidence.

10. I have concluded, for the reasons set out below, that the judge did not
    err in law and that the determination shall stand.

11. As to the question of the standard of proof, there is no doubt that the
    requisite standard is that of a balance of  probabilities.   The  judge
    correctly said that on two occasions in her  determination.   She  did,
    though, also refer to the "lower standard of proof"  prior  to  setting
    out her final conclusions.  The reference  to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof is a reference to what is sometimes referred to as "the real risk
    test" which is the standard of proof applied in asylum cases and  which
    is accepted as being a less demanding standard than that of  a  balance
    of probabilities.  So, if a  judge  did  erroneously  apply  that  more
    generous standard of proof then, unless the facts were such as to  mean
    it could have made no difference, such a judge would err in law.

12. Matters do, in my judgment, though, have to be placed in some  context.
    Judge Hawden-Beal is an experienced judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is a very basic principle that in immigration appeals,  as  distinct
    from asylum appeals, the burden of proof  applicable  is  that  of  the
    balance of probabilities.  That is so basic that, ordinarily, one would
    not expect even a novice  judge  to  make  a  mistake  about  it.   The
    determination does, as noted, contain two  references  to  the  correct
    standard of proof so it is not as if the judge has only referred to the
    lower standard.  Although Mr Mills describes some of  her  findings  as
    being based upon speculation, or as being  otherwise  generous,  I  can
    find nothing in any of the wording she uses,  other  than  the  opening
    words to paragraph 36, as indicating that, as a matter of fact, she did
    apply  the  incorrect   and   more   generous   standard.    In   these
    circumstances, whilst the reference to the lower standard was certainly
    a mistake, it was, in my judgment, no more than a simple error  in  the
    use of words.  I am satisfied, taking everything into account, that she
    correctly applied the balance of probabilities standard throughout  and
    that all of her findings and conclusions were  made  and  reached  with
    that correct burden in mind.

13. As to the remaining arguments, matters such as what findings of fact to
    make and what weight to attach to particular items of evidence are  for
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal will not likely interfere.
     The judge was careful in  her  approach  in  that  she  addressed  the
    various items of documentary evidence before her and  considered  their
    potential significance.  She recognised that there were shortcomings in
    the evidence but was reassured by the oral evidence of Mr Akbar.   What
    was suggested as constituting speculation, in my judgment, was no  more
    than explaining why there  might  be  other  explanations,  aside  from
    dishonesty, for certain anomalies within the documentary evidence.   It
    might have been the case that others would not have been  so  persuaded
    by Mr Akbar's evidence which was, essentially, that  he  had  seen  the
    Appellant as a very young child, and then when she was 6, and then when
    she was 19 and then in later years and he was satisfied that they  were
    all one and the  same  person.   It  may  be  that,  viewed  from  some
    perspectives, her treatment of the evidence  might  be  thought  to  be
    somewhat generous from the Claimant's perspective.  Nevertheless,  this
    is not, in my judgment, a case  where  the  high  perversity  threshold
    which Mr Mills suggests has been reached, actually has.   I  can  quite
    see that other judges faced with the same evidence might  have  reached
    different  conclusions  but  that,  of  itself,  does  not  demonstrate
    arguable error.

14. In the above circumstances, therefore, I  conclude  that  there  is  no
    error in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  its
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set the decision aside

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. I do not do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE APPELLANT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

