
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07825/2013
                                                               OA/07830/2013
                                                               OA/07836/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |On 25 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                MAHWASH TAHIR
                     muhammad ghulam mustafa ahmad tahir
                             muhammad ali tahir

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants,  a  sister  and  two  brothers,  are  all  citizens  of
    Pakistan born respectively on 20 January 1996, 21 September 1997 and  1
    February 2001.  They appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse
    to grant them entry  clearance  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    settlement as the dependent  children  of  Tahir  Mehmood  Younes  (the
    sponsor).

2.   Currently, the three appellants live with  their  paternal  grandmother
    in the family home.  It is proposed that they would come to  live  with
    the sponsor, his second wife and their three children at an address  in
    Croydon, Surrey.

3.   In her  Visa  Application  Form  dated  13  November  2012,  the  first
    appellant indicated that she sees the sponsor  "every  few  years"  and
    speaks to him on the telephone "everyday".  In fact  the  sponsor  left
    Pakistan in October 2007 and returned only once  before  November  2012
    and that was in 2009.  He has subsequently  returned  for  a  visit  in
    2013.

4.   Two issues arose for consideration in the course of  the  appeal.   The
    first was whether or not paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    satisfied, particularly whether the sponsor had had sole responsibility
    for the upbringing of the appellants.  The conclusion of the First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  that  he  had  not.   The   second   issue   was,
    notwithstanding that the appellants failed to meet the  Rules,  whether
    on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR there should be family  unity  in
    the United Kingdom.  Once again, the Judge concluded that Article 8 was
    not engaged in the circumstances of this case.

5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision.   Complaint  is
    made that many findings of fact  were  based  on  presumptions  by  the
    Immigration Judge that  were  in  reality  distortions  of  the  truth.
    Secondly, it was contended  that  the  Immigration  Judge  allowed  the
    findings as to sole responsibility to cloud the issue as to  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  In particular, it was contended that  the  Judge  was  in
    error in  stating  that  there  was  no  family  life  as  between  the
    appellants and the sponsor.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of a  lack  of  focus  in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.  Thus the matter comes before  me  in
    pursuance of that grant.

7.   I was presented with a bundle of documents that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

8.   Ms Easty, who represents the appellants, submitted  that  the  approach
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  towards  the  sponsor  was  an
    unfair one.  The Judge at paragraph 8 of the determination did not find
    the sponsor to be a witness of  truth  for  a  number  of  reasons,  in
    particular that there was little  financial  evidence  documenting  the
    transfer of funds to Rawalpindi  and  very  little  indication  of  any
    transfer of funds from the sponsor to his divorced wife.  This  was  in
    relation to the contention made by the  sponsor  that  he  had  assumed
    financial responsibility for the children and would send funds  to  his
    wife for them.

9.   Ms Easty submits that it was not in issue that the sponsor  could  meet
    the maintenance requirements.  Therefore it was not to be expected that
    the Tribunal would be concerned with the  financial  documents  of  the
    sponsor.  She indicated that indeed he had such documents at court  and
    could have produced them had he been so requested.  She invited  me  to
    find that the Judge was in error as to what evidence  was  or  was  not
    properly to be produced.

10.  It seems to me, however, that that is to misunderstand  the  nature  of
    the concerns as expressed by the ECO in the decisions of  refusal.   It
    was noted that the sponsor claimed that he  transferred  money  to  the
    appellants via their mother because neither  the  grandmother  nor  the
    appellants had bank accounts.  Concerns were  expressed  that,  in  the
    absence of documentation, such position that did not in fact exist.  It
    was noted also  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  sponsor  was
    responsible for making major decisions for the  appellants.   What  the
    ECO was seeking was some documentary confirmation as to  the  level  of
    support and/or involvement with the appellants, both financially and in
    all other ways by the sponsor.  Such a lack of documentation gave  rise
    to the concern by the Immigration Judge that the  sponsor  was  not  as
    involved in the lives of the appellants as he claims.  It seems  to  me
    that that is  a  proper  avenue  of  approach.   I  find  that  in  the
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to make  the  comments  that  were
    made.

11.  It was highlighted in the reasons for refusal the  need  to  show  that
    the sponsor took important decisions in  the  lives  of  his  children.
    Part of that duty would be the responsibility to take decisions  as  to
    education and school life.  The Judge notes, particularly at  paragraph
    8(e) that there is little indication of evidence of those matters.

12.  The lack of documentation to show the involvement  of  the  sponsor  in
    the  lives  of  the  appellants  was,  as  I  so   find,   a   relevant
    consideration.

13.  The Judge having considered the evidence as  a  whole,  concluded  that
    essentially the sponsor had left the responsibility for  looking  after
    the appellants to the grandmother.  It was  also  the  finding  of  the
    Judge that the appellants' natural mother  was  more  closely  involved
    with them than has been presented.  Once again, it  seems  to  me  that
    those are findings properly open to be made.

14.  Ms Easty asked me to find that certain remarks  by  the  Judge  in  the
    determination were more by speculation  and  seemed  to  reflect  undue
    criticism of the sponsor for his having left  the  appellants  when  he
    came to the United Kingdom.  Although there  perhaps  are  some  strong
    comments, I find that they were open to  be  made  within  the  overall
    matrix and context of the case.

15.  The thrust of the appeal was, however, based upon the seeming  lack  of
    application of the case of Razgar to Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   It  was
    contended that the Judge failed to consider the best interests  of  the
    appellants and had been quite wrong in finding that there had  been  no
    family life with the appellants.  In particular, the evidence was  that
    the appellants kept in contact both with the  sponsor  and  with  their
    step-siblings on a regular basis through telephone  and  through  Skype
    and that it was wholly wrong therefore to discount  the  importance  of
    family unity.

16.  Mr Richards, who represented the respondent, invited me  to  find  that
    the Judge properly considered the issue of sole responsibility and that
    it was a fair comment that there was a lack of supporting evidence  for
    it.

17.   He  invited  me  to  find  that  when  looked  at  as  a  whole,   the
    determination dealt with the Article 8 issues as  well  as  considering
    the best interests of the appellants.  It was not  necessary  to  spell
    out in great detail the principles providing  they  had  been  properly
    applied.

18.  It may well be that the comments in paragraph 11 as  to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR would seem, on their face, to be unduly brief  and  dismissive
    of the case.  It was of course for  the  Judge  to  bear  in  mind  the
    circumstances  in  which  the  appellants  lived  in  Pakistan  and  to
    determine whether or not, in all the  circumstances,  there  should  be
    unification of them with their family in London.

19.  It seems to me, however, that the criticisms made of paragraph 11  fail
    to take into account that throughout the determination there has been a
    careful assessment as to the family situation of the appellants and  of
    the sponsor.

20.  The starting point for the  consideration  of  Article  8  really  lies
    within the detail of paragraph 9 of the determination.

21.  The sponsor left the three appellants  six  years  before  the  hearing
    when they were aged 11, 10 and 5 in order to seek  economic  betterment
    in the United Kingdom.  During those six years, the appellants'  father
    sponsored their stepmother to live in the United Kingdom  and  fathered
    three further children, none of whom seemingly have been introduced  to
    the  appellants  save  through  the   medium   of   Skype   and   other
    communication.

22.   During  these  years,  the  appellants  lived  with   their   paternal
    grandparents and more recently with their grandmother only.

23.  Into that mix were the findings made by the Immigration Judge that  the
    involvement of the appellants'  mother  was  at  a  higher  level  than
    claimed and that she was in closer proximity to them  as  was  alleged.
    The Judge, for the reasons  as  set  out  at  paragraph  9(f)  did  not
    consider that the natural mother had abdicated all  responsibility  for
    the children.  In any event, the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor had taken very much upon himself  in  terms  of  monitoring  or
    directing the appellants' schooling.

24.  A significant feature in this particular case is that  it  is  proposed
    that the three appellants come and live with the sponsor and  his  wife
    and his three children in the United  Kingdom.   As  the  Judge  noted,
    there seemed to be no evidence from the  sponsor's  current  wife,  the
    appellants' stepmother, as to her support for this application, nor  is
    there any indication from the three children who  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom of what contact they have with the  appellants.   It  would  be
    reasonable to expect that there should  be  some  indication  from  the
    stepmother as  to  her  attitude  towards  the  sponsor's  three  other
    children arriving.

25.  The Judge at paragraph  9(g)  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellants and noted that their home, their family, their schools,  and
    their friends,  and  their  culture  lie  in  Pakistan.   He  noted  in
    particular the first appellant was enrolled in  a  course  of  tertiary
    education.

26.  The Judge also considered what the appellants  themselves  had  written
    about their situation and circumstances seen in paragraph 8(a)(i)-(iv).
     The Judge did not find that that which they had written in support  of
    their application rang true.  Reasons are given  for  such  conclusions
    which in my view are properly sustainable.

27.  Although perhaps the Judge  was  in  error  in  stating  the  issue  on
    Article 8 in the terms which has been done, it is  difficult  from  the
    paucity of information as presented,  given  the  lack  of  credibility
    findings so far as the sponsor is concerned, to determine  the  precise
    contact which he has with them.  It may well be that  there  is  indeed
    Skype contact  but  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the  quality  of  the
    relationship  that  was  claimed  or  the  way  in  which  matters  are
    expressed by them as to their relationship with their father.

28.  There is within the bundle of documents presented a marked  absence  of
    any statement from the sponsor's present wife or indeed  of  the  three
    children in the United Kingdom speaking as  to  the  quality  of  their
    contact with the appellants or of the nature of the family  life  which
    they enjoy with them.

29.  I note in particular the  witness  statement  of  the  first  appellant
    dated 30 October 2013.  In that statement  she  speaks  of  her  mother
    having moved to Rawalpindi, that she and her siblings were getting used
    to the fact that she was not around.  As the Judge noted,  if  finances
    were submitted to the mother in Rawalpindi such would  involve  a  long
    journey to see the appellants  and  it  was  far  from  clear  how  the
    finances for their welfare could be managed.

30.  The first appellant speaks of the conversations with her  father  being
    long and meaningful and that he would discuss in detail their  progress
    at school and how they were coping with their daily  lives.   That  did
    not seem to reflect the  knowledge  of  the  sponsor  or  his  lack  of
    involvement with  their  education.   There  was  no  mention  in  that
    statement of any contact with the  step-siblings  or  indeed  with  the
    stepmother.  Rather the first  appellant  concludes  her  statement  by
    saying she does not wish to be a burden upon her grandmother.

31.  Mention is made in passing that there is a great relationship with  the
    half-brothers and stepmother but no  details  have  been  provided  nor
    indeed, as I have indicated, have they written any statement to  assist
    in that respect.  It is clear from the determination that the Judge has
    considered in detail the statements made  by  the  appellants  and  has
    given such weight to them as is appropriate in all the circumstances.

32.  There are in effect two families, one in the United Kingdom and one  in
    Pakistan.  There is a paucity of  information  or  evidence  concerning
    contact of one with the other, other than with the sponsor.

33.  It is clear that had the Judge structured the consideration of  Article
    8 in the proper  way  and  applied  the  facts  as  found  to  be,  the
    conclusion would  have  been  inevitable,  namely  that  there  was  no
    imperative for  family  unity  and  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellants were served by their remaining  in  Pakistan.  The  building
    blocks for a full structured consideration of Article 8 were within the
    determination and the findings properly open to be made.

35.  In the circumstances, therefore, I do not find there to be  a  material
    error of law.  The decision shall  therefore  stand,  namely  that  the
    appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is  dismissed  and  that  in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR is also dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

