

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                         Appeal   Number:
OA/07836/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Manchester  Piccadilly                                Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 18th March 2016                                               On  the
6th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                               MRS FIZA SOHAIL
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:

      For the Claimant: No attendance
      For the Secretary of State : Mr Harris (Senior Home Office  Presenting
      Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge D. Wilson, promulgated on the 10th April 2015,  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules  in
      respect of her application for entry clearance as  the  partner  of  a
      British citizen under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   For  the
      sake of clarity in this decision, although  it  is  the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal, the Secretary of State will just be referred to as the
      "Secretary of State" and Mrs  Sohail  will  be  referred  to  as  "the
      Claimant".

   2. Permission to appeal in this case has been granted by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Goldstein on the 8th September 2015, in which he noted that  the
      Claimant had originally been refused  entry  clearance  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer on the ground that the ECO was  not  satisfied  that
      the Claimant's marriage was genuine and  subsisting.  Judge  Goldstein
      granted permission to appeal on the basis it  was  arguable  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge:


      a) failed to  adequately  consider  the  intentions  of  the  Claimant
      towards the marriage, not least in the absence without explanation, of
      a witness statement from her;
      b) failed to adequately reason  his  finding  that  the  marriage  was
      genuine and subsisting, in circumstances where  the  evidence  of  the
      Sponsor was that the relationship would only subsist if  the  Claimant
      was granted entry clearance.


   3. Judge Goldstein found it was arguable that the Judge  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for his finding on  material  matters,  and  arguably
      erred as to whether or not he was entitled in law to seek to reach the
      conclusions he did for the reasons given.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted on all grounds.

   4. Within the original grounds of appeal seeking permission to appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal it was argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      made a material  misdirection  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  the
      intentions of the Claimant towards  the  marriage  when  there  is  no
      witness statement from her or an explanation for this.  It  is  argued
      that the intentions of both parties were of equal importance  and  the
      Judge failed to consider the Claimant's intentions thereby  committing
      an error of law and that in the absence of a  witness  statement  from
      the Claimant, the Judge erred in finding the marriage was genuine  and
      subsisting. Within the second ground of appeal it is  argued  that  at
      [28] it was recorded that the sponsor confirmed that it would only  be
      a subsisting relationship with  the  Claimant,  if  the  Claimant  was
      allowed to come to the UK and it is said that this  demonstrated  that
      to the sponsor living in the UK, living in the UK  is  more  important
      than living with his spouse in a genuine and subsisting  marriage.  It
      is argued the Judge failed to consider this evidence when  making  his
      finding in respect  of  the  genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of  the
      marriage, and that the marriage must  be  genuine  and  subsisting  in
      order for entry clearance to be  issued  rather  than  the  other  way
      round. It is argued that that if the sponsor is not prepared  to  live
      with the Claimant in Pakistan, this is not consistent with  a  genuine
      commitment to the marriage.

   5. Within the renewed grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  the  same
      two grounds of appeal argued. It is further argued  that  it  was  not
      possible to make reasoned finding on the Claimant's intentions towards
      the marriage in the absence of a witness statement from the Claimant.


   6. Although no one attended at the appeal on behalf of  the  Claimant,  I
      did consider it was in the interests of  justice  to  proceed  in  the
      absence of the Claimant or sponsor under the Upper Tribunal  Procedure
      Rules, given that notice of the proceeding had been sent to  both  the
      Claimant and the sponsor indicating the appeal  was  to  be  heard  on
      Friday 18th of March 2016 at 10 a.m. on  the  First  Floor  Piccadilly
      Exchange, 2 Piccadilly Plaza, Mosley Street, Manchester, by notice  of
      hearing issued and sent on the 8th February 2016. No  explanation  was
      given for the failure on part  of  the  Claimant  or  her  sponsor  to
      attend, and in the absence of good reason for the failure to attend, I
      consider that it was in the interests of justice  to  proceed  in  the
      absence. However, do bear in mind this is still for the  Secretary  of
      State to prove that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in
      law, and this cannot be simply assumed as a result of the  absence  of
      the Claimant at the appeal hearing.


   7. In his oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Harris  relied
      upon the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission to  appeal.  He
      argued that the Judge failed to take account of the  fact  that  there
      was no witness statement from the Claimant  and  that  the  Judge  was
      wrong to  find  that  both  parties  had  genuine  intentions  towards
      marriage in the absence of the statement  from  her.  He  did  however
      concede that the Judge did have the Claimant's application which had a
      signed statement of truth and which  included  a  declaration  of  the
      intention of the Claimant to live in the UK with her sponsor, and that
      document was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.  However,
      he argued that the couple met 3 to 4 days before the arranged marriage
      and then stay together for just 19 days before the sponsor returned to
      the UK and after that an application was made for the Claimant to come
      to the UK to join him. He said that there is no evidence or suggestion
      that the marriage was not valid, but that the Claimant could not  show
      a subsisting marriage. He argued that the sponsor had said in evidence
      that if the Claimant was not granted entry clearance to come  to  live
      with him in the UK that there will not be a subsisting marriage.

      My findings on error of law and materiality

   8. In respect of  the  submission  that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly
      consider the intention of the Claimant towards marriage  in  light  of
      the fact there is no witness statement from  her  or  explanation  for
      this, I do bear in mind that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did have as
      evidence before him the application for entry clearance  made  by  the
      Claimant herself, in which at question 1.18 the  Claimant  had  ticked
      "yes" in answer to the  question  "do  intend  to  live  your  sponsor
      permanently?" and at question 2.1 had given the address  she  and  her
      sponsor intended to live together in the UK. This application form was
      completed by the Claimant seeking  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  of
      someone settled in the UK and further within that application form she
      gave evidence as to their contact in terms of Skype, and WhatsApp, she
      gave the date and place when they married  on  29th  October  2013  in
      Lahore, Pakistan, and detailed how they lived together as husband  and
      wife under one roof after getting married on 29th  October  2013  till
      the sponsor left for the UK  on  the  11th  November  2013.  This  was
      evidence from the Claimant was before the  Judge  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was entitled to take  that  evidence  into  account  in
      regards to the Claimant's own  intentions,  as  he  has  clearly  done
      within the decision. There is no legal requirement for the Claimant to
      also file and also of a witness statement in addition to the  contents
      of her application form. The application form itself was evidence that
      the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  account  of  in  respect  of  her
      intentions, and it is perfectly clear having read the  decision,  that
      he has relied upon  the  contents  of  her  application  form  and  in
      particular  her  evidence  therein  as  to  her  intention   to   live
      permanently together with the sponsor,  evidence  therein  as  to  the
      address at which they intend to live in Manchester, and  her  evidence
      therein as to how they maintained contact and how they lived  together
      under one roof after their marriage until the time  when  the  sponsor
      came back to the UK.


   9. Further, the Judge heard evidence from the  sponsor  in  the  UK,  the
      Claimant's husband. He was perfectly entitled to assess  the  evidence
      of the sponsor, not only with regards to his own intentions, but  also
      in regard to his evidence as to the intentions of the Claimant. It  is
      not an error of law for the Tribunal to believe  a  witness.  In  this
      regard, in giving evidence the sponsor had talked about how he and his
      wife communicated via  modern  forms  of  communication  and  how  the
      Whataspp messages were contained within the Claimant's bundle onwards,
      which the Judge  noted  in  his  decision.   Further  the  Judge  also
      referred to the text messages and phone calls made between between  14
      December 2013 and the 3rd January  2014  within  the  bundle  and  the
      electronic messages between A41 and A49. The Judge also made reference
      to the financial support provided by the sponsor to the Claimant.



  10. On the basis of all this evidence the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found
      that he was satisfied that the relationship between the  Claimant  and
      sponsor was genuine and subsisting and they intended to  the  Claimant
      in UK.  In light of the evidence this was a finding that was  open  to
      him on the evidence. There is  no  requirement  for  the  Claimant  to
      submit a further statement, although the Judge did clearly  take  into
      account the fact that he found it  surprisingly  that  there  was  not
      statement from the sponsor at [46].  However, he has given  clear  and
      adequate and sufficient reasons for his findings that the marriage was
      genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  the  parties  intended  to   live
      permanently together in the UK.


  11. In respect of the second ground of appeal in respect of  the  comments
      of the sponsor recorded at [28] of the decision  that  "He  was  asked
      what would become of the marriage if the appeal was  unsuccessful.  He
      said that it would be a problem. He would like his wife  to  come  and
      join him. He has no intention of residing in Pakistan. He lives in the
      United Kingdom.  He was asked if it was the case that there would only
      be a subsisting relationship if his partner is  allowed  into  the  UK
      United Kingdom and he confirmed this was correct".  It is argued  that
      the Judge had failed to take account of this to determine  whether  or
      not the parties were subject to a subsisting marriage and whether they
      did genuinely intend to live together in the UK.


  12. The Judge in determining whether or not the marriage is subsisting has
      to consider this, as  was  agreed  by  Mr  Harris  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent, as at the date  of  the  appeal  hearing.  There  are  two
      separate tests that have to be overcome in determining whether or  not
      the marriage is subsisting, and whether or not the parties  intend  to
      live together permanently in the UK. The Claimant has  to  prove  that
      she and her sponsor were in a subsisting relationship as at  the  date
      of the appeal hearing and they also need to establish and prove on the
      balance of probabilities that they intend to live permanently together
      in the United Kingdom.  These are separate tests. The question  as  to
      whether or not a marriage is subsisting has to be  established  as  at
      the date of the decision and relates to the state of the  marriage  as
      at that  date.  The  question  as  to  whether  they  intend  to  live
      permanently  together  in  the  United  Kingdom  relates   to   future
      intention. Both elements have to be proved.



  13. The fact that circumstances may occur in the  future  which  may  mean
      that the relationship breaks down, does not determine whether  or  not
      the marriage was subsisting as at the date of the appeal  hearing.  On
      the basis, on the evidence before the Judge he was perfectly  entitled
      to find the marriage was genuine and subsisting as at that date.



  14.  The evidence that the  sponsor  would  not  want  to  live  with  the
      Claimant in Pakistan, but would want to live permanently with  her  in
      the UK again was sufficient for the judge to find that they did intend
      to live permanently together in the UK.  The requirements of the Rules
      required them to have an intention to live together permanently in the
      UK,  and  did  not  require  that  they  intended  to  live   together
      permanently in a different country.  The findings of  the  Judge  were
      perfectly open to him on the evidence before him.

  15. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D. Wilson therefore does not
      contain a material error of law and is maintained.


Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  D.  Wilson  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained.

      Signed


      R McGinty


      Deputy Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal  McGinty                    Dated
      18th March 2016
