
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07290/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        Kingsley Kudakwashe Kaundura
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chinyoka, Abbott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Kingsley Kudakwashe Kaundura, was born  on  6  September
    1999 and is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  By a decision dated 30 April  2014,
    the Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  Pretoria  refused  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  for  settlement
    with the  sponsor  (Christine  Muwirimi)  who  is  the  mother  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Chapman), in a decision dated 17 February 2015, dismissed the appeal on
    all grounds.  The appellant had applied for entry  clearance  with  his
    father (Nowell Muwirimi) who had also been refused and had appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  However, Mr Muwirimi  has  not  been  granted
    permission to appeal.  Granting  permission  to  the  appellant,  Judge
    White considered that the First-tier Tribunal may have erred in law  in
    determining  the  issue  of  "sole  responsibility."   In   particular,
    applying the principles  of  TD  (Yemen)  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "Sole
    Responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049, he considered that the judge
    may arguably have erred in finding that  sole  responsibility  may  not
    depend entirely upon what "has happened recently" [34]  and  also  that
    "responsibility may have been for a short duration in that the  present
    arrangements may have begun quite recently." [34]

 2. Judge Chapman noted that the appellant, born in 1999, had been deserted
    by his father not long after his birth.  In [36], Judge  Chapman  noted
    that:

         "There is no  evidence  that  [the  sponsor]  was  taking  such  an
         interest in the eight or so years before [she started paying school
         fees etc.] ... for example, there is no evidence from the sponsor's
         sisters which might have confirmed the role that  the  sponsor  was
         playing in her son's life throughout this time.  Indeed  there  was
         no evidence from the appellant himself about his mother's  role  in
         his life."

 3. The judge went on at [37] to state,

         "Except for the sponsor's own evidence, to which I attached  little
         credibility, there is very little  evidence  she  has  resumed  any
         greater role in her son's life than she previously had  played.   I
         also note that, had she wished to do so in  2006  after  an  asylum
         claim had  been  rejected,  the  sponsor  could  have  returned  to
         Zimbabwe to play a more active role in her son's life.   She  chose
         not to do so, nor to seek his entry into the UK to join her at that
         time."

 4. Judge Chapman concluded

         "Having considered all these factors,  I  am  not  satisfied  on  a
         balance  of  probabilities  that   the   sponsor   has   had   sole
         responsibility for the appellant.  I do not go as far as saying she
         has abrogated all responsibility for her son, but I find that it is
         more likely than not that, at the very  least,  responsibility  for
         the upbringing of her son has been  shared  with  her  sisters  and
         therefore not her sole responsibility."

 5. The findings of the judge could not be clearer.   First,  she  has  not
    accepted the credibility of the evidence of the United Kingdom sponsor,
    the appellant's mother.   Having  rejected  her  credibility,  she  has
    clearly found that the appellant has failed to discharge the burden  of
    proof upon him in the appeal; it was for the appellant  to  prove  that
    his mother had sole responsibility for him.   Even  if  the  judge  had
    accepted that the sponsor had assumed a much greater role in her  son's
    life in recent years, it is absolutely clear  that  she  believes  that
    role has always been shared with her sisters and, as a consequence, the
    sponsor has not had "sole" responsibility for the appellant.  I do  not
    find that the judge has erred in law for  the  reasons  stated  in  the
    grounds of appeal or at all.  The remaining  grounds  are  little  more
    than a disagreement with the findings which were open to the  judge  on
    the evidence before her.  I note that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's Article 8 ECHR assessment.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

