
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum   Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: OA/07027/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th February 2016                        |On 2nd March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               ukvs sheffield
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     jaf
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rene of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer to whom I shall  refer  as
    the ECO, who appeals against the decision of  Judge  Munonyedi  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 13th July 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Nigerian citizen born 25th  April  2008  and  is
    therefore 7 years of age.  The Claimant applied for entry clearance  to
    join his father, to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor, who is a British
    citizen settled in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application was refused on 1st May 2014 with reference to paragraph
    297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules.  The  ECO  did  not  accept
    that the Sponsor had sole responsibility for the Claimant, nor  was  it
    accepted that  there  were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made exclusion of  the  Claimant  undesirable  and
    suitable arrangements had been made for his care.

 5. The appeal was heard on 19th June 2015.  The  FtT  allowed  the  appeal
    finding that the Sponsor had sole responsibility for the Claimant,  and
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations making
    the Claimant's exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.

 6. The ECO applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in  the  following
    terms;


         "The Respondent challenges  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Munoyedi  (at  Taylor  House)  allowing  this  appeal.   The
         Appellant sought entry clearance to join his father whom he met for
         the first time in 2011 and once more thereafter.  It was argued  on
         his behalf that his mother had decided she no longer had  the  time
         nor inclination to care for him.
         The grounds take issue with the conclusions of the judge and  argue
         that  there  was  no  evidential  basis  for  the   positive   sole
         responsibility findings and that core elements of  the  claim  were
         wholly unsupported by documentary evidence on  both  limbs  of  the
         appeal.
         Essentially the judge's decision appears to have been swayed by the
         Sponsor's oral evidence.  It is arguable that this is not enough."

 7. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

 8. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was  submitted  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    documentary evidence.  There was no adequate explanation as to why  the
    Claimant's mother would be unable to look after him.

 9. While it was claimed that  the  Claimant's  mother  had  abdicated  her
    parental responsibilities as confirmed in  her  letter,  there  was  no
    independent evidence to confirm that the written information  was  from
    the Claimant's mother.

10. It was submitted that the Sponsor had only  financially  supported  the
    Claimant, and there was no other evidence to  show  that  he  had  sole
    responsibility in relation to education or medical care.

11. It was contended that there were no serious and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations which  made  the  Claimant's  exclusion  from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable.   There  were  already  safe  and  suitable
    arrangements in place for the Claimant's care in Nigeria.  The Claimant
    and Sponsor could maintain  their  relationship  and  keep  in  regular
    contact by modern means of communication.

12. Mr Rene relied upon his rule 24 response.  In summary he submitted that
    the decision of the FtT was well reasoned and the  findings  made  were
    supported by adequate reasons.  It  was  contended  that  the  ECO  was
    seeking  to  raise  a  new  issue  in  the  grounds,  questioning   the
    authenticity of the letter written  by  the  Claimant's  mother.   This
    point had not been made before the FtT.  Mr  Rene  submitted  that  the
    decision of the FtT should stand  as  no  material  error  of  law  was
    disclosed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. The FtT did not materially err in law for the following reasons.

14. The FtT applied the correct burden and standard of proof, and  assessed
    the circumstances appertaining at the date of the decision  to  refuse,
    as indicated in paragraph 4 of the decision.

15. The FtT considered the relevant case law that  being  TD  Yemen  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049, and noted the principle in that  decision,  in  that  sole
    responsibility is a factual matter to be decided upon all the evidence.
     The FtT appreciated that the issue to be decided is to  ascertain  who
    in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.

16. The FtT found the Sponsor to be a credible witness and  noted  evidence
    to indicate that he had been financially supporting the Claimant.   The
    FtT concluded, having taken into account the Sponsor's evidence, and  a
    letter from the Claimant's  biological  mother,  that  the  mother  had
    abandoned her responsibility towards the Claimant, and the Claimant had
    been looked after by the Sponsor's grandmother in Nigeria.

17. The FtT noted that the Sponsor had paid the Claimant's school fees, and
    that there was evidence from the school of  the  Sponsor's  involvement
    when he visited Nigeria.

18. In my view the FtT was entitled to reach those conclusions, based  upon
    the evidence before it, and gave  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings
    made.

19. The FtT was also entitled,  based  upon  the  evidence  before  it,  to
    conclude that the illness of the Sponsor's grandmother, of which  there
    was medical  evidence,  indicated  that  she  was  no  longer  able  to
    adequately look after the Claimant,  and  that  the  Claimant's  mother
    wished to undertake no responsibility for him.  In those  circumstances
    the FtT was entitled to conclude that serious and compelling family and
    other considerations existed, which made the exclusion of the  Claimant
    from the United Kingdom undesirable.

20. The FtT considered all material evidence, and did not take into account
    any immaterial considerations.  The FtT made findings which  were  open
    to it on the evidence, and gave adequate reasons  for  those  findings.
    The grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal,
    disclose a disagreement with the conclusions of the  FtT,  but  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

21. In considering the adequacy of reasoning, I have taken into account the
    principles in Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)
    the head note of which I set out below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

22. In my view the FtT has discharged the duty set out above  and  provided
    adequate reasons.  It is apparent why the FtT reached  the  conclusions
    in favour of the Claimant.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision and the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT but I  make  an  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
order is made because the Claimant is a minor.

Signed                              Date 18th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands so does the decision to  make  a  fee
award.


Signed                              Date 18th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


