
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07207/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2014                                 |On 1 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                   MS NONDUMISO BONGEKA SIPHESIHLE DLAMINI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Mahmud, Counsel


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL


 1. The appellant refused the  application  of  the  respondent  for  entry
    clearance to the UK as a returning resident.   The  refusal  was  under
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules  on  the  ground  that  the
    respondent had failed to disclose on her application form that she  had
    a conviction in the UK for criminal damage, for which  she  received  a
    conditional discharge.

 2.  At  an  oral  hearing  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed   the
    respondent's appeal on "immigration grounds". The appellant was granted
    permission to appeal that decision.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell produced the  unreported  decision
    of Mr Justice Green and Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson in the case of  Mrs
    I  G  Omenma  appeal  number  IA/09829/2013  which  determination   was
    promulgated on 22 May 2014.

 4. It is clear from the wording of that determination that the  effect  of
    Section 14(1) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 is
    that a person who has received a conditional or absolute discharge does
    not make a false representation if the answer is "no" when asked if  he
    has ever been "convicted" of an offence.

 5. Mr Whitwell took instructions at the hearing and sought  consent  under
    Rule 17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to
    withdraw the appeal.  Mr Mahmud, acting  for  the  respondent,  had  no
    objection and on that basis  I  consented  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    appeal.

 6. The result is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that
    the appeal of Ms Dlamini is allowed therefore stands.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


