
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07641/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2014                               |                             |
|Prepared 20 June 2014                         |On 7 July 2014               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                          MRS NELOFAR AZHAR SOHAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mazar Hussain, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth 4  February  1964,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 27  February  2013  to
    refuse entry clearance to join her spouse  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Refusal was with particular reference to paragraphs
    EC-P.1.1., E-ECP.4.2. and E-ECP.4.1.  In short, the Appellant  did  not
    have the necessary approved English language test result.

2.   It is accepted by the Sponsor that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
    necessary  English  language  test  result  either  at  the   date   of
    application or the date of the Respondent's decision or by the date  of
    the judge's decision.

3.   It therefore meant inevitably that the appeal failed under  the  Rules.



4.   The judge was provided with a  range  of  information  and  submissions
    about the Sponsor's health.  Those issues are set out in paragraphs 13,
    16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, and 24 of the determination.

5.   Permission to appeal that decision was given by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zucker on 22 April 2014 on a limited basis that  it  was
    arguable that insufficient consideration had been given  to  Article  8
    ECHR rights appertaining at the  date  of  decision  in  this  case  in
    connection with the Sponsor's ill-health.

6.   The Sponsor essentially indicated his  disappointment  at  the  outcome
    and his belief, although he accepted it would not have ultimately  made
    any difference to the judge's  decision,   that   time   was  given  to
    provide a University of Punjab degree certificate before  the  decision
    was promulgated. However, the judge's decision was promulgated  earlier
    than had been indicated: It is unfortunate, if the same occurred,  that
    it did so.

7.   Having considered the submissions and the understandable position  that
    the Sponsor wished to be joined by  his  wife  which  is  their  mutual
    objective I find that  the  judge  did  fairly  recite  the  bundle  of
    correspondence and documents provided by  the  Sponsor  concerning  his
    health. I went through the determination with  the  Sponsor  to  ensure
    that all material letters he had relied on had been referred to by  the
    judge.

8.   In the circumstances I do not find there is any lack  of  consideration
    of the Sponsor's ill-health and of course it was a matter  of  judgment
    and weight in assessing proportionality what weight to give to that  as
    an issue.  Whilst I might not have reached the same decision that  does
    not indicate that there is an error of law.   I  only  interfere  where
    there are matters which had been admitted or not  considered  or  where
    matters have been considered and inappropriate considerations have been
    given to the information, documentation or submissions raised.  As such
    I found in assessment of the medical issues under the  Article  8  ECHR
    claim the judge made no material error of law.



 9.  I wish  to  emphasise  that  there  is  no  suggestion  in  the  papers
    whatsoever nor do I find any sign of it nor in submissions made  by  Mr
    Mills  of a lack of good faith by either the Appellant or the  Sponsor.
    I am satisfied that the application was genuine. It is unfortunate that
    in the circumstances the test certificate was not provided and a  fresh
    application being able to be made sooner. As it is  the  Appellant  has
    now got Canadian citizenship and it is accepted by Mr Mills  that  that
    will be a proper basis for her to show she meets the  English  language
    requirements.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.

11.    The original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

12.   Fee Award.

        Since the appeal has failed it is not  appropriate  to  make  a  fee
    award.


Signed                                  Date 3 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


