
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/07018/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 November 2017                       |  On 28 November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                            mrs Amina Said Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Balroop, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Djibouti.  She was  born  on  27  October
    1993.  She appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant her entry
    clearance as the partner of a British national.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 28  February  2017,  Judge  S.  Aziz  (the
    judge)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal because he found that she did not satisfy the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and that as regards Article 8,  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

 3. The grounds claim the  judge  erred  materially.   The  only  issue  in
    question was whether the appellant met the requirements of the  English
    test.  At [31] the judge accepted the  appellant  obtained  an  overall
    band score of 4.0.  At [32] the judge accepted that 3.5 was  equivalent
    to B1.  The grounds claim that was important as the test only  required
    the appellant to obtain A1 in all four levels.  Before B1, there is a 2
    and then A1 comes after that so A1 is two levels below B1.

 4. The grounds claim that the judge essentially refused the case as  there
    was no evidence that level 3 listening was equivalent to  A1.   It  was
    submitted that the judge erred as he accepted B1 was 3.5 to 4.5 and for
    the judge to come to the conclusion that 0.5 band level meant a drop in
    two grades could not be logical.  It had to be that a  0.5  drop,  that
    is, to level 3, was the next grade below, that is, A2.

 5. The grounds submit that a  printout  from  Language  Levels  at  Oxford
    School of English and Educouncil.org from the public  domain  confirmed
    that B1 was 3.5-5, A2 is level 3 and A1 is below  that.   Since  A2  is
    level 3 and only A1 is needed, that would show the judge erred  in  his
    logic.

 6. With regards Article 8, the grounds claim the judge  erred  because  he
    appreciated there was a British child (see [17]).  The judge failed  to
    consider MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013]  UKUT
    00380 (IAC).  See headnote:
         "(1)  In EU law terms there  is  no  reason  why  the  decision  in
             Zambrano could not in principle be relied upon by the  parent,
             or other primary carer, of a minor EU national living  outside
             the EU as long as it  is  the  intention  of  the  parent,  or
             primary carer, to accompany the EU national child  to  his/her
             country of nationality, in the instant appeals that being  the
             United Kingdom.  To  conclude  otherwise  would  deny  access,
             without justification, to a whole  class  of  EU  citizens  to
             rights they are entitled to by virtue of their citizenship.
         (2)   The above  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  terms  of  The
             Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   (Amendment)   (No.2)
             Regulations 2012 (SI  2012/2560),  brought  into  force  on  8
             November 2012.  Paragraphs 2 and 3  of  the  Schedule  to  the
             Regulations give effect to the CJEU's decision in Zambrano  by
             amending Regulations 11 and 15A of the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in order to confer  rights  of
             entry and residence on the primary carer of a British  citizen
             who is joining the British citizen  in,  or  accompanying  the
             British citizen to [Regulations  11(5)(e)  and  15A(4A)],  the
             United Kingdom and  where  the  denial  of  such  a  right  of
             residence would prevent the British citizen from being able to
             reside in the United Kingdom or in an EEA State."



 7. The grounds claim that reference  should  have  been  made  to  Mostafa
    [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC).

 8. Judge Shimmin in a decision  dated  20  September  2017  found  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  materially  erred  in  consideration  of  the
    evidence in relation to the level at which the appellant had passed the
    English test.  Further, it was arguable that there was an error of  law
    in consideration of Article 8 in terms of there being a  British  child
    as per Mostafa.

 9. The Rule 24 response was filed on 11 October 2017.  The respondent  did
    not oppose the appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  and
    invited the  Tribunal  to  determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    continuance hearing to consider the appellant's application  for  entry
    clearance to the UK as a partner under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules and outside the Rules under Article 8.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Balroop relied upon the grounds.

11. Mr Tufan  accepted  that  the  Rule  24  response  indicated  that  the
    respondent did not oppose the application for permission to appeal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. I find the judge materially erred in his analysis both with  regard  to
    his approach to the requirements of the English test and with regard to
    his approach to Article 8.  As regards Article 8, the judge  failed  to
    take into account MA and SM as well as Mostafa in terms  of  the  child
    and also the appellant's ability to satisfy the Rules.  Such ability to
    satisfy the Rules, whilst not the question to be determined, is capable
    of being a weighty factor in the proportionality  analysis.   See  also
    Chavez-Vilchez [2017] EUECJ C-133/15.  It is important to determine  in
    each case at issue in the proceedings which parent is the primary carer
    of the child and whether there is in fact a relationship of  dependency
    between the child and the third country national parent.

13. The judge made a material error of law.  The appeal must be re-heard.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-
    hearing.

    Anonymity direction not made.





Signed                              Date 14 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



