

                                          [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/07595/2013
      OA/07594/2013


                                   THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On October 14, 2014             |On  October 15, 2014     |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HHO
                                     MGM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Bolton
      CAB


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellants, born May 20, 1990 and April 27, 2011, are  citizens  of
    Kenya. The appellants applied for entry clearance under paragraph 352AA
    and 352D HC 395 respectively to join GG, the unmarried partner  of  the
    first-named appellant and the  father  of  the  second  appellant.  The
    respondent refused their applications on February 25, 2013 on the basis
    neither satisfied the Immigration Rules.

 3. On March 19, 2013 the appellants appealed under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing  the  applications
    should have been allowed under the Immigration Rules  or  alternatively
    under article 8 ECHR.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Birrell
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on  December  20,  2013.  In  a
    determination promulgated on December 30, 2013 she allowed the  second-
    named appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  the  first-
    named appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision on January 13, 2014 arguing there
    had been two material errors of law. She submitted:

     a. In respect of the second-named appellant  she  submitted  the  FtTJ
        erred by finding the sponsor's son was part of a family unit.


     b. In respect of the  first-named  appellant  she  argued  the  FtTJ's
        assessment under article 8 was  flawed  as  she  failed  to  attach
        sufficient weight to the fact neither appellant satisfied the Rules
        on the basis of the respondent's grounds of appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker on January 24, 2014. He found the FtTJ may  have  erred
    by extending the definition of family unit to include the  second-named
    appellant and this then led to an error by  allowing  the  second-named
    appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 7. A Rule 24 response was filed by appellants' representatives on February
    6, 2014 in which it was argued:

     a. Counsel for the respondent (Mr Cliffe) did not challenge Mr Brown's
        submissions before the FtTJ on the interpretation of paragraph 352D
        HC 395.


     b. The challenges amount to nothing more than a disagreement.

     c. The FtTJ properly directed herself as to the law as to the  meaning
        of what constitutes  a  "family  unit"  at  paragraph  [8]  of  her
        determination  and  explained  why  she  allowed  the  second-named
        appellant's appeal at paragraphs [34] to [35] of her  determination
        and thereafter gave full and sustainable  reasons  as  to  why  she
        allowed the first-named appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 8. The sponsor was in attendance at the  hearing  and  represented  by  Mr
    Brown.


    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. Mr McVeety accepted the FtTJ did consider the decision  of  BM  and  AL
    (352D9iv); meaning of "family unit") Columbia [2007]  UKAIT  00055  and
    that on reflection paragraphs [27] to [28] of BM and AL did  fit  these
    facts because the sponsor had fled fearing persecution and consequently
    it was arguable that the enforced separation was due to the persecution
    faced by the sponsor. Mr McVeety  accepted  that  if  the  second-named
    appellant met the Rules then his argument on the first-named  appellant
    was weakened because they were a family.

10. Mr Brown submitted the FtTJ did not make any error and  relied  on  the
    FtTJ's findings in paragraphs in paragraph [35], which demonstrated the
    FtTJ did consider the "family unit" and was  satisfied  that  paragraph
    [27] of BM and AL covered this case and her findings were open to  her.
    The appeal  in  respect  of  the  second-named  appellant  was  a  mere
    disagreement.

11. He further submitted there  was  no  error  to  allow  the  first-named
    appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR. The FtTJ  had  considered  the
    law and whilst the approach in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) had not been set out or followed  the
    reality was that the second-named appellant's appeal  would  have  been
    allowed if their child was being admitted under the Rules.



    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR IN LAW

12. Mr McVeety accepted that the key to this appeal was the FtTJ's approach
    to the second-named appellant's appeal. The respondent had  been  given
    permission on the basis Designated Judge of the First-tier  Zucker  was
    persuaded that the definition "family unit" did not cover  the  second-
    named appellant because he accepted the  submission  that  the  second-
    named appellant was only a part of the first-named appellant's family.


13. As conceded today that approach is flawed because the sponsor had  left
    his partner because of perceived persecution. This situation is covered
    by the decision of BM and  AL  (352D9iv);  meaning  of  "family  unit")
    Columbia [2007] UKAIT 00055 because the Tribunal  accepted  that  where
    there has been a separation and the reason for the separation may  well
    be associated with the claim of persecution a child might still  remain
    part of the family unit from  which  the  potential  refugee  had  been
    temporarily separated.


14. The FtTJ was aware that the sponsor had not mentioned the appellants in
    his gateway interview  but  accepted  his  explanation  and  found  the
    sponsor to be a credible witness.

15. In the circumstances I am satisfied the findings were open to the  FtTJ
    and I do not find any error in  law  in  respect  of  the  second-named
    appellant and I uphold the FtTJ's original decision.

16. Mr McVeety accepted that if the second-named appellant met the Rules
    then leaving the first-named appellant behind would engage article 8
    ECHR as she was the second-named appellant's mother. The FtTJ found
    article 8 was engaged and considered the appeal outside of the Rules.
    She was satisfied that it would be disproportionate to keep the parties
    apart and she allowed the appeal.

17. I see nothing wrong with her approach and in the circumstances I uphold
    the FtTJ's decision to refuse her appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but to allow it under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


18. There is no material error of law and I uphold the original decision.

19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was made and I extend the order to these proceedings.



Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not alter the decision to refuse a fee award.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
