

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08191/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 06 April 2016                         |On 13 April 2016                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NAIROBI)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                 JANAT SEBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Unigwe, Counsel instructed by A & C Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Entry Clearance
    Officer is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    On 08 December 2012  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance for refugee family reunion. At the date  of  the  application
    she was 17 years old. It is stated that the application was refused  on
    the ground that the Entry Clearance Officer did not accept that the  UK
    sponsor, Mrs Aida Nakabugo, was the appellant's biological mother.  The
    appellant appealed the decision. The appeal was  heard  on  31  October
    2013 and dismissed in a decision dated 05 November 2013.  That  is  the
    limited extent of the information  currently  before  the  Tribunal  in
    relation to the first application for entry clearance made in 2012.  No
    copies of the earlier decision to refuse entry clearance or the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision were produced in this appeal.

3.    On 03 March 2014 the appellant made a  second  application  for  entry
    clearance for refugee  family  reunion.  At  the  date  of  the  second
    application  she  was  18  years  old.  The  respondent   refused   the
    application on 12 June 2014 on the ground that she  was  not  under  18
    years old at  the  date  of  the  application  and  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM for entry as an adult  dependent  relative.
    The appellant appealed the decision.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 01 September 2015. The judge  was  hampered  by
    the fact that no bundle had been prepared  by  the  respondent  and  no
    representative appeared on behalf of the respondent at the hearing. The
    judge went on to decide the appeal based on the evidence given  by  the
    sponsor  and  the  limited  documentary  evidence  contained   in   the
    appellant's bundle. He concluded that the respondent had failed to give
    adequate  consideration  to  the  immigration  rules  regarding  family
    reunion and as such found that the decision was not in accordance  with
    the law. He allowed the appeal to the limited extent that the case  was
    "remitted" to the respondent to give proper  consideration  to  whether
    the appellant met the  requirements  of  "paragraphs  352A-FJ"  of  the
    immigration rules and the relevant  UKBA  policy  relating  to  refugee
    family reunion.

5.    The respondent seeks to appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the ground that the First-tier Tribunal erred in determining the appeal
    in light of a mistake of fact. It was correct that the  appellant  made
    an initial application for entry clearance on 08 December 2012  but  at
    the date of the second application she was 18 years  old  and  did  not
    therefore meet the requirements of the immigration  rules  for  refugee
    family reunion. The judge should have considered whether the  appellant
    met the requirements of the immigration rules at the date of the second
    entry clearance application, which was the subject of the appeal.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

7.    It is clear from the decision that the judge was  aware  of  the  fact
    that appellant made an "initial application"  for  entry  clearance  in
    2012, which was refused [11]. He was also aware  of  the  fact  that  a
    further decision was made to refuse entry clearance for family  reunion
    under Part 11 of the immigration rules (paragraph 352A-FJ) on  12  June
    2014. The judge identified the second decision as the subject  of  this
    appeal [10 & 17].

8.    The judge was faced with some difficulty in  deciding  the  appeal  in
    light of the fact that the respondent failed to serve a bundle and  did
    not attend the hearing. As such, he was unaware of the  fact  that  the
    appellant appealed the first decision made in 2012. No doubt  his  task
    was also made more difficult  by  the  way  in  which  the  appellant's
    representative is said to have put the case. It was suggested that  the
    second decision to refuse entry clearance  somehow  formed  part  of  a
    continuing application for entry clearance [15].

9.    Even taking into account the limited evidence before the judge  it  is
    clear that a copy of the second application  for  entry  clearance  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The application form  states  that  the
    application was submitted online on 03  March  2014.  At  the  date  of
    application the appellant was 18 years old. The application form states
    that the application was for settlement  for  the  purpose  of  "Family
    reunion - under Part 11 Asylum, Immigration Rules".

10.   The former Family Reunion Policy was replaced by  specific  provisions
    incorporated into the immigration  rules.  Paragraphs  352A-FJ  of  the
    immigration rules, and the Family Reunion Policy that accompanies those
    provisions, make clear that only children  under  the  age  of  18  are
    eligible for family reunion. Dependent children over the age of 18  are
    specifically identified as ineligible applicants under the terms of the
    Family Reunion Policy, which was relied upon by  the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

11.   The judge was correct to point out that entry  clearance  was  refused
    with reference to the  rules  relating  to  adult  dependent  relatives
    contained in Appendix FM. The reasons for refusal show  that  this  was
    considered in the alternative  because  the  appellant  was  no  longer
    eligible for family reunion:

           "The solicitor's letter you have  provided  says  that  you  are
           applying to join your mother on the  basis  of  family  reunion.
           With regard to this I note that you are aged over 18 and  a  fee
           has been paid for your application. Family reunion  applications
           are gratis and for the purposes  of  Family  Reunion  under  the
           immigration rules, family  members  include  children  under  18
           only. I have therefore considered your application as the  adult
           dependent of a person with refugee status in the UK."

12.   The judge understood that two entry clearance decisions had been  made
    and that the operative decision for the purpose of this appeal was  the
    one dated 12 June 2014. However, in paragraph 21  of  the  decision  it
    seems that he failed to appreciate  that  this  was  not  a  continuing
    application from the one made in 2012 but a fresh application for entry
    clearance made on 03 March 2014.

13.   Entry Clearance Officers sometimes make fresh decisions as part of  an
    ongoing application but that will usually happen in circumstances where
    an appeal is allowed to a limited  extent.  In  this  case  the  appeal
    against the first decision to refuse entry clearance was dismissed. The
    appellant made a second application  for  entry  clearance.  Given  the
    strict age requirement it was not necessary  for  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to make specific reference to paragraphs  352A-AF  because  the
    appellant was, by the date of the second  application,  ineligible  for
    family reunion.

14.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law when  it  was  quite  clear
    that the Entry Clearance Officer had considered the terms of the  rules
    relating  to  family  reunion  and  gave  reasons  for   refusing   the
    application on the ground that the appellant was not under 18 years old
    at the date of the second application.

15.   During an informal discussion with  Ms  Nakabugo  at  the  hearing  it
    became clear that she is understandably frustrated  and  upset  by  her
    continued separation from her children. However, very  little  evidence
    was produced in support of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal to
    explain the details of her circumstances or those of  her  children  in
    Uganda.

16.   Mr Unigwe's submissions bore little relevance to  any  of  the  issues
    raised in the respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He  talked  of
    delay in the application but any delay  that  has  occurred  was  as  a
    result of the natural process of appealing a negative decision. I  note
    that Ms Nakabugo was recognised as a refugee in 2010 yet no explanation
    has been given as to why she did not apply for the children to join her
    at a much earlier stage. In support of the second application for entry
    clearance she sought to address the original reasons for  refusal  with
    DNA evidence to prove that she was the  children's  biological  mother.
    Such evidence could have been produced in support of the  first  appeal
    rather than waiting to make a second application for  entry  clearance.
    Unfortunately,  by  the  time  she  made  the  second  entry  clearance
    application her daughter was 18 years old.

17.   For the reasons given above  I  have  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law.
    The decision is set aside. It was agreed at the hearing that if I found
    an error of law it would be appropriate to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing because no findings  were  made
    by the previous judge in relation to human rights issues.

18.   It will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal to determine  all  the
    relevant issues but given  what  I  have  said  about  the  appellant's
    eligibility for family reunion at the date of  the  second  application
    for entry clearance the sponsor may want to focus  her  preparation  on
    whether, at the  date  of  the  decision,  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances outside the immigration rules that might  have  justified
    entry clearance being granted on human rights grounds. The sponsor will
    need to ensure that there is a detailed statement outlining her history
    and current circumstances as well  as  those  of  the  children.  Where
    possible the case should be supported with evidence.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 07 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


