
[pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal Numbers: OA/08484/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  OA/08485/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10 July 2013                               |On 24 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

|MILAN GURUNG                             |First Appellant |
|MILINA GURUNG                            |Second Appellant|


                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Suchak promulgated on 1 March 2013 dismissing
    their appeal against the decision of the respondent not to  grant  them
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the dependants of their mother
    who is settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. The first appellant was born on 11 October 1984; the  second  appellant
    on 8 December 1989.  Both are citizens of Nepal  and  are  brother  and
    sister.  The appellants' mother is a widow who on 23 September 2009 was
    granted indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  the
    concession offered to the widows of ex-Gurkhas, outside the Immigration
    Rules.  The appellants' father had served in the Gurkhas,  retiring  in
    1994.  He unfortunately died on 18 November 2003.

 3. Both of the appellants live in Nepal and  are  in  full-time  education
    which  is  paid  for  by  their  mother.   She  also  pays  for   their
    accommodation and all their other expenses out  of  her  wages  in  the
    United Kingdom and the widow's pension she receives  from  the  British
    Army.  It is also the appellants' case that they  lived  together  with
    their mother until her departure for  the  United  Kingdom;  that  they
    continue to live together; and, that they continue  to  have  a  family
    life with their mother. The appellants' mother maintains  contact  with
    them by Skype, email and telephone.  She has also visited them in Nepal
    in 2011.

 4. On 30 January 2012 the appellants applied for entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom to join their mother.  It is the appellants'  case  that
    they are emotionally and financially dependent on their mother; that  a
    family life still exists between them; that had their father been given
    the opportunity to emigrate to the United Kingdom upon  discharge  from
    the forces, he would have done so; and, that in all the  circumstances,
    bearing in mind the historic injustice done to the Gurkhas, it would be
    a breach of their rights pursuant to Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention to refuse to grant them entry clearance to join their mother
    in the United Kingdom.

 5. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the appellants
    did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration
    Rules; that there were no instructions to Entry Clearance  Officers  to
    consider the adult children of widows under any discretionary criteria,
    the discretionary policy regarding the adult descendants of Gurkhas not
    being applicable to the adult children of widows.  The  respondent  was
    not satisfied that there were particular bonds in the  case  of  either
    appellant such that a family life was  established  or  that  therefore
    Article 8 of the Convention was engaged; and, that even  were  there  a
    family life, any interference  arising  from  refusal  to  grant  entry
    clearance was proportionate  bearing  in  mind  the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control  and  the  fact  that  there  was  no  bar  on  the
    appellants' mother returning to Nepal.

 6. The appellants appealed against these decisions on the basis that  they
    constituted a breach of the appellants' and their  mother's  rights  to
    respect for their family and private lives.

 7. In the Entry Clearance Manager's response, the respondent submits  that
    it  was  correct  for  the  matter  not  to  be  considered  under  the
    discretionary guidance; that the appellants had provided no evidence to
    show that they were incapable of functioning without their mother; that
    the appellants were healthy adults capable  of  making  a  living,  who
    lived together in Nepal and all the factors suggested that  their  wish
    to join their mother was one of choice rather than necessity,  and  the
    evidence in support of to the applications was unexceptional.

 8. The appeals were heard by Judge  Suchak  on  20  February  2013.   Both
    parties were represented by Counsel.  The judge found that:

      i) the appellants were  adults  at  the  time  their  mother  made  an
         application for entry clearance and that she was  aware  that  this
         would leave them in Nepal; that it was 21  months  later  that  the
         appellants applied for entry clearance to join their mother and  in
         the circumstances, at the date of applications, there was no family
         life between the appellants and their mother [33];

     ii) even had  family  life  been  established,  there  was  nothing  to
         indicate that the appellants' father  would  have  settled  in  the
         United Kingdom [36], that although the sponsor stated  her  husband
         would  have  applied  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  following
         discharge from the service in 1994, there was no evidence  to  show
         that he had taken any steps to do so; and,

    iii) in the circumstances, the refusal was proportionate and  there  was
         nothing in the evidence to show that there should  be  a  departure
         from the ordinary principles  of  maintaining  immigration  control
         [36] although he noted that if a Gurkha could show that but for the
         historic injustice he would have settled in the United Kingdom at a
         time when his dependent children would have been able to  accompany
         him under the age of 18, there was a strong case in holding that it
         was proportionate to permit the adult children to join  his  family
         now [35].

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge erred:

      i) in finding that there was no family  life  between  the  appellants
         [3], failing [3(i)] to consider that  the  appellants  had  enjoyed
         family life with their mother continuously  for  their  whole  life
         before she left for the United Kingdom;  that  they  had  no  other
         close family in Nepal [ii]; and failing to give  proper  effect  to
         the decision of the Court of Appeal in Gurung & Ors v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA 8, in particular not having regard to the facts  as  a  highly
         fact-sensitive issue and in failing  to  consider  the  appropriate
         cultural context;

     ii) in  concluding  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
         appellants' father had taken any steps to  apply  to  come  to  the
         United Kingdom, as he had ignored the evidence of  his  sponsor  on
         this point which had not  been  challenged  [4;]  and,  had  failed
         properly to analyse the historic injustice, erring in stating  that
         the appellants' father had not  taken  steps  to  apply  for  entry
         clearance when there had been  no  provision  under  the  Rules  to
         permit this [4(iii)].

10. Permission to appeal against this decision on all grounds  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 5 June 2013.  In her response to
    the grant pursuant to Rule 24,  the  respondent  opposes  the  appeal,
    indicating that the  judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  made
    appropriate findings in respect of family life and dependency for which
    adequate reasons were given.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

11. Whist the judge was correct to state  [33]  that  the  appellants  were
    adults at the time of application, there is  no  indication  from  this
    that the judge considered the appellants  submissions  in  relation  to
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)
    that family life may continue despite children  attaining  the  age  of
    majority, nor is there any indication that he considered the degree  of
    emotional dependence as an addition to financial dependence  given  the
    fact that this was a highly fact-sensitive issue.  It is  unclear  from
    the determination that the judge considered adequately the question  as
    to what emotional dependence there may or may not have  been  over  and
    above the usual ties.

12. Whilst we note Mr Melvin's submission that  this  is  implicit  in  the
    judge's determination, we are not satisfied that this  issue  had  been
    addressed adequately such that the appellants could  discern  from  the
    determination why their appeals had been dismissed.

13. That error  is  not,  however,  necessarily  material;  the  judge  did
    consider what the position would be were he to have found  that  family
    life existed [34 to 35].

14. We consider that although the judge correctly asked the question as  to
    whether the appellant's father would have settled in the United Kingdom
    had he been able to do so, the judge misdirected himself in considering
    the issue of intention given the  reference  [36]  to  there  being  no
    evidence to show that the father had taken any steps to join the United
    Kingdom.  It is not the case that to succeed it must be shown that  the
    retired Gurkha took steps to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom;  indeed,
    given that there was no provision for  him  to  have  done  so  in  the
    Immigration Rules and the Human Rights Act 1998 was not in  force  when
    he was discharged, the judge failed to make an adequate finding on this
    issue.

15. We note Mr Melvin's submission that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
    concluded, on the basis of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  either
    that there was family life or that the appellants' father  had  had  an
    intention to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.  We  do  not  accept  that
    proposition.  As was noted in Ghising and Gurung & Ors  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA 8 whether family life exists is a highly fact-sensitive issue, and
    there is also a range of possible decisions a  judge  could  reasonably
    have come concerning the father's intention  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom..

16. For all these reasons, we consider that the  errors  disclosed  in  the
    determination are material in that they were capable of  affecting  the
    outcome of the  decision.   We  therefore  announced  that  to  be  our
    decision and that we would re-make the decision.

Re-making the Decision

17. At the request of Mr Ahmed, we heard further evidence from the sponsor,
    who gave evidence through the court interpreter.  We also had before us
    an additional bundle, containing an additional witness  statement  from
    her, produced by the appellants.

18. Ms Gurung adopted her witness statements and was  cross-examined.   She
    said at the time of the application the appellants were living together
    in Kathmandu, which they do even when at  university.   She  said  that
    they were living in Kathmandu when she had come to the  United  Kingdom
    in 2010 and she said that she had lived  at  the  family  home  in  the
    village.  She then said that she had in fact lived  in  Kathmandu  from
    1991, prior to that they had been in Hong Kong.  She then said that the
    family had all been living together in the same place  in  2010  before
    they came to the United Kingdom.

19. The sponsor said that her son had applied to join the British  Army  in
    2002.  She said that she did not know if he wanted to join the  British
    Army and that was entirely up to him.  She said that  if  the  children
    wished to, they would continue to study in the United Kingdom  and  she
    did not think her son would join the army and he would  like  to  study
    further.  She said that was what she would prefer.

20. The sponsor said that the children were physically fit and do not  need
    any help with special needs.

21. The sponsor said that after her husband had been discharged in 1994  he
    had gone to Hong Kong where he had worked for eighteen months and  then
    returned to work as  a  security  guard  at  the  American  Embassy  in
    Kathmandu, a job he had been doing when he died.

22. The sponsor said that her husband would have applied  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom had he been allowed to do so  when  he  was  discharged,
    adding that he would have done so had he been offered  the  opportunity
    and that was why she had come to the United Kingdom.  She said  it  was
    in 2007 when she found out she could come here;  her  husband  had  not
    made any application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  in  any
    capacity after he had been discharged.

23. The sponsor was asked what relatives she had in Nepal at  the  time  of
    application.  She said just the two children and, asked again, that she
    was sure that this was the case.  On further questioning she  confirmed
    that she has two brothers and two sisters living in Nepal, as  well  as
    some distant relations in the Kathmandu Valley.  She said that  one  of
    her sisters lives in Khotan, up in the hills,  and  both  her  brothers
    live in the hills also.  Asked about her children's  mention  of  other
    relatives, she said that these were distant  relations  who  were  also
    living far away, adding that these were neighbours, it being normal  to
    refer to neighbours as relations,  particularly  if  they  were  older.
    After stating that the distant relatives lived in the Kathmandu Valley,
    she said that they were not in fact neighbours but were descended  from
    the same great-grandfather as her husband.

24. The sponsor said that her daughter wished to study if she  entered  the
    United Kingdom and would, if necessary, go away to study at  university
    in which case she would go to live with her and get work there.

25. In re-examination the sponsor confirmed that one of her  sisters  lived
    several days' journey from Kathmandu, the other six hours away by  bus.
    Then she said her brothers lived about five hours away.  She said  that
    her children had little contact with their aunts  and  uncles,  meeting
    once a year at a festival in an uncle's village.  She said her brothers
    and sisters were not supporting the children financially and had  their
    own children.  She said that they rarely had contact with the relatives
    in the Kathmandu Valley, only going to visit on, for example, the  case
    of someone's death.  She said she was  the  only  one  who  gives  them
    emotional and financial support.

26. The sponsor said that  she  knew  her  husband  would  have  taken  the
    opportunity to come to the United Kingdom had it been open  to  him  as
    they used to talk about it, but she did not recall any of the dates  as
    it occurred after his discharge  in  1994.   She  said  that  they  had
    discussed this when he had retired as their finances were not that good
    and they had discussed going abroad, possibly for a better opportunity,
    and to be financially secure.  She said that  the  United  Kingdom  had
    been mentioned as he had been here some six times while serving in  the
    army and he liked this country.

27. In response to our questions the sponsor said that  in  2010  when  she
    left Kathmandu she had been living in a rented house where her children
    had continued to live.  Asked why she had said that  before  coming  to
    the United Kingdom she had lived in the family house  in  the  village,
    she said that this was a long time ago.  The sponsor  said  that  there
    were people living in the house in the village but  this  was  old  and
    they were unable to charge rent for it.

28. The sponsor said that after she had gone to visit her children in 2011,
    she had moved them to a better place and they still lived in  the  same
    place now.

29. The sponsor said that she would work hard and do  overtime  to  finance
    her children's studies even though they  might  have  to  pay  overseas
    student fees if they came to the United Kingdom; she had a  rough  idea
    of what this would be.

30. Mr Melvin submitted that there was on the facts at the date of decision
    no family life between the appellants and their mother, there being  no
    signs of emotional dependency over and above normal ties.  He submitted
    also that the evidence from the sponsor was vague and at odds with what
    was said in the application forms and what the appellants had  said  as
    to the relatives that they had in Nepal.  He submitted that the sponsor
    was willing to bend the truth to enhance the claim  that  the  children
    were emotionally dependent on her.

31. Mr Melvin submitted further that there was no real  evidence  that  the
    sponsor's husband had intended to come to the United  Kingdom  and  the
    decision was proportionate.

32. In reply, Mr Ahmed  submitted  that  we  should  accept  the  sponsor's
    evidence in all its aspects; that the family unit had existed prior  to
    the sponsor's departure to the United Kingdom and had not  subsequently
    been broken.  He submitted that there were  no  other  members  of  the
    family on whom they could depend  and  the  sponsor  had  continued  to
    assist them financially and emotionally.  He asked us to note that  the
    appellants were still in full-time  education,  and  it  had  not  been
    suggested that they had any other work or income.

33. Mr Ahmed submitted that the sponsor's evidence was not  vague  and  her
    evidence was that her husband had served here six times, which was  not
    in dispute, and had clearly formed an intention to come here,  although
    he accepted that given the impossibility of doing so, this was  only  a
    desire or wish.  He submitted that an inference could fairly  be  drawn
    from the evidence that the sponsor's husband would  have  settled  here
    had he been able to do so.

34. In assessing whether family life has continued  to  exist  between  the
    appellants and their mother, despite their having reached  the  age  of
    majority, we proceed on the basis that this is a highly  fact-sensitive
    issue as noted both in Gurung & Ors and Ghising .

35. We consider that the learning on this  issue  establishes  that  family
    life exists between a parent and children from birth and  will  usually
    continue until the child reaches the age of 18.  We  accept  also  that
    achieving that age does not in itself necessarily mean that family life
    ceases to exist,  particularly  where  the  family  continues  to  live
    together, and where the individual has not  yet  established  a  family
    with another person.

36. We have considered carefully  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellants as well as the other evidence led before us.

37. The evidence of the appellants is limited.  While a statement from both
    was submitted with the application, no witness statement from either of
    them was produced for the appeal before  Judge  Suchak  or  the  appeal
    before us, although there were statements from their mother in  respect
    of both hearings.

38. The statement in support of the application, dated 22 January 2012, was
    drafted in the names of both appellants.  It was  recorded  that  their
    father passed away, since when their mother has  been  responsible  for
    education fees, flat rent and extra expenses.  It was said also,  "This
    is the first time  that  we  three  have  lived  separately  after  our
    father's death so we wish to join our mother as soon as possible".   It
    was said also, presumably by the first appellant,  that  he  wished  to
    join the  British  Army  and  that  they  were  seeking  to  apply  for
    settlement not only to join their mother but to get a better  education
    and wider opportunities.  Then details of the  appellants'  educational
    history were set  out,  it  appearing  that  the  first  appellant  was
    studying a Bachelor's Degree in Business Studies; the second  appellant
    studying for a Bachelor's Degree in Interior Design.

39. In their application forms [part 3] the first appellant stated that  he
    and his sister had lived at the same  address  for  approximately  five
    years and under section 8.5.2, that he lived on  campus  during  school
    and in form VAF4A, it was stated that the  first  appellant's  mother's
    sister lived in Nepal, she being the only other family member  who  was
    declared.  The second appellant's application forms contained identical
    information.

40. In her initial statement dated 7 February 2013 the sponsor stated  [18]
    that the children did not lead independent lives and relied totally  on
    her for support academic, accommodation, educational  matters  and  all
    other matters.  She also stated [19]  that  she  still  had  a  lot  of
    responsibility towards the children and that  without  that  help  they
    would not be able to deal with matters independently.  She stated  that
    she paid for their accommodation and school fees [21] and [25] that her
    children did not have any relatives in Nepal.

41. In her second witness statement, dated 28 June 2013, the sponsor stated
    that prior to departure, she arranged  for  her  children  to  live  in
    rented accommodation which  was  also  funded  by  her  [5],  that  her
    children were dependent on her and that this had not changed [7],  that
    without  her  support  they  were  not  able  to  deal   with   matters
    independently [8] and that they did not have  any  close  relatives  in
    Nepal [10].  She stated, "That they are left in Nepal  under  the  most
    dire and vulnerable conditions  which  are  beyond  their  capacity  to
    endure."  [10].

42. In addition, she stated [13] that if her late husband would  have  been
    granted ILR prior to 1 July 1997 she would have  been  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom with all her family but  little  about  any  discussions
    held or previous intention to come to the United Kingdom.

43. We are concerned that there  are  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence of the sponsor and the appellants.  The sponsor was  asked  if
    she had any close relatives in Nepal and said no.  She  then  confirmed
    that answer, saying she was sure.  She  then  said  that  she  had  two
    brothers and two sisters.  Only when pressed did she  accept  that  she
    did in fact have  distant  relatives  of  her  husband  living  in  the
    Kathmandu Valley, having stated that these were in effect neighbours.

44. We note with concern that the appellants mentioned  only  one  aunt  in
    their application forms whereas it now transpires that  they  have  two
    aunts and two uncles, blood relations of their mother, living in Nepal.
     Further, the evidence of the sponsor was that they went  to  celebrate
    festivals with her brothers.

45. This issue is not peripheral.  It forms part of the case that they have
    no-one else to turn to in Nepal and it is put forward as  an  indicator
    as to why the family life claimed to exist between the sponsor and  the
    appellants is so strong.

46. We would note with concern also the sponsor's clear evidence  that  she
    was living in the family village  before  she  left  Nepal.   She  did,
    however, later correct this but did not explain adequately her  earlier
    answer.

47. The sponsor's evidence is also that when she left Nepal,  she  arranged
    for the appellants to continue living in the house they had until  then
    rented.  She then said that in 2011  she  arranged  for  them  to  move
    somewhere else, yet in their application forms  the  appellants  stated
    that they had lived in the same place for approximately five years.

48. The  appellants  and  the  sponsor  have  consistently  said  that  the
    appellants lived in hostel accommodation during  term  time,  yet  they
    also said that they had not lived separately from their mother  before,
    which is inconsistent. We find that this  is  an  indication  that  the
    appellants and the sponsor are seeking to exaggerate  the  strength  of
    their relationship.

49. Mr Melvin submitted that the sponsor was  vague  when  giving  evidence
    about what she and her husband wished to do upon his discharge from the
    British Armed Forces. It would have been difficult at this distance  in
    time to  consider  how  they  would  have  reacted  to  a  hypothetical
    situation in which, on the basis of what they knew at  the  time,  they
    would not be allowed to come to the United Kingdom.  Nonetheless,  what
    became clear from the sponsor's evidence was that she and  her  husband
    wished  to  go  somewhere  else  abroad  to  improve  their   financial
    situation.  We do not accept that this was a wish to go to  the  United
    Kingdom, rather it was a wish to go somewhere else where they would  be
    more financially secure.

50. We consider that in her recent witness statement the sponsor has sought
    significantly to exaggerate the hardships in which the appellants  find
    themselves [10].  Given that they are  supported  financially,  to  the
    extent that they do  not  have  to  work,  and  are  supported  through
    university, we  consider  that  this  is  a  significant  exaggeration,
    casting doubt on the evidence of emotional dependence.

51. We consider that the above leads inevitably to a  conclusion  that  the
    sponsor and the appellants have simply lied about which relatives  they
    have in Nepal, and that the sponsor has lied about the circumstances in
    which her children live.  There is, we find, a  consistent  pattern  of
    seeking to show that the relationship between the sponsor and her adult
    children is stronger than it is by lying about the existence  of  other
    relatives in Nepal, thus emphasising  their  interdependence,  and,  in
    seeking to show that they have always lived in the same household, when
    they  have  not,  not  least  as  the  appellants   lived   in   hostel
    accommodation when studying.

52. We consider that this casts significant and substantial doubts  on  the
    claim that, as at the  date  of  decision,  over  and  above  financial
    dependence, there existed a family  life  between  the  appellants  and
    their mother. It is for the appellants to show that they have a  family
    life  with  their  mother,  and  we  find  that,  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities, they have not  done  so.  We  take  the  view  that  the
    financial assistance provided by the sponsor  and such communication as
    has taken place between the sponsor and the appellants is  evidence  of
    no more than the usual emotional ties one would expect to find  between
    a mother and her adult children, in circumstances where she  has  means
    and they do not.

53. We do not accept that there still existed at the  date  of  decision  a
    family life between the appellants who are 27 and 22 and their  mother.
    Although the biological relationship is not in doubt, we do not  accept
    that we have been told the truth about the emotional  nature  of  their
    relationship.

54. Similarly, we do not accept given our concerns  about  the  appellants'
    and sponsor's evidence, that it was ever her or her husband's  wish  to
    settle in the United Kingdom until the fortunate opportunity  arose  in
    2007.

55. Accordingly, having had regard to the relevant case  law,  we  consider
    that as no family life existed between the appellants and  the  sponsor
    while she has been in the United Kingdom, the  refusal  to  grant  them
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom did not engage Article 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  Accordingly, we dismiss the  appeals  on  all
    grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error of law and we set it aside.

 2. We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeals on all grounds.



Signed                                             Date 24th July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


