

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/08175/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 2nd July 2014
                             On 3rd July 2014
Prepared 2nd July 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               NOSHEEN SAQUIB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr R Ashan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for entry clearance to the UK as a spouse which
   was refused. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Graham on the 29th of November 2013 in Birmingham. The appeal was
   dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 13th of December 2013.

2. In dismissing the appeal the Judge found that the evidence to show a
   subsisting relationship was inadequate and phone evidence was rejected.
   At paragraph 13 the Judge considered the Sponsor's claimed recent trip to
   Pakistan to see the Appellant, it was pre-decision, and found that he had
   not provided evidence to show that such a visit had taken place. The
   appeal was dismissed with the Judge finding that the marriage was not
   subsisting.

3. The application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal stated
   that the Tribunal had been served with copies of the Sponsor's passport
   and flight tickets before the hearing and this was confirmed by the
   return of those documents by the Tribunal after the hearing. It was an
   error for the Judge not to have considered them given the findings in
   paragraph 13.

4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney
   on the 9th of April who noted that the First-tier Tribunal file contained
   copies of the documents referred to in the application and that it was
   arguable that the Judge erred in failing to take account of all the
   evidence before her.

5. The rule 24 response from the Secretary of State assert that the
   documents were received by the Tribunal after the hearing. In the file
   that I have there are copies of the passport, with stamps for the early
   2013 visit and copies of the flight ticket and documentation, date
   stamped the 27th of March 2013.

6. It is not clear why the Appellant or his representative did not refer to
   what was submitted with the Notice and Grounds of Appeal to the First-
   tier Tribunal nor is it clear how it was overlooked by the Judge. In the
   circumstances I am bound to find that the determination contains an error
   of law as it appears that significant relevant evidence was not
   considered. In the circumstances I will set aside the determination and
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all issues.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for
re-hearing on all issues.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award and
leave the matter for the First-tier Tribunal to consider.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 2nd July 2014


