
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08881/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st June 2015 and Determined on the papers |On 12th August 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            JUAN RAMON MOLA SOTO
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Determined on the Papers

Representation: at the hearing of 1st June 2015

For the Appellant:     Mrs Wiechers and Ms M Tyrrell
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Venezuela born on 31st August 1948 and he
    applied for admission to the United Kingdom as a family  member  of  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK, namely his wife,  (the
    sponsor).  On 4th July 2014 the respondent refused the application with
    reference to Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) as no passport  or  evidence  of
    marriage was provided.

 2. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan, who  allowed
    the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  on
    the basis that the decision was perverse if not irrational.   An  error
    of law was found in a decision promulgated on 1st June 2015 because  of
    a contradiction within the findings.  In order to remake  the  decision
    further evidence was requested and I directed that the matter be  dealt
    with on the papers. I have received no objection from the appellant  or
    respondent to the matter being determined on that basis.

 4. Ms Fujiwala indicated  at  the  hearing  on  1st  June  2015  that  the
    following documentation would be required:

      i)  Further translated details  of  Mrs  Wiechers  de  Mola's  pension
      income from Venezuela.

      ii)  Comprehensive sickness insurance

      iii) Evidence of the home ownership by  the  daughter,  Maria  Eugenia
      Wiechers, such as mortgage or Land Registry documents

      iv)   Income   details   for   Maria   Eugenia   Wiechers   such    as
      payslips/P60/letter of contract from BG Group Ltd.

 5. For the purposes of remaking the decision  I  accept  that  a  marriage
    certificate was provided and that the appellant  and  Mrs  Wiechers  de
    Mola, who is a German and  EEA national, are married.  As Mrs Wiechers,
    the EEA national, had remained in the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than
    three months I have applied Regulation 6 and considered whether she was
    exercising her treaty rights in accordance with the EEA Regulations  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations (Regulation 12).  Although there is
    an initial right of residence under Regulation 13 this is for a  period
    not exceeding 3 months. Following this period, an EEA national, that is
    the spouse, must show that she is a  qualified  person,  thus  a  self-
    sufficient person in accordance with Regulations 4 and  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 6. Regulation 6 specifies that a self sufficient person means a person who
    has

    (i)  sufficient  resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social
    assistance  system  of  the    United  Kingdom  during  his  period  of
    residence

    and

    (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom

 7. Evidential requirements are not restricted  by  Section  85(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Further to  Boodhoo  and
    another (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 evidence  which
    is post decision may be taken into account.

 8. The documents requested by the Secretary of State were indeed  produced
    by the appellant's sponsor wife.  This  included  confirmation  of  her
    pension income, a further declaration of  financial  and  accommodation
    support from  Ms  M  Tyrrell,  Mrs  Wiechers',  the  EEA  national  and
    appellant's daughter, together with Ms  Tyrrell's  P60  confirming  her
    income of [           ] per annum and confirmation of ownership by Ms M
    Tyrell of property which housed the sponsor.  Also produced  was  valid
    and current comprehensive sickness  insurance  for  Mrs  Wiechers,  the
    sponsor.

 9. I am satisfied under Regulations 6 and 7 of the  EEA  Regulations  that
    the EEA national is indeed  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom and  that  she  is  the  appellant's  wife  and  therefore  the
    appellant is a family member.  The  appellant  has  satisfied  the  EEA
    Regulations such that he should be admitted to the United Kingdom.

10. The appellant's appeal is allowed outright.

Notice of Appeal

Appeal Allowed



Signed                                             Date 6th August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


 Fee Award

In the light of the decision to re-make the decision in the appeal,  I  have
considered whether to make a fee award (rule 23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). I have had regard to the  Joint
Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards  in  Immigration  Appeals  (December
2011). I make no award as although the appellant has been successful in  his
appeal the relevant paperwork was not produced until the hearing.





