


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08781/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 17 November 2017                 |On: 20 November 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              eric george bell
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, instructed by Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 27 April  1973,  applied  for
   entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a partner under Appendix  FM  of
   the immigration rules. He has been given permission to appeal against the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse his application.

2. The appellant initially sought to enter the UK in November 2001  but  was
   refused entry, granted temporary admission for a day  and  absconded.  He
   subsequently sought leave to remain outside the immigration rules but was
   refused and was removed from the UK on 4 November 2004.  He  applied  for
   entry clearance in April 2005 on the basis  of  his  marriage,  but  that
   application was refused on  23  June  2005  as  the  respondent  was  not
   satisfied that he would be maintained and accommodated  without  recourse
   to public funds and was not satisfied that his relationship with his wife
   was genuine and subsisting  and  that  they  intended  to  live  together
   permanently. The appellant sought unsuccessfully to appeal that  decision
   in July 2006. He then applied for entry clearance as a visitor,  but  was
   refused in July 2007.


3. The appellant applied for entry clearance again as  a  visitor  but  that
   application was also refused, on 11 February 2008, on the grounds that it
   was not accepted that he was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor, it was
   not accepted that he would be adequately maintained and  accommodated  in
   the UK without recourse to public funds and it was not accepted  that  he
   was able to meet the costs of his return  journey.  His  application  was
   refused under paragraph 41 of HC 395 as well as under  paragraph  320(11)
   on the grounds that he had failed to observe the time limit or conditions
   attached to a previous grant of leave to enter.  The  appellant  appealed
   against that decision but his appeal was  dismissed  on  5  August  2008,
   although the Tribunal found that paragraph 320(11) did not  apply  as  he
   had not previously been granted leave to enter or  remain  and  therefore
   could not have failed to observe any time limit or condition attached  to
   such leave.

4. On 28 January 2015 the appellant applied again for  entry  clearance,  to
   settle with his wife. His application was considered under paragraph  EC-
   P.1.1 of Appendix FM and paragraph 320(11) of the immigration  rules  and
   was refused on 20 April 2015. In refusing the application the  respondent
   noted the appellant's immigration  history  and  the  fact  that  he  had
   admitted in an interview previously to working illegally in the  UK.  The
   respondent noted that it was mentioned by the ECO in the  previous  visit
   visa refusal, which was upheld on appeal, that the appellant had lied  to
   the immigration authorities when seeking  leave  to  remain  outside  the
   rules in order  to  stay  in  the  UK.  The  ECO  also  referred  to  the
   Immigration Judge having found that the appellant exercised deception  in
   the past with regard to immigration matters and that his wife  was  aware
   of his attempts to deceive. The respondent was not, in the circumstances,
   prepared  to  exercise  discretion  and  refused  the  application  under
   paragraph 320(11) of HC 395. The application was accordingly  refused  on
   suitability grounds, under EC-P.1.1(c) with reference to S-EC2.5(b).  The
   respondent also referred to the ECO not being satisfied,  in  a  previous
   refusal of entry clearance, that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
   wife was genuine and subsisting and that they  intended  living  together
   permanently. The respondent noted  that  no  further  evidence  had  been
   produced showing contact between the appellant and his wife and  children
   and no evidence had been produced to show that they had visited him.  The
   respondent was therefore not satisfied that the appellant's  relationship
   was genuine and subsisting and that  he  and  his  wife  intended  living
   together permanently and refused the application under  EC-P.1.1(d)  with
   reference to E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10. Finally the respondent was not satisfied
   that the appellant met the  financial  requirements  of  the  immigration
   rules and refused the application under EC-P.1.1(d) with reference to  E-
   ECP.3.1. The respondent was satisfied that the decision  did  not  breach
   the appellant's Article 8 human rights.


5. The  appellant's  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Lawrence on 9 December  2016.  The  appellant's  wife  and  her  daughter
   attended the hearing and gave evidence before the judge. The judge  found
   that the provisions of paragraph 320(11) did apply and were  engaged  and
   he found that the appellant could not meet the  suitability  requirements
   of Appendix FM of the immigration  rules.  With  regard  to  whether  the
   appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting the judge noted that  his
   wife had visited him several times and had given birth to three  children
   to him, in 2005, 2007 and 2011. As to the financial requirements  of  the
   rules the judge noted that the relevant savings were in an account in the
   joint names of the  appellant's  wife  and  her  daughter  and  that  her
   daughter gave evidence that she  was  free  to  use  the  money  for  any
   purpose. The judge considered that unless and until the funds were in the
   sponsor's sole name he could not find that she was at liberty to use them
   for her own benefit. The judge noted the sponsor's evidence that she  was
   now working and she produced payslips but he considered that that  was  a
   new matter which he was unable to take into account. The judge found that
   the appellant had been unable to demonstrate any compelling circumstances
   outside the immigration rules. There were no insurmountable obstacles  to
   family life continuing in Jamaica. He  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
   immigration rules as well as on wider Article 8 grounds.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  by  the  appellant
   on the following grounds: that  there  was  procedural  irregularity  and
   unfairness in the judge's decision on paragraph 320(11)  given  that  the
   respondent  had  indicated  that  the   refusal   on   that   basis   was
   unsustainable,  and  that  had  impacted  on  the  judge's  findings   on
   suitability; that the judge had failed to make any finding as to  whether
   the appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting; that it was not open
   to the judge to find that the funds had to be held in the  sponsor's  own
   name when her daughter had given evidence that  they  were  available  to
   her; that the judge had failed to consider Article 8 outside  the  rules;
   and that the judge had failed to make any proper assessment of  the  best
   interests of the children.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on 8 September 2017 on all grounds.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  on  the  error  of
   law.


9. I indicated to Mr Melvin that  I  was  particularly  concerned  with  the
   judge's findings at [7]. It appears that there was a  concession  by  the
   respondent that paragraph 320(11) could not apply in  the  circumstances,
   yet the judge went on to find that paragraph 320(11)  did  apply  without
   giving any indication of his intention not  to  follow  the  respondent's
   concession and thus without  giving  the  appellant  any  opportunity  to
   respond. Furthermore, that issue then led the judge to make the  findings
   that he did on the suitability requirements under Appendix FM. It  seemed
   to me that that was a matter of procedural unfairness.


10. Mr Melvin agreed with that, but he asked me to find that  the  appellant
   could not have succeeded in any event as he could not meet the  financial
   requirements of the immigration rules and could  not  have  succeeded  in
   demonstrating  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the rules on wider Article 8 grounds. Mr  Adophy  submitted  that
   the appellant could succeed under the  immigration  rules  as  there  was
   evidence that he could meet the financial requirements on  the  basis  of
   the savings which the sponsor's daughter had agreed could be used by  the
   sponsor. He also submitted that there were  compelling  circumstances  on
   wider Article 8 grounds outside the rules and that the judge  had  failed
   to consider the best interests of the children.


11. In light of the procedural unfairness arising from the judge's  decision
   on paragraph 320(11), which in turn infected his findings on  suitability
   under Appendix FM, I set aside his decision in that respect. Both parties
   were satisfied for the decision to be re-made on the evidence  before  me
   without a further hearing. I have  therefore  proceeded  to  re-make  the
   decision and I do so on the basis of  the  respondent's  concession  that
   paragraph 320(11) did not apply and, furthermore,  that  the  suitability
   provisions in S-EC2.5(b) do not apply to the appellant.


Consideration and Findings


12. Although the judge did not make a clear finding at [10], it seems to  me
   that he accepted that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
   between the appellant and the sponsor. The respondent's Rule 24  response
   at [4] accepted that that was his finding. On the basis of  the  evidence
   of the sponsor's visits to Jamaica and  the  birth  certificates  of  the
   couple's three children I accept that there is a genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship.


13. However I am in agreement with Mr Melvin that the  appellant  could  not
   meet the financial requirements of the immigration rules in paragraph  E-
   ECP.3.1 and E-ECP.3.2. Irrespective of the oral evidence of the sponsor's
   daughter, that the funds in the joint  account  were  available  for  the
   sponsor to use as she pleased, the fact is that the requirements  of  the
   immigration rules at Appendix FM-SE relating to  specified  evidence,  as
   referred to in the refusal decision, could not be met. Not only were  the
   funds not in the sponsor's own name, as required  in  Appendix  FM-SE  A1
   1(iii), but the bank statement produced did not show that the  funds  had
   been held for six months prior to  the  application,  as  required  under
   Appendix FM-SE A1 11(c).


14. Turning to Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules  I  am  also  in
   agreement with Mr Melvin that the appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate
   compelling circumstances justifying  a  grant  of  entry  clearance.  The
   appellant is a person who cannot meet the requirements of the immigration
   rules, who previously absconded when on temporary admission in the UK and
   who then lied to the immigration authorities when seeking leave to remain
   outside the immigration rules. His marriage to the sponsor took place  at
   a time when he was in the UK  unlawfully.  There  are  therefore  weighty
   public  interest  considerations  militating  against  him  in  assessing
   proportionality, albeit it is, of course, relevant to note that that  was
   several years prior to the current application and decision.


15. In  favour  of  the  appellant,  the  evidence  available  is  extremely
   limited. It includes evidence of the sponsor's annual visits  to  Jamaica
   since his departure in November 2004, a few  photographs  of  the  family
   together and letters from the children. The children, aged 9, 7 and 3  at
   the time  of  the  respondent's  decision,  have  never  lived  with  the
   appellant and were all born after he left the UK. Whilst  I  accept  that
   the best interests of the children may well be for them to live  together
   with both their parents, and that their  best  interests  are  a  primary
   consideration, they are  not  the  sole  and  determinative  factor.  The
   evidence of the appellant's relationship with his children  is  extremely
   limited, consisting only of their letters and a few photographs. As Judge
   Lawrence said at [17], whilst the children are British citizens, there is
   no evidence to show that it would be unreasonable for  them  to  move  to
   Jamaica with their mother if the family wanted to be  together,  although
   of course that is a matter of choice for the  family.  The  children  are
   young enough to adapt to life in Jamaica and there is no evidence  before
   me to show that they could not do so or that their ties to  the  UK  were
   such that it would be unreasonable to expect them to do so. Alternatively
   the sponsor and the children could remain in the UK and continue to visit
   the appellant in Jamaica as previously, so maintaining  the  status  quo.
   The appellant's step-daughter is now an adult and her family life ties to
   him are more tenuous. She can choose to join  the  appellant  in  Jamaica
   with her family or she can remain in the UK.

16. A final and relevant consideration in assessing proportionality is  that
   it is open to the appellant to make a fresh application showing  that  he
   is now able to meet the requirements of the immigration rules,  supported
   by proper evidence of his wife's access  to  savings  held  in  her  bank
   account, or proper evidence of third party support, or  evidence  of  his
   wife's ability to support him through her income from employment.


17. For all of these  reasons  I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has
   demonstrated  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of   entry
   clearance outside the immigration rules. I  find  that  the  respondent's
   decision was entirely proportionate and did not  breach  the  appellant's
   right under Article 8.


DECISION

18. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision  and  re-
   make it by dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.





Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  17 November
2017

