
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08710/2012




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th July 2013                                |On 11th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                            Mrs nuna abdi hussen
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    the entry clearance officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M S Patel, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Somalia who was born on the  1st  February
   2012. She appeals with permission from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
   Caswell), which dismissed her appeal against the respondent's decision to
   refuse her application for entry clearance as the  spouse  of  Mr  Ismail
   Kulane.

2. The respondent originally refused entry clearance  on  grounds  that  the
   appellant had not demonstrated that she met either the  English  language
   or the maintenance and accommodation requirements of paragraph 281 of the
   Immigration Rules. However, Judge Caswell was satisfied on a  balance  of
   probabilities  that  the  appellant   had   met   the   maintenance   and
   accommodation requirements.

3. It was (and is) the appellant's  case  that  she  is  exempted  from  the
   English language requirement of the Immigration Rules because there is no
   testing centre in her country of origin. Judge Caswell dealt with this at
   paragraphs 11 and 12 of her determination -

    11. However, on the issue of  the  English  language  requirement,  the
       evidence before me does not support the Appellant's contention  that
       she was exempt from this. It is correct that Somalia is named as  an
       exempt country, and I am prepared to accept that there is no British
       High Commission in Somalia from which an application could be  made.
       However, the UKBA guidance produced by the Appellant states that "If
       you are a long-term resident of a country with no test  centre,  and
       you are applying from that country for a visa as a partner, your are
       exempt ... The list of countries where no test centre  is  available
       is subject to change, and currently includes ... Somalia".

    12 It is accepted that the Appellant did not apply  from  Somalia,  but
       from Kenya (and indeed she had been resident in Kenya for some  time
       before she made her application). Mr Hans asks me to find  that  the
       fact that all Somalis would have  to  apply  outside  their  country
       means that I should read this guidance as meaning that the Appellant
       is still exempt. However, I do not accept that argument.  The  point
       of the guidance is to exempt those who are applying  from  countries
       where there is no test centre,  and  therefore  where  it  would  be
       unfair to expect them to show they meet the  requirement  by  taking
       the test. It is not to allow persons from certain countries to  have
       more favourable countries to have  more  favourable  treatment  than
       others when it comes to meeting the  English  language  requirements
       for entry to the UK.

4. Mr Patel began his submissions by re-emphasising the guidance  quoted  by
   the judge at paragraph 11 of her determination, and submitted  that  this
   covered all those who were ordinarily resident in an exempt country  such
   as Somalia. He also produced evidence that there are currently a total of
   14 countries without British consular facilities. Some of those countries
   also appear on the list of 30 countries that are without English language
   testing centres and whose long-term residents are thus  exempt  from  the
   English language requirement of the Immigration Rules. That  evidence  is
   helpful because it casts light upon the rationale that  lies  behind  the
   exempting long-term residents of certain countries. Thus, where a  person
   is able and decides to apply for entry clearance in the country of  which
   he is a long-term resident it would be clearly unreasonable to expect him
   to travel to another country simply in order to sit an  English  language
   test. However, the position is otherwise where a person is either  unable
   or decides for his own reasons  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  from  a
   country where he can conveniently also sit  the  English  language  test.
   Thus, as the guidance makes plain, the applicant must  (i)  have  been  a
   long-term resident of a country where there is no English  language  test
   centre and (ii) have applied for entry clearance from that country.

5. It is certainly arguable that in the  appellant  met  the  first  of  the
   above conditions even  though,  as  the  judge  observed,  she  had  been
   residing in Kenya for some time when she made her  application.  However,
   it is beyond debate that the appellant did not meet the second  condition
   because she did not apply for entry clearance from  Somalia.  Thus,  once
   the appellant had taken the trouble to travel to Kenya in order  to  take
   advantage of the British consular facilities that were available in  that
   country, it was reasonable to expect her also to take the opportunity  of
   sitting the English language test at one of the testing centres that  are
   available in the country. It is therefore  clear  that  the  respondent's
   decision was in accordance with  Immigration  Rules  and  the  judge  was
   legally bound to find that this was so.

6. Mr Patel also raised the issue of Article 8. This had been raised in  the
   grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and it was thus  technically
   incorrect for the judge to suggest otherwise in  the  first  sentence  of
   paragraph 14 of her determination. It may of course be that the judge had
   intended merely to indicate that it was not an  argument  that  had  been
   pursued at the hearing. Be that as it may, the judge nevertheless went on
   to consider it. As Mr Patel was unable to  point  to  any  fault  in  the
   judge's reasoning in respect thereof it follows that any failure  by  her
   to appreciate that the appellant had raised Article 8 in his  grounds  of
   appeal is not such as to justify setting aside her determination.

Decision

7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an error  of  law  such  as  to  set
   aside its determination and the appeal is therefore dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
