
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/08186/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2017                            |On 06 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              Saad Khamis Zadeh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Ozoran Turkan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the error of law decision promulgated on 4  April  2017,  the
    hearing was resumed for the decision to be remade.


 2. I heard oral evidence from the Sponsor.  Both representatives made oral
    submissions following which I reserved my decision.


 3. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle, the
    Appellant's bundle  which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (255
    pages), and the Appendix to this bundle provided for this hearing  (107
    pages).  I have also taken into account  photographs  provided  by  the
    Appellant (numbered 1 to 13).


The Respondent's decision


 4. The Respondent refused the application in the notice of decision  dated
    28 April 2015.  In summary, the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the
    relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  was  genuine   and
    subsisting, or that they intended to live together permanently  in  the
    UK.  The photographs provided showed the Appellant and Sponsor together
    on only four occasions, two of  which  were  directly  related  to  the
    wedding.  The Sponsor only stayed in Iran for two months  during  which
    period the Appellant met and married him.   Evidence  of  contact  over
    Tango, Viber and Whatsapp had been provided, but they did  not  confirm
    that the people engaged in the conversations  were  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor.  The Respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor enjoyed the level of contact claimed.


 5. The  Respondent  also  refused  the  application  under  the  financial
    requirements.  The Appellant had not provided an employer's letter  for
    the Sponsor.


 6. The Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM") reviewed the decision  on  21  July
    2015.  No new evidence had been submitted in support of the  appeal  or
    to address issues raised in the  notice  of  refusal.   The  Respondent
    considered the application under Article 8 ECHR.  There was no evidence
    that the Appellant and Sponsor would not be able to  live  together  in
    Iran.  It was not unreasonable to expect the Sponsor to return  to  his
    country of origin.  The maintenance of  effective  immigration  control
    was important especially in cases where the Appellant had  been  unable
    to satisfy the requirements of  a  legitimate  and  proper  immigration
    rule.


Burden of proof


 7. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show that the Respondent's
    decision is a breach of her rights to a family and private  life  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.


Decision and reasons

  8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr. Burrett stated that the Sponsor would
     need an interpreter.  However, no interpreter had been requested by the
     Appellant's representatives.  Mr. Burrett had  not  requested  that  an
     interpreter be present for this resumed hearing at  the  error  of  law
     hearing on 23 March 2017.  The Sponsor said that he would  be  able  to
     give evidence in English.  I said that I would proceed to hear evidence
     from the Sponsor until and unless any problem with understanding arose.
      The Sponsor had no problem understanding the questions put to him, and
     neither he nor Mr. Burrett raised this as an issue.


 9. I found the Sponsor to be an honest witness who answered all  questions
    put to him and was not  evasive.   I  find  that  I  can  rely  on  his
    evidence.


10. At the outset of the hearing, having considered the Appellant's  bundle
    which had not been on the Tribunal file for  the  previous  hearing,  I
    expressed my surprise that there was no  evidence  to  corroborate  the
    claim made by Mr. Burrett at the error of law hearing that this was the
    second  entry  clearance  application  made  by  the  Appellant.    The
    chronology is set out on page 1 of the bundle and there is no reference
    to a previous application.  I expressed my  dissatisfaction  at  having
    been told by Mr. Burrett in submissions at the  error  of  law  hearing
    that this was the  second  entry  clearance  application  made  by  the
    Appellant.  Mr. Burrett stated that he had been told that this was  the
    second application, although he acknowledged that there was no evidence
    to this effect.  He stated that he had not been  intending  to  mislead
    the Tribunal, and that maybe he had got it wrong.


11. I find that this is the first application for entry clearance  made  by
    the Appellant.  The application was made in January  2015,  refused  in
    April 2015, reconsidered by the ECM in July 2015 and the hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal was on 7 September 2016.


12. I also note that, although I had directed that the Sponsor explain  why
    he had not attended the  error  of  law  hearing,  no  explanation  was
    offered by Mr. Burrett or the Sponsor.


Relationship requirements


13. I have considered the evidence provided.   At pages 138 to 139  is  the
    letter which accompanied the Appellant's application.  This states that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were introduced through  family  members  who
    are neighbours in Iran.  They began talking  online  in  October  2013.
    They met in person on 20 February 2014.   They were married on 23 March
    2014.  They have kept in touch using Tango, Viber  and  Whatsapp.   The
    evidence provided is listed on page 139, and includes photographs,  and
    evidence of communication.   However,  the  evidence  of  communication
    provided is not included in the Appellant's bundle.


14. In the Respondent's bundle at Annex I  there  are  two  pages  of  what
    appear to be messages, but these are untranslated, and their source  is
    not clear.  It is not clear whether  this  was  the  only  evidence  of
    communication which was provided with the application.


15. I have considered the evidence of the  Sponsor.   As  stated  above,  I
    found him to be  an  honest  and  reliable  witness.   In  his  witness
    statement the Sponsor said  that  he  and  the  Appellant  had  started
    talking on the phone and messaging each other online in  October  2013.
    No evidence of this was provided.  In the Appendix bundle the Appellant
    provided print outs of Whatsapp chats  and  translations  covering  the
    period 13 March 2017 to 23 April 2017 (pages 65 to  106).   This  post-
    dates the  application  and  decision.   She  also  provided  what  are
    described as "couples telephone call logs" but it not clear what period
    of time these cover.  They appear to be from Whatsapp (pages 36 to 45).
     This is the only evidence of contact provided.  The Sponsor provided a
    photograph of the Appellant which she had sent to  him  two  weeks  ago
    (page 107 of the Appendix).


16. I find that the Appellant and Sponsor met once before  their  marriage.
    I find that there is some confusion in the evidence  as  to  when  this
    was.  However, I have taken into  account  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor, as well as a photograph provided at the hearing  which  showed
    the Appellant and Sponsor together.  I accept  the  Sponsor's  evidence
    that this was taken in  October  2013  in  Iran  (number  8).   On  the
    evidence before me, I find on the balance of  probabilities  that  they
    first met in person in October 2013.


17. The next time that they met was when the Sponsor went to Iran for their
    marriage in February 2014.  The marriage took place in March 2014.  The
    next occasion they saw each other in person was  in  January/  February
    2015 in Turkey when  the  Appellant  made  her  application  for  entry
    clearance.  It was not  clear  from  the  evidence  provided  with  the
    application and for the appeal in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Sponsor had gone to Turkey to meet the  Appellant  when  she  made  the
    application.  However, on the evidence before me, I find on the balance
    of probabilities that they met for a third time in person in Turkey  in
    January/February 2015.  The Sponsor provided photographs at the hearing
    showing the Appellant and him together in Turkey in April 2016.


18. Despite some reservations with the evidence, in particular with regards
    to the quality and quantity of evidence provided with the  application,
    I find that the Appellant has  provided  evidence  that  she  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor.  I  find  on  the
    balance of probabilities that  the  relationship  has  been  subsisting
    since they married.  I am able to  take  into  account  evidence  which
    postdates the  application  insofar  as  it  relates  to  circumstances
    appertaining at the date of the decision.  The  Sponsor  and  Appellant
    met in Turkey again in 2016.  The  Sponsor  has  provided  evidence  of
    their recent  Whatsapp  communication.    I  find  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant and Sponsor intend  to  live  together
    permanently.  I find that  the  Appellant  satisfies  the  relationship
    requirements of the immigration rules.


Financial requirements


19. The Respondent  refused  the  application  as  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided an employer's letter for the  Sponsor.   The  letter  provided
    with the application was not from the Sponsor's employer,  as  required
    under the immigration rules.  Mr.  Burrett  accepted  that  the  letter
    provided with the application,  being  from  the  Sponsor's  employer's
    accountants, did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules.


20. For the appeal the Sponsor provided a letter from his employer (page 40
    of the Appellant's bundle).  I have considered this letter.  It was not
    submitted  by  Mr.  Armstrong  that  this  letter  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of the rules, albeit that it post-dated the  decision.   I
    find on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  this  letter  meets  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.


21. Mr. Armstrong submitted that only five months' worth of  the  Sponsor's
    bank statements had been provided, from September 2014 to January 2015.
     However, the notice of decision indicates that  bank  statements  were
    provided for the period August 2014 - February 2015, which is a  period
    of six months.  I find that bank statements were provided to cover  the
    required period.


22. I do not accept Mr. Burrett's submission that this was a case where the
    policy of evidential flexibility should have been  used  to  obtain  an
    employer's letter, given that the Respondent was not satisfied that the
    relationship requirements were met, and  given  my  findings  above  in
    relation to the quality and quantity  of  evidence  provided  with  the
    application to show that these requirements had been met.


23. I find that the Appellant has now provided  evidence  which  meets  the
    financial requirements of the immigration rules.  Taking  into  account
    all of the evidence, I find that the Appellant has shown on the balance
    of probabilities that she met the requirements for entry  clearance  as
    the  spouse  of  the  Sponsor  under  Appendix  FM,  the   Respondent's
    immigration rules relating to Article 8.


Article 8 outside the immigration rules


24. I have further  considered  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8
    outside the immigration rules in accordance with the steps set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I have  found  above  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  I find that they
    have a family life sufficient to engage the operation of Article 8  and
    I find that the decision would interfere with that.


25. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


 26. In carrying out the proportionality exercise, I have taken into account
     my findings above in relation  to  the  appeal  under  the  immigration
     rules.  The Appellant did not provide evidence with the application  to
     satisfy the Respondent that she met the requirements of the immigration
     rules.  However, I have found above that for the  appeal  she  provided
     evidence to show that she met the requirements of the immigration rules
     at the time of the application.


 27. I have also taken into account the factors set out in section  117B  of
     the 2002 Act, insofar as they are relevant.  Section  117B(1)  provides
     that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
     interest.  The Appellant has shown that she meets the  requirements  of
     the immigration rules.


 28. The Respondent  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the  English
     language requirements of the immigration rules (117B(2)).


 29. The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met  the  financial
     requirements as the Appellant had not provided an employer's letter for
     the Sponsor.  However she had provided evidence that  the  Sponsor  was
     earning in excess of that  required  under  the  immigration  rules  to
     sponsor  a  spouse.   I  find  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor   are
     financially independent (117B(3)).


 30. Sections 117B(4) to (6) are not relevant.


 31. I attach particular weight to the fact that  the  Appellant  has  shown
     that she met the requirements of the immigration rules.   I  find  that
     this reduces the weight to be given to the Respondent's public interest
     in maintaining effective immigration control.


 32. I have taken into account that the Appellant and Sponsor  were  married
     in April 2014, over three years ago.  I have taken  into  account  that
     this application  was  made  online  in  January  2015,  and  that  the
     Appellant attended an appointment with the Respondent in February  2015
     (page 140).  I find that the application was made over two  years  ago.
     I also take into account that  because  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
     Tribunal did not deal properly with the evidence,  this  has  prolonged
     the period of separation of the Appellant and Sponsor.


 33. I have taken into account the evidence of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
     that the refusal has caused problems for the Appellant with her family.
      I find that the whole process has  taken  over  two  years.   While  I
     accept that, had more evidence been provided with  the  application  or
     with the grounds of appeal, this may  not  have  happened,  I  have  to
     consider the circumstances as they are before me,  which  is  that  the
     Appellant and Sponsor have been separated for over two years since  the
     decision was made.  I accept the evidence that this has caused problems
     for the Appellant with her family in Iran.


 34. Given  that  the  Appellant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of  the
     immigration rules, I find the weight to be given  to  the  Respondent's
     aim of maintaining effective immigration control is lessened.   I  find
     that the balance comes down in favour of the Appellant.   I  find  that
     the Appellant has shown  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
     decision is a breach of her rights and those of the Sponsor to a family
     life under Article 8.


 35. I have not made an anonymity direction.



Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and a fee has been paid.   However,  the  evidence
was  not  before  the  Respondent  when  the  decision  was  made.   In  the
circumstances, I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



