
 [pic]




The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
OA/08871/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 18th April 2017                 |On 10th May 2017                        |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                             Mr.MUHAMMAD NABEEL.
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

            THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR PAKISTAN AT ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Whitestone, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He applied for entry
      clearance as a partner under appendix FM. His application was refused
      on 30 April 2015 on the basis the income threshold requirement had not
      been demonstrated by the required proofs. Personal bank statements
      corresponding to all the wage slips had not been submitted. There was
      a payslip dated 5 February 2015 but no corresponding bank statements
      showing the lodgement.


   2. The entry clearance officer considered evidential flexibility but did
      not exercise this in the appellant's favour as original bank
      statements had not been produced for the six-month period.
      Furthermore, the appellant had a previous application refused due to
      lack of proofs.


   The First tier Tribunal


   3. His appeal was heard by judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sharkett and
      was dismissed under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds.


   4.  The judge recorded that the appellant had enclosed further
      documentary evidence in the form of stamped and certified bank
      statements. The application had been reviewed by the entry clearance
      manager who maintained the refusal. His sponsor stated that when the
      application was refused she returned to the bank and had the bank
      statements certified on the 12th May 2015. Subsequent to the
      application the appellant visited her husband in Pakistan, fell
      pregnant, and then ceased work. On appeal it was contended that the
      appellant could submit a fresh application when he can meet the rules.

   5. At paragraph 36 the judge referred to the date of application, the 2
      March 2015, as being significant as it affected the proofs required.
      The judge referred to the shortcoming in the proofs in that the money
      paid on the last payslip dated 5 February 2015 was not evidenced in
      the bank statement. Furthermore the bank statements submitted were not
      originals or certified copies at the time of application.

   6. Reference was made to the consideration of discretion by the entry
      clearance officer. It was noted that at the time of the review the
      financial requirements and the evidential requirements were met.
      Paragraph 42 referred to the fact that the appellant had been advised
      what was to be submitted and the previous application had been refused
      in 2014 for similar reasons. The judge felt that this was an
      inappropriate fetter on the exercise of discretion by the entry
      clearance manager. However, at the time of hearing the appellant was
      no longer in employment. Consequently the financial requirements of
      appendix FM could no longer be met.

The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was granted by an Upper Tribunal judge on the
      basis the relevant date was not the appeal hearing date but  the time
      of the application, as this was an out of country appeal.

   8. At hearing, the appellant's representative said that the relevant
      dates were from September 2014 to March 2015. The wage slips covered
      the relevant period and the bank statements had been submitted but one
      was missing. There is also an employer's letter and a P 60 form.

Conclusion.

   9. It is my conclusion that the judge materially erred in law in being
      influenced by the fact that the appellant's sponsor had subsequently
      become pregnant and was unemployed. So far as the immigration rules
      were concerned, in an out of country appeal the relevant date for the
      proofs was the time of the application.


  10. It is correct that at the time the application original bank
      statements had not been submitted and one of the wage slips was not
      reflected in the bank statement. The appellant subsequently obtained
      certification of the bank statements. The judge had concluded that the
      entry clearance manager had fettered the exercise of their discretion
      in reviewing the decision.


  11. The application as made did not meet the requirements of appendix FM
      SE. However, the corrected proofs were relevant when the judge was
      considering article 8 on a freestanding basis. In this regard the
      judge should have considered the position through the prism of the
      rules. The relevant date was as at the time of decision but  that
      assessment is one which has to be made in the round, taking account of
      past, present and likely future circumstances. It is my conclusion
      that the judge materially erred in law in this regard having regard to
      the comment that the entry clearance manager had fettered their
      discretion and the decision reached was unreasonable. I find the
      outcome is therefore disproportionate. Consequently, I will remake the
      decision allowing it under article 8. In doing so the primary
      consideration in section 117 B about the appellant not being a burden
      upon the taxpayer was satisfied at the relevant time.

   Decision.


   The decision of First-tier Judge Sharkett dismissing the appellant's
   appeal materially errs in law. I remake the decision and allow it under
   article 8.

 Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th May 2017

