

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/08350/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 March 2016                           |  On 17 March 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                         Mr desmond nKrumah agyemang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - accra

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Griffith sitting at Taylor House on 29  July
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision of an Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse him entry clearance as the child under the age of  18
    of a person settled in the UK.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 25 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer  gave  his  reasons
    for granting the appellant permission to appeal.

         1.   The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against a decision of
             the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Griffith)   who,   in   a
             determination promulgated on 28th August  2015  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             his application for leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  under
             the immigration rules for the  purpose  of  settlement  has  a
             child of the sponsor who is settled in he United Kingdom.

         2.   In summary the appellant's Grounds and reasons for  permission
             to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  drafted  by  the  appellant's
             representative assert:

             a.   The judge found  that  the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
                  responsibility however the reasons for these findings  are
                  inadequate and flawed.

             b.   The judge also erred by failing  to  consider  article  8
                  ECHR and s55 both had been put  forward  in  the  original
                  grounds of appeal.  "The determination gives  no  material
                  consideration to the best interests of the appellants  who
                  are after all children."

             c.   The determination fail to comply with issued guidance for
                  when  considering  applications  such  as  that   of   the
                  appellants.

         3.   The grounds for application  referred  to  "children"  whereas
             there is only a single appellant.

         4.   Permission to appeal may be granted if  I  am  satisfied  that
             there was a material error of  law  that  would  have  made  a
             material difference to the outcome  of  the  original  appeal.
             This could be due to adverse or irrational findings or a  lack
             of findings on core issues as established  in  he  case  of  R
             (Iran etc) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

         5.   In a well  reasoned  determination  the  judge  gave  adequate
             reasons for finding that the appellant and his Sponsor did not
             satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules.  The  judge
             has carefully considered  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
             sponsor and explains why he came to the  conclusion  that  the
             evidence does not satisfy the requisite immigration rules.

         6.   Contrary to the submissions, it is apparent that the judge has
             considered the best interests of the child (see paragraph 31).
              As this is about a country appeal s55 does not apply.

         7.   The findings that the judge reached in respect of "sole carer"
             and best interests were open to  the  judge  on  the  evidence
             before the tribunal and I can discern  no  arguable  error  of
             law.  The grounds amount to nothing more than  a  disagreement
             with the findings of the judge, findings which  were  properly
             open to the judge on the evidence before the tribunal.

         8.   It is correct that the original grounds of appeal  included  a
             submission that the respondent's decision breached  article  8
             ECHR.  The judge does not make findings  in  respect  of  that
             issue.  It is arguable that the judge has misdirected  himself
             for the failure to consider article 8  ECHR  and  the  grounds
             submitted  by  the  respondent  on  that  point  is  arguable.
             Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted on  that
             point.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before Judge Griffith,  Miss  Victor-Mazeli  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of the appellant.  There  was  no  appearance  by  a
    Presenting Officer on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.  The judge
    received oral evidence from the sponsor,  which  he  recorded  in  some
    detail at paragraphs [13] to [19] of his subsequent decision.

 4. The main  issue  in  the  appeal  was  whether  the  sponsor  had  been
    exercising sole responsibility for the appellant (date of birth 25  May
    1996) in Ghana, despite the appellant's mother being  alive  and  being
    present in Ghana.  The line taken by the Entry Clearance Officer in the
    refusal decision was that  it  was  the  appellant's  mother,  not  his
    sponsor in the UK, who had taken  the  important  decisions  about  the
    appellant's upbringing.

 5. But an alternative argument raised by way of appeal was that it was  in
    the best interests of the appellant for him to  be  reunited  with  the
    sponsor, given that his mother was no longer able or  willing  to  care
    for him, so that this constituted  serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations which would make it desirable not  to  refuse  the
    appellant entry clearance.  In the same context, the  appellant  raised
    in his notice of appeal a claim under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. In his review, the Entry Clearance Manager addressed  the  claim  under
    Rule 297(i)(f) and the parallel claim under Article 8 ECHR.  The  judge
    set out the Entry Clearance Manager's case in this regard at paragraphs
    [9] and [10] of his decision.

 7. At paragraph [20], the judge summarised  Miss  Victor-Mazeli's  closing
    submissions on behalf of the appellant.  These were primarily  directed
    at the issue of sole responsibility.   But  in  the  alternative,  Rule
    297(i)(f) was relied on:

         It is in the appellant's best interests to be with his father given
         the circumstances prevailing in Ghana.

 8. The judge's findings on the disputed issues were set out in  paragraphs
    [22] onwards.  For present purposes, it is only necessary to  refer  to
    paragraphs [29] to [32], which I set out verbatim below.

         29.  I do not find that documentary evidence  produced  establishes
             that the sponsor has had and has sole responsibility  for  the
             appellant.  I reject the sponsor's evidence that there  was  a
             rift between the appellant and his mother in 2012 after  which
             he left her home and since which time the sponsor has had sole
             responsibility.  I find on the balance of  probabilities  that
             responsibility for the appellant's upbringing has been  shared
             and that that was the position at the date of his application.

         30.  I have considered in the alternative whether there are serious
             and compelling family or other considerations which  make  the
             exclusion of the appellant undesirable  but  in  light  of  my
             concerns about the credibility of the sponsor and his evidence
             about the circumstances in which the appellant is living, I do
             not find the appellant has shifted the evidential burden.

         31.  As regards the best interests of the child, the appellant  was
             a month away from his majority at the date of the  application
             and was a student, thus living a  semi-independent  life  away
             from home during  term  time.   In  light  of  the  discrepant
             evidence  about  the  length  of  his  course,   his   current
             circumstances are not entirely clear.  It was  submitted  that
             it was in the best interests of the appellant to be  with  his
             father given the circumstances prevailing  in  Ghana;  on  the
             sponsor's evidence that  would  mean  removing  him  from  his
             university course with no guarantee that he could continue his
             education in the UK.   As,  however,  I  have  not  found  the
             sponsor's account of the appellant's circumstances in Ghana to
             be truthful, I am satisfied that the respondent's duties under
             Section 55 have been met.

         32.  For these reasons I find the appellant has not discharged  the
             burden on him to show that he meets the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

The Rule 24 Response

 9. On 10 February 2016 Mr Staunton settled a Rule 24 response on behalf of
    the Entry Clearance Officer opposing the appeal.  In  summary,  it  was
    contended that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed
    himself appropriately:

         3.   Judge Griffith finds that the appellants sponsor is not solely
             responsible for him and that there is no existing rift between
             the appellant and his mother.  Within the determination  there
             is no indication that the appellants counsel gave  submissions
             in relation to Article 8.

         4.   At paragraph 31 of the determination Judge Griffith finds that
             the appellant is living a semi independent life in  Ghana,  it
             must follow that the appellants Article  8  rights  have  been
             established in Ghana.  Judge Griffiths also finds in paragraph
             25 that the appellant and sponsor do have regular contact,  it
             must follow that the Entry Clearance  Officers  decision  does
             not prevent the appellant from  continuing  this  contact  and
             ultimately continuing to fulfil his  Article  8  rights.   The
             determination of Judge Griffiths does not contain  a  material
             error of law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. After close of business  on  29  February  2016,  the  day  before  the
    scheduled hearing of the appeal before me to determine whether an error
    of law was made out, the appellant's solicitors, Nasim &  Co,  sent  an
    email to the Upper Tribunal requesting an adjournment.  The ground  for
    seeking an adjournment was that the sponsor had  missed  his  scheduled
    return flight to the UK from Ghana, and so was not going to be back  in
    the UK in  time  for  the  hearing.   In  support  of  the  adjournment
    application, the solicitors filed an itinerary showing that the sponsor
    had been scheduled to fly out to Ghana on 21  February  2016,  and  had
    been scheduled to come back on a flight departing  from  Ghana  on  the
    night of 28 February.  However, no explanation was given as to  how  it
    had come about that the sponsor had missed his flight home.

11. As should have been obvious to Nasim & Co, the ability of  the  sponsor
    to attend the hearing did not provide  an  adequate  justification  for
    adjourning the hearing, the primary purpose of which was  to  establish
    whether an error of law was made  out.   The  sponsor  had  nothing  to
    contribute in this regard.  The appellant had been legally  represented
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Counsel,  who   was   presumably
    instructed by Nasim & Co.  That same firm  had  instructed  Counsel  to
    appear before me in another case on my list.  I  obtained  confirmation
    from Counsel that she did not have any instructions with regard to this
    appeal.  In all the circumstances, I was satisfied that it was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the error of law  hearing  in  the
    absence of a representative of the appellant, and I was satisfied  that
    it would be contrary to the overriding objective to grant  the  written
    adjournment request made by Nasim & Co.

12. Mr Staunton submitted that the  appeal  should  be  dismissed  for  the
    reasons given by him in his Rule 24 response.

Discussion

13. In Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f)) Democratic Republic of Congo [2013]
    UKUT 88 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that "serious" means  that  there
    needs to be more than the party simply desiring a state of  affairs  to
    obtain.  "Compelling" in the context of paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates
    considerations that are  persuasive  and  powerful.   It  sets  a  high
    threshold and it excludes cases where, without more, it is  simply  the
    wish of the parties to be together, however natural that  ambition  may
    be.  It is further stated that the exercise of the duty  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to assess the application under the Rules  inevitably
    involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best  interests
    require.

14. In T (s55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC),
    the Tribunal held that:

         Where there are reasons to believe that a child's  welfare  may  be
         jeopardised   by   exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom,   the
         considerations of  Article  8  ECHR,  the  "exclusion  undesirable"
         provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  extra  statutory
         guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to apply  the  spirit  of  the
         statutory guidance in certain circumstances  should  all  be  taken
         into account by the ECO at first instance and the judge on appeal.

15. Having reviewed the judge's manuscript Record of Proceedings, I am able
    to confirm that, as surmised by Mr Staunton in his  Rule  24  response,
    Counsel for the appellant did not advance an Article  8  claim  in  her
    closing submissions.  Although Article 8 was raised in  the  notice  of
    appeal, matters had moved on by the time that the judge  came  to  give
    his reasons for dismissing the appeal.

16. In his ECM appeal review, the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  rejected  the
    Article 8 claim on two grounds.  The first ground was that there was no
    additional evidence relating to the  Article  8  claim  which  was  not
    already relied on in support of the claim under Rule 297(i)(f).

17. It is apparent from the judge's manuscript Record of  Proceedings  that
    the reason why Counsel for the appellant did  not  advance  a  distinct
    Article 8 claim was that, consistent with the  guidance  given  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in T and Mundeba,  she  was  only  seeking  to  rely  on
    Article 8 ECHR considerations in support of the alternative  case  that
    the appellant's exclusion was undesirable  under  Rule  297(i)(f).   In
    short, she rightly recognised that a distinct claim under Article 8 was
    superfluous. Hence, she relied heavily on the proposition that the Rule
    was satisfied because the child's exclusion was contrary to the child's
    best interests which, following ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, are
    a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment at stage 5 of
    the Razgar test.

18. As was held by the judge who granted the appellant permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proving that he met the requirements of the Rules, which  include  Rule
    297(i)(f).

19. Given the nature and scope of this particular Rule, the appellant could
    not succeed in an alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR.  There  could
    not be any compelling circumstances which would enable him  to  succeed
    in a claim outside the Rules, as all relevant compelling  circumstances
    (if any) would necessarily have  been  considered  in  the  context  of
    whether the appellant could bring himself within Rule 297(i)(f).

20. Having made a sustainable finding that  it  was  not  contrary  to  the
    appellant's best interests to exclude him  from  the  UK,  rather  than
    remaining  in  his  home  country  to  continue  with  his   university
    education, a putative Article 8 claim could not get off the ground.

21. Moreover, as previously canvassed, Counsel for the  appellant  had  not
    invited the judge to  consider  whether  the  appellant  had  a  viable
    Article 8 claim in the event that he failed to discharge the burden  of
    proving that he qualified for entry clearance under Rule 297(i)(f).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
