
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st July 2015                        |On 10th November 2015               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                    MR Khaled Yousuf Abdu Mohamed SHARIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Maslord (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    S D Lloyd, promulgated on 30th  March  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 18th February 2015.  In the determination,
    the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters come before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Somalia, who  was  born  on  22nd
    October 1982.  He applied for entry clearance to join his  spouse,  Mrs
    Latifa Amir Sharif, who had entered the UK on 27th December  2014  with
    limited leave to remain on the basis of  humanitarian  protection,  but
    the application was refused on 27th May 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he and his sponsoring  wife,  Mrs  Latifa
    Amir Sharif, met in a refugee camp.  They were married on 24th December
    2011 in a religious ceremony  in  front  of  an  imam.   There  was  no
    official documentation whatsoever.  Their names, however, were  written
    down on a piece of paper which has since been lost (see  paragraph  7).
    Some six months later in July or August 2012, Ethiopian militia entered
    the camp and took  away  many  of  the  men,  including  the  Appellant
    himself.  The Sponsor fled.  She came to the UK and she claimed asylum.
     She later gave birth to their son, Yousuf Khaled Yousuf Sharif on 19th
    January 2013.

 4. DNA evidence has been provided showing that the Appellant is indeed the
    father of Yousuf (see paragraph 8).  The Sponsor was  able  to  contact
    the Appellant after she left, finding him at the camp so  that  he  was
    left with contact details, and when  the  Appellant  returned  to  make
    enquiries he was able to contact the Sponsor in the UK  (see  paragraph
    9).  The Appellant now contends that  he  meets  the  criteria  of  the
    Immigration Rules for family reunion with his spouse and he also relies
    upon Article 8 ECHR rights (see paragraph 11).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that,

         "I accept the Sponsor's evidence as  broadly  consistent  with  the
         other available evidence.  The evidence weighing in favour  of  the
         Appellant is that a DNA test has confirmed  the  paternity  of  the
         Sponsor's child as  the  Appellant,  and  of  course  the  spouse's
         statement.  There are some receipts for money transfers dated  12th
         February 2013, 5th February 2014, 1st  March  2014  and  4th  March
         2014.  There is also another receipt which has the  date  partially
         cut  off,  but  reads  2013.   I  suspect  this  is   a   duplicate
         ..."(paragraph 29).

 6. The main issue in the appeal was, "as to whether the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor are married" (paragraph 28).

 7. Nevertheless, a considerable number  of  factors  weighed  against  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  There was nothing to explain why or how the
    Appellant came to be released by the Ethiopian militia (paragraph  30).
    There was no evidence that the Sponsor had found  herself  in  Ethiopia
    "other than a broad statement that her guardian  was  becoming  elderly
    and the situation was becoming unstable" (paragraph 31).

 8. The  judge  held  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and could not succeed under Appendix FM because  this
    contains no provisions for entry clearance as a partner, the  Appellant
    having failed to demonstrate that he was married to the Sponsor in  any
    legal sense (see paragraph 38).  If one considered the  position  under
    human rights law, the judge held that she would accept "that Yousuf  is
    the Appellant's child and that the Appellant lived with the Sponsor for
    eight months prior to the application, although  this  period  was  cut
    short by his removal from the camp  by  Ethiopian  militia"  (paragraph
    41).

 9. The judge held that, "I find the Appellant has a family life  with  the
    Sponsor and his son.  The decision under  appeal  interferes  with  his
    right to enjoy such a life together ..." (paragraph 41).   Nevertheless
    there was no disproportionality in the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The Rules provided for the Appellant and the  Sponsor  to  live
    together subject to the conditions being satisfied.  Moreover, they had
    stayed in contact through Skype and there was no disproportionality  in
    requiring them to carry on doing so (paragraph  42).   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  dismissed  the
    appeal because she was not satisfied that the Appellant and the Sponsor
    were married.  However, there was strong evidence that included the DNA
    evidence confirming that the Appellant was the father of the  Sponsor's
    child, and the fact that the Sponsor has been supporting the  Appellant
    financially in Ethiopia, and the Sponsor's evidence that  she  and  her
    son have recently visited the Appellant in Ethiopia,  which  the  judge
    accepted was consistent with the stamps in  the  son's  passport.   The
    judge's findings  that  the  couple  were  not  married  was  therefore
    irrational.

11. On 20th May 2015, permission to appeal was granted on this basis by the
    Tribunal.   It  was  also  granted  on  the  basis   of   the   judge's
    consideration of Article 8 was materially flawed in that she failed  to
    have regard to the best interests of the Appellant's child on the issue
    of proportionality.

12. A Rule 24 response was entered on 3rd June 2015.  This stated that  the
    judge had balanced the findings in favour of the  Appellant,  given  at
    paragraph 29 of the determination, against the findings that  were  not
    in his favour at paragraphs 30 and 31.  The judge reminded  himself  at
    paragraph 32 of the evidence of the Appellant and the Sponsor's status.
     The determination  was  plainly  sufficiently  reasoned.   As  far  as
    Article 8 was concerned the judge had considered Appendix  FM  and  had
    regard to the fact that the child was that of the Appellant.   However,
    the child's leave would expire in 2018 and this was  significant.   The
    judge could not have reached a different decision.  The child was young
    and family life could be enjoyed in Addis Ababa.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 31st July 2015, Miss Maslord, appearing  on
    behalf of the  Appellant  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    submitted that the judge simply failed to make proper findings of fact.
     On the one hand, she was  stating  that  the  Appellant  was  properly
    married to his wife,  the  Sponsor,  and  there  was  a  child  of  the
    marriage.  She was even implying that they had lived as a  family  unit
    for eight months (see paragraph 41).  On  the  other  hand,  the  judge
    appeared to be suggesting that none of this was proved because  of  the
    way in which they had lived their lives  having  fled  from  a  refugee
    camp.  It was well established  that  evidence  needs  to  be  properly
    determined and a firm view taken on matters that  are  germane  to  the
    appeal.  One example of the irrational approach of  the  judge  is  the
    reference to the DNA report, which confirms the  fact  that  the  child
    Yousuf is 99.9% the child of the Appellant.  However, at paragraph  35,
    the judge curiously states that, "I  treat  the  DNA  evidence  with  a
    degree of caution."  With that,  the  judge  proceeds  to  state  that,
    "accordingly I dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  ..."
    (paragraph 36).  The judge also seems to then imply  that  the  parties
    are not married.

14. For his part, Mr Walker submitted that he would rely upon the  Rule  24
    response.  This was a complete answer to the  appeal.   The  judge  was
    entitled to come to the conclusions  that  she  did.   She  did  direct
    herself appropriately.  She did have regard  to  both  the  Immigration
    Rules and  to  human  rights  arguments.   These  findings  were  made.
    Appendix FM and Article 8 were properly considered at paragraph 4.

15. In reply, Miss Maslord submitted  that  given  the  way  in  which  the
    findings had been made the appropriate course of action was to  make  a
    finding of an error of law and to remit the case back to  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that I should  set  aside
    the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA [2007]).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, whilst  the  judge  states  that,  "I  treat  the  DNA
    evidence with a degree of caution" (paragraph 35), nevertheless, in her
    ultimate conclusions, the judge is clear that,

         "I accept for these purposes that Yousuf is the  Appellant's  child
         and that the Appellant lived with  the  Sponsor  for  eight  months
         prior to the application, although this period was cut short by his
         removal from the camp by Ethiopian militia.   Accordingly,  I  find
         that the Appellant has a family life with the Sponsor and  his  son
         ..." (paragraph 41)

17. In the circumstances, it  is  simply  not  credible  to  say  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State  is  not  disproportionate  to  the
    Article 8 rights of this family bearing in mind  that  they  had  lived
    together as a family unit prior to the Sponsor coming to  the  UK,  and
    that present communication through modern means of  communication  such
    as Skype (see paragraph 42)  is  an  unrealistic  means  of  sustaining
    family life for any period of time.

18. Second, the judge does not appear to give proper regard at all  to  the
    fact that this was a marriage situation, and a  family  life  situation
    which was subject to the family reunification policy for refugees.  The
    threshold standard is lower here.

19. Third, there is the issue of the Appellant's marriage to the sponsoring
    wife, Mrs Latifa Amir Sharif.  The judge is ambivalent about this.  The
    evidence was that the marriage took place by way of an Islamic marriage
    before an imam (see paragraph 17).  It is  as  a  consequence  of  that
    marriage that there is "confirmatory DNA testing results  showing  that
    the Appellant and the Sponsor to be the parents of  the  child  Yousuf"
    (paragraph 18).

20. On a balance of probabilities, there is every reason to  conclude  here
    that this was a genuine marriage, for  a  genuine  purpose,  which  was
    still subsisting in every way.  There are, after  all,  remittances  of
    monies, which the judge expressly refers to (see  paragraph  29).   The
    judge is clear that, "the Sponsor's evidence"  is  "broadly  consistent
    with the other available evidence" (paragraph 29).

Re-making the Decision

21. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for  the  reasons  that  I
    have given above.  The nub of this claim is  set  out  in  the  factual
    findings of the judge herself.  She states (at paragraph 29)  that,  "I
    accept the Sponsor's evidence as  broadly  consistent  with  the  other
    available evidence."  She states (at paragraph 32) that,

         "I must bear in mind that the Sponsor tells me that they were  both
         refugees in Ethiopia, that resources were sparse, and there was  no
         requirement for documents to prove a marriage and indeed  none  was
         provided.  As the Appellant  left  the  camp  it  would  have  been
         difficult for them to contact anyone there.  Accordingly, I must be
         careful not to impose too high an evidential standard ..."

22. Yet, this is exactly what appears to have been done and, if  determined
    on a balance of probabilities, there  is  no  reason  why  this  appeal
    should not be allowed, and not least, given that this marriage  led  to
    the birth of Yousuf, who the DNA evidence now proves, to be  the  child
    of the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The judge is clear (at paragraph 41)
    that, "I accept for these purposes that Yousuf is the Appellant's child
    and that the Appellant lived with the Sponsor for eight months prior to
    the application ..."

23. In the same way, the judge  is  clear  (at  paragraph  35)  that,  "the
    presence of positive DNA evidence of course supports the presence of  a
    relationship ..."  The plain fact is that the judge has  accepted  that
    the child is the Sponsor's son  and  that  the  couple  lived  together
    before the Sponsor was removed from the refugee camp  and  the  Sponsor
    then came to claim asylum in the UK.

24. Furthermore, the Sponsor had been found to be credible by the  Tribunal
    in her own application for asylum.  For a refugee family reunion policy
    to apply, this has to be the starting point.  Thereafter, once the  DNA
    evidence points irrefutably to the fact that the child, Yousuf, is  the
    child of the Sponsor and the Appellant, then  this  indicates,  on  the
    requisite standard of proof,  that  reasonably  speaking,  there  is  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage relationship between the Appellant  and
    the Sponsor, as that  is  the  evidence  given  before  the  judge,  in
    circumstances where documentary evidence is difficult to come  by,  and
    is acknowledged to be so by the judge herself.

25. Finally, the Sponsor had  submitted  travel  documents  confirming  her
    visit to see her husband.  There was also a  copy  of  her  son's  visa
    which  indicated  the  same.    There   were   photographs   submitted.
    Accordingly, if the central issue  was  whether  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant were married, then this issue is resolved in  favour  of  the
    Appellant and the appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.   I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
allowed.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    9th November 2015

