
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2015                 |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                    Mr Subramaniam Ramamoorthy Tuticorin
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S M Iyer, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 5th March 1943 and he  made
    an application for entry clearance under Appendix FM Section E-ECDR  on
    28th April 2014.  His application was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 4th June 2014.

 2. In his refusal  notice  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  the
    letters produced from the appellant's  cardiologist  and  his  GP  with
    regard to the limitations  of  his  medical  ailments  and  noted  that
    although his GP stated that he could not cook and clean by himself  but
    his cardiologist made no mention of such. The area the appellant  lived
    in had a high pollution level but there was no  corroborative  evidence
    submitted to confirm that.  There were several  areas  in  India  which
    would not contain the same pollution  levels.   The  letter  stated  he
    should eat low sodium and reduced saturated fat meals but  he  had  not
    stated he was unable to receive this food in his area.   It  was  quite
    simple not to add salt and  saturated  fat  to  a  meal  as  these  are
    primarily  added  during  the  cooking  process.   Private  chefs  were
    available in all parts of India on a part-time or full-time  basis  and
    they could provide home-cooked meals to specification.

 3. He had also stated he could not obtain cleaners to clean the house on a
    regular basis but live-in and live-out  maids  and  home  helpers  were
    readily available in the majority of India.  Furthermore  the  care  he
    stated he required appeared to revolve around  avoiding  pollution  and
    consuming low sodium and saturated fat meals.

 4. A check on Google for nursing homes in Maharashtra state alone provided
    1,500,000 hits.  A check for medical nursing homes had  1,300,000.   It
    was clear therefore that help for his ailments was available  in  India
    and that he had several family members in India who  could  potentially
    provide care for him.  Care could be  provided  through  the  financial
    help from the sponsor which he was already using.  The Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied he was unable to obtain the required level of
    care in India  and  refused  the  application  with  reference  to  EC-
    DR.1.1.(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules E-ECDR.2.5.

 5. The decision was reviewed by the Entry Clearance  Manager,  who  stated
    there were no  reports  to  confirm  that  the  appellant  had  chronic
    obstructive pulmonary disease but he was aware that there was treatment
    available in India.  It  is  a  matter  of  personal  choice  that  the
    appellant did not wish to make use of  care  homes  and  there  was  no
    provision for this in the Immigration Rules.  There was no reason why a
    care home or a personal carer would not be able to provide the required
    level of care that the appellant needed.  It was known  that  in  India
    domestic help and private nurses were widely  available  and  that  the
    waiting time to see a consultant was far shorter than that in the UK.

 6. There were two letters and no other evidence of the appellant's ongoing
    medical treatment or condition.  The appellant was able to afford to go
    to private medical doctors in India and although he states he is unable
    to afford a private caterer for his meals it is not shown he is able to
    afford this service in the UK or that sponsors would be  able  to  take
    care of him on a full-time basis.

 7. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Suffield-Thompson heard the appeal  on
    28th January 2015 and refused the appeal  on  3rd  February  2015.   An
    application for permission to appeal setting  out  errors  of  law  was
    first refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin,  who  rejected  the
    application because it was not received in time. A renewed  application
    was made to the Upper Tribunal.



Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. The application for permission to appeal  stated  first  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules of Appendix FM-SE  that  the  appellant  was
    incapable of cooking and cleaning as evidenced by a letter from his GP.
     The cardiologist, although he did not use those words, stated that the
    father was not  geared  to  care  of  himself.   Further  evidence  was
    attached.

 9. Secondly, with regard to pollution an air quality report was  published
    by the Maharashtra Pollution Control  Board,  which  was  a  registered
    government body.  The GP had mentioned pollution in  his  letter  dated
    2nd April 2014.  A letter from a pulmonologist dated 25th February 2015
    was attached.

10. Thirdly, procuring a healthy diet.  The GP clearly stated in his letter
    dated 2nd April  2014  regarding  the  difficulties  the  father  faces
    regarding getting people to cook food to suit his  health.   He  stated
    that the appellant "depends on outside food  suppliers  for  his  daily
    meals.  The meals provided by such caterers are quite high in saturated
    fats and salt.  Unfortunately there is a lack of caterers or cooks that
    provide healthy  meals  in  this  area."   It  was  submitted  that  Dr
    Deshpande was a registered medical practitioner and his father's GP for
    many years and made home visits.   This  was  independent  evidence  to
    prove the lack of healthy food suppliers.

11. Fourthly, the appellant did have brothers and sisters in India but  the
    appellant had provided letters written by them stating their  inability
    to support him on a daily basis.  These were presented  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in July 2014.  Further  evidence  from  the  cardiologist
    dated 20th February 2015 showed that old age homes were unsuitable  for
    him as he needed cardiac rehabilitation.

12. Fifthly, with regard to obtaining  financial  help  the  financial  aid
    provided by the sponsor had not been of use in finding care that  would
    be appropriate for his medical needs and there was a lack of facilities
    where he lived and he could not move to a care home as his cardiologist
    advised against it in his later letter of 2015.

13. Sixthly, the presence  of  relatives.   The  letters  written  by  them
    provided strong evidence that they were no longer in a position to care
    for him on a regular basis.

14. Seventhly, the compassionate grounds.   The  evidence  provided  proved
    that the application to settle in the UK was not based on compassionate
    grounds as the GP, cardiologist and pulmonologist clearly explained  in
    their letters that the appellant was not in  a  position  to  exert  in
    order to cook and clean.

15. Eighthly, the appellant met the criteria of the Rules.

16. Ninthly, in making care arrangements the evidence provided  established
    that care homes would not provide a  level  of  care  required  by  the
    appellant.

17. Lastly, the evidence demonstrated  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    heart and lung disease, had suffered a heart attack and  had  later  on
    had congestive heart failure and he suffered from COPD, which is a long-
    term condition.   The  doctors'  letters  clearly  explained  that  the
    illness was debilitating and there was no cure and he was not  able  to
    care for himself.  He clearly met the Rules.

18. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt extended time and  granted  the  application.
    She found that it was arguable that the evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was capable of indicating that  the  appellant  did  not  have
    access to support from family members in India and that his  particular
    combination of health conditions and the evidence  on  pollution  which
    was not overtly considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge meant  that
    he could not be cared for in his home or in a care home contrary to the
    findings at 11 and 13.

19. It was also arguable that the combination of factors in this case,  the
    appellant becoming a widower, followed by one of  his  daughters  dying
    relatively young and after some years of  being  nursed  with  multiple
    sclerosis, his heart attack having occurred on the anniversary  of  her
    death, when considered against the background of his  own  serious  ill
    health and lack of provision for his needs could amount  to  compelling
    circumstances outside the specific provisions of the Immigration Rules.
     Permission was granted.

20. A Rule 24 response was submitted opposing the appeal.   The  respondent
    asserted that the case was determined  on  the  papers  and  the  judge
    considered the evidence before him at  the  date  of  the  hearing  and
    reached wholly sustainable conclusions as to  the  circumstances.   The
    appellant relied on two letters which were provided after the  date  of
    the hearing and which appeared to be solely addressed in support of the
    appellant's application.  The judge had considered  the  evidence  that
    was before him as limited by Section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  to  that
    existing at the date of decision and reached the conclusions that  were
    open to him.  The grounds were merely a disagreement with the findings.
     Article 8 was not a general dispensing power.

The Hearing

21. At the hearing Mrs Iyer attended and referred to the two letters  which
    she supplied subsequent to the hearing which took place on 28th January
    2015, that is to the letter from the cardiologist dated  20th  February
    2015 and the pulmonologist dated 25th February 2015.  She  stated  that
    she accepted that they were not letters before the First-tier  Tribunal
    but she submitted that much of the evidence presented  was  overlooked.
    There were letters from relatives and letters in relation to  pollution
    but once again these were letters which were subsequent to the decision
    and I explained that albeit that circumstances appertaining at the time
    of the decision can be  taken  into  account,  the  relevant  date  for
    consideration of the evidence is at the date of decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

22. Mrs Iyer submitted that the evidence of  the  appellant's  GP  and  his
    cardiologist which dated from the beginning of 2014 had not been  taken
    into account.

23. She submitted that there were some care homes and medical nursing homes
    in India as indicated by the Entry Clearance Officer  in  his  decision
    but these, she stated, were not suitable and the  psychological  aspect
    was very important.  Although the cardiologist had  not  stated  things
    such that her father could not cook and clean the GP had made  note  of
    this.

24. Mr Melvin submitted that the sponsor was seeking to reargue the  appeal
    and that the evidence as at the date of the decision was  the  key  and
    the sponsor was seeking to rely on postdecision  evidence  and  raising
    issues now that should have been raised before the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

25. At the outset of my conclusions I set out the relevant Immigration Rule
    the components of which all must be fulfilled.

         "Section E-ECDR:  Eligibility  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
                           dependent relative

         ...

         Relationship requirements

         ...

         E-ECDR.2.3.   The sponsor must at the date of application be -

                    (a)    aged 18 years or over; and

                    (b)

                        (i)    a British Citizen in the UK; or

                        (ii)   present and settled in the UK; or

                        (iii)  in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
                             protection.

         E-ECDR.2.4.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                    are  the  sponsor's   parents   or   grandparents,   the
                    applicant's partner, must as a result of age, illness or
                    disability require long-term personal  care  to  perform
                    everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                    are  the  sponsor's   parents   or   grandparents,   the
                    applicant's partner,  must  be  unable,  even  with  the
                    practical and financial help of the sponsor,  to  obtain
                    the required level of care in the country where they are
                    living, because -

                    (a)    it is not available and there  is  no  person  in
                        that country who can reasonably provide it; or

                    (b)    it is not affordable.

         ...

         Appendix FM-SE: family members specified evidence

         ...

         Adult dependent relatives

         ...

         34.  Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term personal  care  should  take  the
             form of:

             (a)   Independent  medical  evidence  that   the   applicant's
                  physical  or  mental  condition  means  that  they  cannot
                  perform everyday tasks; and

             (b)  This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
             the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to
             obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they
             are living should be from:

             (a)  a central or local health authority;

             (b)  a local authority; or

             (c)  a doctor or other health professional.

         ..."

26. It is clear  from  Appendix  FM-SE  that  the  appellant  must  produce
    evidence as to the long-term personal  care  required  and  independent
    evidence as to whether that appellant can obtain the required level  of
    care in the country they are living should be independent, and, from  a
    central or local health authority, a local authority  or  a  doctor  or
    other health professional.

27. Further to AS (Somalia) and another  v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2009] UKHL 32 there was discussion of  Section  85  of  the
    2002 Act and this specifically found that  in  relation  to  an  appeal
    under Section 82(1) against the refusal  of  entry  clearance,  Section
    85(4) should not apply and the  Immigration  Judge  may  only  consider
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse.  This
    included a consideration of Article 8.  It  was  stated  that  where  a
    change of circumstances was alleged  by  someone  who  is  outside  the
    jurisdiction the Entry Clearance Officer would be in the best  position
    to evaluate the effect of this.  The debate was whether the restriction
    imposed was proportionate but found that the language in section  85(5)
    was incapable of being read down.  I do not consider in this case  that
    a restriction imposed by section 85(4) is disproportionate.   There  is
    no doubt that there has been a shifting of the medical evidence.   This
    change in the evidence might well reflect the changing  nature  of  the
    appellant's difficulties but the evidence must support an assessment at
    the relevant time which is the date of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision.

28. I can accept that there was information submitted in  relation  to  the
    appellant's condition in his application form but the two letters  that
    were submitted to support that application were  limited  to  a  letter
    from Dr Viswanathan dated 21st April 2014 and a further letter from the
    appellant's GP Dr Deshpande dated 21st April 2014.

29. It is this evidence which is the key evidence in  relation  to  whether
    the appellant could meet the Immigration  Rules  and  the  judge  quite
    rightly stated that although the  GP  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to cook and clean by himself  there  was  no  mention  that  the
    consultant had stated  this.   Even  if  it  were  the  case  that  the
    appellant were unable to cook and clean by himself the Entry  Clearance
    Officer quite reasonably submitted, and this point was adopted  by  the
    judge, that live-in and live-out maids and home  helpers  were  readily
    available in the  majority  of  India.   Further  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer clearly stated that the needs of the appellant revolved  around
    avoiding pollution and consuming low sodium and saturated fat meals.

30. Under the Rules there is a requirement for independent evidence from  a
    doctor or a health care professional which would include Dr Viswanathan
    and the GP in relation to the obtaining of care but neither the GP  nor
    the consultant addressed the  issue  relating  to  whether  there  were
    nursing homes or medical nursing homes available in India and in  other
    words

    'applicant is unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor in the UK, to obtain the required  level  of  care  in  the
         country'.

31. Although there was criticism that the judge had referred to the  family
    being able  to  look  after  the  appellant  there  were  no  effective
    submissions in relation to nursing homes  or  care  homes  in  the  two
    independent pieces of evidence from the GP  or  the  consultant.   That
    information was not produced until after the decision was  promulgated.
    There is no material error of law in the judge's decision.

32. At paragraph 13 the judge states specifically: "I do find  that  it  is
    possible for the sponsor to find the care  that  he  needs  by  way  of
    outside help or a care home.  There  are  other  close  family  members
    nearby who can also assist the appellant to remain in  his  own  home."
    Albeit that the judge did not appear to take into  account  the  family
    members who all for the purposes of the appeal rejected the possibility
    of being  able  to  assist  the  appellant  the  judge  relied  on  the
    statements of the Entry Clearance Officer to the effect that there were
    care homes in India.  The medical evidence produced at the date of  the
    decision addressed the  practical  health  implications  of  self  care
    rather than  the  psychological  issues  and  thus  the  need  for  the
    appellant to live with family.  There was no indication in  either  the
    GP  or  the  Consultant's  evidence  at  the  time  that  there  was  a
    psychological need for the appellant to obtain assistance  which  could
    only be derived from his family.

33. First and foremost, however, at paragraph 11 the judge stated that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that he needed long-term  personal  care
    as required under the Rules.  It was accepted that he had had  a  heart
    attack but there was contrasting evidence from the consultant  who  did
    not say that the appellant was unable to cook, clean or  take  care  of
    his personal hygiene.  In relation to the high level of air  pollution,
    although it was stated by the GP that  "this  has  affected  his  lungs
    leading to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease", it did not state how
    his functional ability had been compromised.

34. There was little by way of medical information or evidence in  relation
    to the psychological effects on the appellant  and  although  Mrs  Iyer
    attempted to introduce this into her evidence before the Upper Tribunal
    I am not persuaded that the judge did not  adequately  deal  with  this
    factor on the basis of the evidence before him.

35. At paragraph 12 he stated: "Losing his wife and daughter must have been
    devastating but again these are things  that  happen  to  many  elderly
    people and are not sufficient grounds to show that he  cannot  continue
    to live independently or care for himself with some help."

36. The grounds for permission to appeal rested, save for the second ground
    of appeal, on the  submission  of  later  evidence  which,  as  I  have
    explained, is not permissible.   The  second  ground  of  appeal  makes
    mention that the GP referred to pollution but the evidence should be in
    relation to the lack of care in the country not just the area.

37. Much of  the  challenge  was  based  on  evidence  which  was  produced
    subsequent to the decision and from 2015 and which could possibly  form
    the basis of a further application.  It does not demonstrate  an  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision.  The  appellant's
    sponsor was clear that the challenge was in relation to the Immigration
    Rules only and not on the basis of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and indeed this did not form part of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

I therefore find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 27th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

