
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08424/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th January 2017                      |On 3rd February 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ajaz masih
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Flynn promulgated on 18 August 2016, in which the  Respondent's  appeal
    against her decision to refuse  his  application  for  entry  clearance
    dated 24 April 2015 was allowed.

 2. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, born on 2  August  1967,  who
    made an application for entry clearance as the spouse of Parveen Bushra
    (the "Sponsor").  He had previously been in the United Kingdom  for  an
    unknown period of time, returning to Pakistan in  2004.  The  Appellant
    made a previous claim for  settlement  on  20  August  2004  which  was
    initially refused but he successfully appealed against that refusal  in
    August 2006.  The Respondent states  that  the  application  for  entry
    clearance was then reconsidered but refused under paragraph 320(21)  of
    the Immigration Rules; although before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Sponsor stated in evidence that she did not know  what  happened  other
    than that entry clearance had not been granted.

 3. The Appellant refused the latest application for entry clearance on the
    sole ground that the Respondent did not pass the  listening  aspect  of
    the required English language test as required by  paragraph  E-ECP.4.2
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Judge Flynn allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  18  August
    2016 on human rights grounds.  The reasons for this were that she found
    that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the Sponsor  relocating
    to Pakistan, finding that it was reasonably likely that she would  face
    a risk of persecution in Pakistan as a Christian.  Further, Judge Flynn
    considered that it was significant that the Appellant had  been  unable
    to join his wife of twelve years despite a successful appeal ten  years
    ago which reduced the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.  Judge Flynn noted that the Appellant  had  passed
    the written and speaking English tests and would be likely  to  improve
    his English following arrival in the United Kingdom,  enabling  him  to
    integrate with the Sponsor's assistance.  Judge Flynn  also  considered
    that in the future, the Sponsor's earnings would likely increase as her
    health problems would improve when the Appellant joined her  such  that
    she would be able to work full-time again.  These last two factors were
    also found to reduce the weight to be accorded to immigration  control.
    Overall,  the  circumstances  were  considered  exceptional   and   the
    interference with the Appellant's right  to  respect  for  family  life
    under Article 8 was disproportionate.

Grounds of appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals the decision of Judge  Flynn  on  three  grounds.
    First, that there was no consideration of and no reasons  given  as  to
    why the Respondent could  not  continue  to  improve  his  English  and
    reapply for entry clearance in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules.
    Further, Judge Flynn prospectively considered the facts in section 117B
    of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  inadequately
    applying these to the circumstances pertaining at the date of decision.
     In any event, the Appellant relies on the Court of  Appeal's  decision
    in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ  803  that  at  best,  the  ability  to  speak  English  and  being
    financially independent are neutral factors  and  not  ones  which  can
    reduce the weight to be attached to immigration control.

 6. Secondly, the Respondent was  refused  entry  clearance  following  his
    successful  earlier  appeal  for  reasons  of  having  submitted  false
    documents or made false representations such that the Appellant was not
    at fault for the period of separation.  In paragraph  37,  Judge  Flynn
    reduces the weight to be attached to immigration  control  due  to  the
    long period of separation after the previous successful appeal  but  in
    circumstances where she accepted in paragraph 29  that  no  conclusions
    could be reached as  to  why  entry  clearance  had  not  been  granted
    following the previous successful appeal.  It is submitted that this is
    an error of law as there was no basis for  such  a  conclusion  in  the
    absence of specific findings.

 7. Thirdly, Judge  Flynn  failed  to  consider  the  Sponsor's  visits  to
    Pakistan which was relevant to her claimed fear of persecution there as
    a Christian.  The evidence before Judge Flynn was  that  the  Appellant
    and  Sponsor  married  in  Pakistan  and  that  the  Sponsor   suffered
    miscarriages  between  2004  and  2007  (following  contact  with   the
    Appellant which presumably took place in Pakistan) and  copies  of  her
    passport were  in  the  bundle  which  showed  entry  stamps/visits  to
    Pakistan in 2011, 2013 and 2014.  None of this was  considered  in  the
    context of the Sponsor's claimed fear of relocating to Pakistan.

 8. At the oral hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer drew  attention
    to paragraph 19 of the decision in which Judge Flynn  arguably  applied
    the wrong standard of proof, stated to be 'lower than the normal  civil
    standard'.  It was accepted that this did not form part of the  grounds
    of appeal.

 9. In response, Counsel submitted on behalf of the Respondent  that  there
    was no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In relation to what happened after the  previous  successful
    appeal, there was nothing to suggest that the Sponsor knew  about  this
    or even that the decision had been made and served on  the  Respondent,
    the copy being provided at the appeal hearing being  undated.   In  any
    event the continued separation of the couple is a relevant part of  the
    history and context of the current appeal and assessment.

10. The Sponsor's visits to Pakistan were not hidden  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and were instead included in the evidence  to  show  continued
    direct contact with the  Respondent.   It  should  be  considered  that
    visits  are  not  determinative  of  fear  on  return  as  there  is  a
    qualitative difference between visiting and living in a country.

11. Overall it was submitted that given the findings of heartache and grief
    caused to the Appellant and the Sponsor by their continued  separation,
    combined with their improved circumstances, it was open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to find that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

Findings and reasons

12. In her decision, Judge Flynn gives three main reasons  as  to  why  the
    appeal is allowed on human  rights  grounds.   First,  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to the Sponsor relocating to Pakistan  because
    it is reasonably likely that she would face a risk of persecution there
    as a Christian which is increased because she is a woman; secondly that
    the weight to be accorded to immigration control is reduced because the
    long period of separation despite  a  previous  successful  appeal  and
    thirdly, that the weight to  be  accorded  to  immigration  control  is
    reduced because prospectively, after arrival in the United Kingdom, the
    Appellant is likely to improve his English and the Sponsor will be able
    to resume full-time employment.  I find  that  all  three  reasons  and
    therefore the conclusions contain material errors of law  because  they
    are either not based on the evidence and findings before the First-tier
    Tribunal and/or because they follow a misdirection in law as to risk on
    return  and  the  application  of  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

13. In relation to the finding  of  insurmountable  obstacles  due  to  the
    Sponsor's Christianity, Judge Flynn accepted the  Sponsor's  subjective
    fear to be genuine and went on to find it reasonably  likely  that  she
    would face a real risk  of  persecution,  with  her  fear  being  well-
    supported and entirely  consistent  with  the  background  evidence  of
    frequent attacks on  and  murders  of  Christians  in  Pakistan.   That
    conclusion fails to take into account the evidence  before  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal that the Sponsor has frequently returned to Pakistan  (on
    at least 7 occasions during the period of  her  relationship  with  the
    Appellant) and fails to have any regard to the country guidance case of
    AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC)  which
    concluded that Christians in Pakistan generally  suffer  discrimination
    but not sufficient to amount to a real risk of persecution and although
    women are at a heightened risk, this falls short of a generalised  real
    risk.  For those two reasons, the decision contains material errors  of
    law for failure to take into account relevant material  and  authority.
    The errors are material as it is far from  clear  that  had  these  two
    points been taken into account, the finding would have been the same.

14. In  relation  to  the  finding  that  the  weight  to  be  accorded  to
    immigration control is to be reduced because the  Respondent  has  been
    unable to join the Sponsor following his previous successful appeal,  I
    find that it was simply not open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach
    such a conclusion based on the evidence before her.  In  paragraph  29,
    Judge Flynn states that she cannot  reach  any  conclusions  on  events
    following the previous  successful  appeal  as  there  is  insufficient
    evidence from either party on it.  In those circumstances, it  was  not
    open to her to then reduce the weight to  be  accorded  to  immigration
    control, which could only be possible if there had been  a  finding  of
    some level of culpability on the part of the Appellant causing delay or
    continued separation.  The evidence from the Appellant  before  me  was
    that the application for entry clearance had  been  reconsidered  post-
    appeal and refused for  different  reasons  which  the  Respondent  was
    responsible for.  It is not clear when or even  if  that  decision  was
    served, but that does not detract from the error in paragraph 37 of the
    decision.

15. Finally, I find  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    application of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  That section sets out factors which the Tribunal is required
    to take into account when considering the public interest question.  It
    includes that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
    the public interest and further that it is in the public interest  that
    persons seeking to enter the United Kingdom can speak English  and  are
    financially independent.  There  is  nothing  within  that  section  to
    suggest that the latter are forward  looking  factors  as  to  what  an
    individual may be able to achieve after entering the United Kingdom and
    they should be considered at the time of the decision.  In  any  event,
    as the Court of Appeal confirmed in Rhuppiah,  if  a  person  does  not
    speak English, that would be a negative factor  under  section  117B(2)
    but the fact that they do speak English is only a neutral factor.   The
    same applies to financial independence in  section  117B(3),  the  fact
    that  a  person  is  financially  independent  is  a  neutral   factor.
    Therefore,  even  if  the  prospective  findings  as  to  language  and
    financial independence were correct, it was a material error of law  to
    hold those factors as any higher than neutral and they do  not  justify
    any reduction in the weight to be attached to immigration control.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18  August  2016
    involved the making of material errors of law in  allowing  the  appeal
    that require the decision to be set aside  and  remade.   I  go  on  to
    remake the decision.

17. It is accepted in this case  that  the  Respondent  can  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as  a  spouse
    and instead he relies solely on Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights in this appeal.  In considering the appeal on this ground,
    I follow the usual step-by-step approach set on in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27, applies as follows:


      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?
     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
    iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?
      v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         ends sought to be achieved?

18. In this appeal, there is no dispute that the Respondent and the Sponsor
    are in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  therefore  that  they
    have established family life.  The refusal of entry clearance maintains
    the status quo with the Respondent residing in Pakistan and the Sponsor
    residing in the United Kingdom (subject to any choice  to  relocate  to
    Pakistan to enjoy family life with the Respondent there)  and  as  such
    the interference to family life is by  preventing  it  from  developing
    further in the United Kingdom.  Any interference is in accordance  with
    the law and would be pursuant to the legitimate aim of  protecting  the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom through  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.

19. When conducting the balancing exercise, I am obliged  to  consider  the
    factors set out in Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, so far as relevant to this appeal, those are that  the
    maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest  and  that
    it is in the public interest that an application speaks English and  is
    financially independent.  At the date of decision, the Respondent could
    not speak English to the required standard (this was the sole ground of
    refusal under the Immigration Rules) but the Sponsor was  then  working
    and able to meet the financial requirements.

20. In all of the circumstances and taking  into  account  the  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  I
    am required to do, I do not find that the refusal of entry clearance is
    a disproportionate interference with the Respondent's right to  respect
    for family life for the following reasons.   As  confirmed  in  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), weighty reasons
    would be  needed  for  a  grant  of  entry  clearance  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules where they have not been met and in  this  case  none
    have been put forward by the Respondent.

21. There is no reason in this case why the Respondent could or should  not
    make a fresh application for entry clearance once  he  has  passed  the
    required English language tests (as  it  is  said  he  now  has).   The
    Respondent and Sponsor have been in a relationship for  some  12  years
    now, but have been living in separate countries for all  of  that  time
    and  in  the  knowledge  that  the  Sponsor  would  need  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant  of  entry  clearance
    for family life to be enjoyed in the United Kingdom.

22. Although the Sponsor claims  to  be  in  fear  of  persecution  if  she
    relocated to Pakistan, this has not stopped her visiting the country on
    a regular basis and in accordance with AK and SK there is no real  risk
    of persecution in any event.  It was a matter of choice for the  couple
    to begin their relationship in separate  countries  and  it  remains  a
    matter of choice as to whether they  make  a  further  application  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom or whether the Sponsor  relocates
    to Pakistan to enjoy family life there.  It would not  be  unreasonable
    or disproportionate for her to do so if she so chose.   The  fact  that
    the Sponsor has been in the United Kingdom for  twenty  years  and  has
    employment here does not mean that she would not be able  to  integrate
    into Pakistan with the Respondent, given that  it  is  a  country  with
    which he has at least  some  familiarity  (from  her  early  years  and
    regular visits) and knowledge of the language.  The  Sponsor  has  been
    suffering from depression said to be caused by the continued separation
    from her the Respondent but there is nothing to  suggest  that  if  she
    relocated to Pakistan that this would not therefore improve nor that in
    any event medical treatment would not be available if required.

23. The evidence in relation to events after the previous appeal hearing is
    not entirely clear, however,  there  is  little  to  suggest  that  the
    Respondent actively pursued a fresh decision prior to his  most  recent
    application (even if he  did  not  receive  the  earlier  refusal)  and
    nothing to suggest that the continuing separation of the couple was  in
    any way caused by Appellant.  There can be no reduction to  the  weight
    to be attached to immigration control in such circumstances.

24. For these reasons, I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds on  the
    basis  that  the  refusal  of  entry   clearance   would   not   be   a
    disproportionate interference with the right to respect for family life
    and in particular, no weighty reasons have been given for  a  grant  of
    entry  clearance  outside  of  the  Immigration   Rules   where   those
    requirements have not been met.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        [pic]        Date     3rd February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


