
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08500/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         MRS VIJAYALUXMY MAHESWARAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam, Legal Representative,
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the appellant to this appeal is, strictly,  the  Secretary  of
    State I have for the sake of consistency  continued  to  refer  to  the
    parties by their original First-tier Tribunal designations.  Thus,  the
    Secretary of State continues to be described as "the respondent".

2.   The appellant is a 69 year old citizen of Sri  Lanka  (born  25  August
    1945) who appealed against the respondent's decision of  16  June  2014
    refusing her application for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as
    the adult dependent  parent  of  her  son  (and  sponsor)  Mr  Vaheesan
    Maheswaran.  He is a British citizen resident and settled  in  the  UK.
    The application was made on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and she relied  in
    particular on Rules E-ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5.  The  essence  of  those
    Rules are that the applicant "must as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
    disability" require long term personal care to perform everyday  tasks"
    and that the applicant "must be unable, even  with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the country where they are living, because (a) it is not available  and
    there is no person in the country who can reasonably provide it; or (b)
    it is not affordable."

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on 18 June 2014  by
    reference to those Rules.  The appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  D  Lloyd  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 February 2015.

4.   In the judge's decision, he found [18] that  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  was
    satisfied and he indicated [19] that the appeal

         "... hinges on E-ECDR.2.5 and as to whether the appellant is unable
         to acquire the required level of care, even with the practical  and
         financial help of the sponsor, because it is unavailable and  there
         is nobody  in  the  country  who  can  provide  it  or  it  is  not
         affordable".

    The judge found, after giving reasons, that "on balance" E-ECDR.2.5 was
    satisfied and he allowed the appeal.

5.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal and  permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on  13  April  2015.   The
    grounds impliedly accepted that E-ECDR.2.4 was met but argued that,  on
    the evidence, the judge's approach to E-ECDR.2.5  was  wrong  and  that
    there was insufficient evidence before the Tribunal for  the  judge  to
    have allowed the appeal on that ground.

6.   It is for the Secretary of State in this case to satisfy me that  there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.  Mr  Tufan  acknowledged   that
    subparagraph 2.4 was not in issue but the challenge was in relation  to
    2.5 which provided that it is for the appellant to satisfy the Tribunal
    either that the level of care in Sri Lanka was not available  and  that
    there was no person who could reasonably provide it or that it was  not
    affordable.  He submitted that  the  judge's  criticism  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's interview [17] was not a just  criticism  and  that
    the interview record showed that the interview  was  adequate:  see  in
    particular questions 17, 23 and 31 of the interview  record.   He  also
    submitted that although the judge  "on  balance"  found  that  2.5  was
    satisfied, he did not give adequate or sufficient  reasons  for  making
    such a finding having regard to the fact that the burden of proof is on
    the appellant.

7.   In reply, Mr Alam argued that the grounds as well  as  the  submissions
    already made did no more than simply disagree with the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and the weight that the judge chose to  place
    on the sponsor's evidence.  It was clear from  the  decision  that  the
    judge found the evidence of the sponsor and  of  the  doctors  who  had
    given medical reports to be reliable.  The decision was well within the
    judge's discretion based on that evidence.

8.   I reserved my decision, but having now reviewed  all  the  evidence  as
    well as making a  careful  consideration  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision I am satisfied that there was no error of law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  The judge gave a detailed  and  thorough
    decision making appropriate and correct references to  the  Immigration
    Rules in question and, in  particular,  identifying  the  gaps  in  the
    evidence.  He did not overlook them and it was clear that he took  them
    into account when making his final decision.  At [25] he made it  clear
    that his decision was "on balance" and he thereby correctly  identified
    the standard of proof that  he  was  obliged  to  apply.   The  judge's
    reasons and summary of the evidence were clearly  set  out  at  [16]  -
    [24].  His decision could not by any  stretch  of  the  imagination  be
    regarded to be perverse or against the overall weight of evidence.   On
    this basis I am satisfied that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  his
    decision and the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any  material  error
of law. The decision shall stand.

There has been no request for an anonymity direction and none is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
11 June 2015

