
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08402/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 January 2014                               |On 22 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - warsaw
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               HALYNA KOROTYSH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Igors Nilovs (sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Halyna Korotysh, was born on 22 December 1979 and is  a
    female citizen of Ukraine.  The appellant had made an application under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 to reside  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national,  Mr  Igors  Nilovs
    (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).  The application was refused by
    the Entry Clearance Officer, Warsaw by a decision dated  6  March  2013
    and the respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  M  J  H
    Wilson) which, in a determination  promulgated  on  13  November  2013,
    allowed the appeal.  I shall refer to the appellant as the "respondent"
    (as she was before the First-tier  Tribunal)  and  to  the  respondent,
    Halyna Korotysh, as the "appellant".

 2. The sole ground for refusal  was  that  the  ECO  considered  that  the
    marriage of the appellant and sponsor was a  marriage  of  convenience.
    Judge Wilson concluded that it was  not  and  accordingly  allowed  the
    appeal.

 3. The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge failed to have regard
    to previous applications for entry clearance made by the  appellant  in
    which she had allegedly relied upon false  documents  in  support.   Mr
    Diwnycz, for the Entry Clearance Officer, did not  seek  to  rely  upon
    these grounds.  He told me that the Entry Clearance Officer was  unable
    to prove to the required standard that the  previous  applications  had
    been supported by false documents.

 4. The grounds go on to assert that the burden of proof had been  reversed
    by reason of  the  suspicions  generated  by  the  appellant's  alleged
    reliance upon false documents and that the appellant should  have  been
    "invited to respond to the basis of suspicion by  producing  evidential
    material to dispel it" (Papajorgii  (EEA  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) at  [27]).   The  difficulty  with  that
    ground is that the Tribunal was not  dissuaded  that  a  suspicion  did
    arise given that the Entry Clearance Officer is unable  to  prove  that
    false  documents  were  relied  upon  in  respect   of   the   previous
    applications.  In any event, Judge Wilson was well aware (see [13])  of
    the allegation regarding false documents and he found that the  sponsor
    (who gave oral evidence before him) remained credible in  his  evidence
    notwithstanding.  Further, the sponsor gave oral  evidence  before  the
    judge which  the  judge  found  entirely  credible  and  also  produced
    documentary evidence which the judge had "no grounds for  doubting  ...
    reflected in general terms exchanges of an intimate nature between  the
    appellant and  the  sponsor,  a  finding  I  make  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities" [14].  Even if the burden of proof had shifted,  I  find
    that Judge Wilson's careful and thorough determination records that  he
    accepted both  the  oral  and  documentary  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant and sponsor to prove that  the  marriage  was  genuine.   The
    grounds complain that the judge only heard the sponsor's  evidence  and
    did not have the benefit of hearing from the appellant.  Given that the
    appellant is resident abroad, that is hardly surprising.  The judge was
    entitled to determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence which was
    adduced before him and I have no doubt in finding that  the  judge  has
    provided sufficient reasons for rejecting the ECO's assertion that  the
    appellant  and  sponsor  had  entered  a   marriage   of   convenience.
    Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

 5. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 21 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

