
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2013                              |On 21 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE MITTING
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                             Nuzhia Fatima Fuaad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fuaad Haamed Chaudhry, non-legal rep (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. On 19 February 2013 the appellant applied for entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Work Migrant.   On  6  March  2013  her
    application was refused by an Entry  Clearance  Officer.   She  appeals
    against that refusal.  Her appeal was itself refused by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a determination and reasons promulgated on 3 October  2013.



 2. The appellant was born in Pakistan  on  8  August  1987.   She  had  an
    arranged marriage contracted at a distance with her husband and sponsor
    on 30 July 2011.  A marriage ceremony was performed which both attended
    in person in Pakistan on 8 September 2012.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer decided that there was no evidence provided
    to show contact and intervening devotion between the appellant and  her
    husband.  Judge Freer was satisfied that despite the view of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer there was sufficient evidence for him to find to  the
    relevant threshold, that is to say on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    that it was the appellant's intention to live together with her husband
    throughout his stay and her stay in the United Kingdom.  He  then  went
    on to consider evidence of the husband's intention.  This was  a  paper
    application.  Therefore, Judge Freer only considered the documents  put
    in by the appellant and her husband and  sponsor.   They  included  the
    marriage certificate; two affidavits, one from her husband and one from
    his paternal uncle, devoted in reality to proof of the  marriage;  some
    photographs, some of which bore dates, taken at the  marriage  ceremony
    and on their honeymoon; and evidence of telephone  calls  between  them
    when they were separated and likewise of emails.

 4. This material satisfied Judge Freer that at the date of the application
    "there was adequate evidence  of  a  subsisting  relationship  for  the
    purposes of subparagraph 319C(d)" of the Immigration  Rules.   He  then
    went on to give his reasons notwithstanding that finding for dismissing
    the appeal.  He expressed it thus: "I am minded to dismiss  the  appeal
    but only on the 'intentions' ground in subparagraph 319C(e)".   It  can
    be discerned from his reasoning in  paragraph  12  that  he  found  the
    written material  provided  to  substantiate  the  husband's  intention
    inadequate to discharge the burden of proof on the appellant.

 5. We readily understand that conclusion  and  had  matters  rested  there
    would have had no difficulty in concluding that the  decision  was  not
    based upon an error of law and contained no error of law.  But  we  are
    unable in the light of the facts and findings we  have  recited  to  be
    able rationally to reconcile  Judge  Freer's  conclusion  that  he  was
    satisfied that there was a subsisting  relation  at  the  date  of  the
    application, that is to say a marriage, and satisfied that it  was  the
    appellant's intention to live with her  husband,  with  his  conclusion
    that the "intentions" ground was not satisfied.  What in effect he  has
    decided is that although he was satisfied  that  there  was  a  genuine
    marriage and that one of the parties of the marriage intended  to  live
    with the other, he was not satisfied that the other party  intended  to
    live with the first person.  This seems to us to be logically  curious,
    so curious as to  be  unsustainable.   Accordingly  we  find  that  the
    decision did contain a highly material error of law.

 6. We must then consider what  to  do  about  it.   We  are  told  by  the
    appellant's sponsor, her husband who has appeared before us today, that
    she is pregnant and expects their first child towards the end  of  this
    month or early next month.  His own visa will, by the end  of  February
    next year, have less  than  six  months  to  run,  so  that  under  the
    Immigration Rules he will not be in a  position  to  sponsor  her.   In
    those circumstances, although we could remit  the  matter  for  further
    hearing back to the First-tier Tribunal we propose to take the shortcut
    of hearing him on oath ourselves.

 7. Having identified an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal we have heard  evidence  on  oath  given  by  the  appellant's
    sponsor and husband.  He has produced  to  us  his  original  Pakistani
    passport which bears plainly genuine  entries  which  confirm  his  own
    evidence about his travels to and from Pakistan  via  the  United  Arab
    Emirates.  He gave his evidence in a frank and open manner.  When asked
    to deal with unexpected byways such as the entry stamps on his passport
    showing that he entered the United Arab Emirates passport control on 11
    March and exited it on 12 March this year his explanation for that  was
    that his flight was delayed by a snowfall in the United Kingdom so that
    he missed his connecting flight at Dubai and was  put  up  in  a  hotel
    overnight.  That explanation is the  sort  of  thing  which  permits  a
    Tribunal to tell whether or not someone is speaking the truth  frankly,
    and without prior preparation he gave us an entirely  unforced  account
    of what occurred then and was clearly telling the truth about it.

 8. We are satisfied he is telling us the truth about much  more  important
    matters, namely his marriage, the fact that it is  a  genuine  marriage
    and a consummated one.  What the First-tier Tribunal did not  know  and
    what in fact he could readily have said  is  that  his  wife  was  then
    pregnant.  She is due to give birth either at the end of this month  or
    the beginning of next month.  He has shown us on his  mobile  telephone
    what is clearly a genuine hospital record confirming that  fact.   This
    is obviously  a  subsisting  marriage  and  provided  that  immigration
    control permits it, it is obviously her  intention  to  live  with  him
    while he is in the United Kingdom and his intention to live  with  her.
    Although this was an arranged marriage it is clearly a genuine one  and
    the parties intend to  fulfil  their  mutual  responsibilities  to  the
    other.

 9. Accordingly, having identified an error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, having heard evidence which  for  obvious  reasons
    the First-tier Tribunal was unable to hear, we are satisfied  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 319C(e) as well as 319C(d) are satisfied, and
    that this appeal is therefore allowed.






Signed                              Date


Mr Justice Mitting


