

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/08739/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 21 June 2016                               |On 13 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                   M A J D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Vidal, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge L M Shand QC ("the FTTJ")  promulgated  on  25  November
    2015, in which she refused the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal
    of his application for entry  clearance  to  join  his  mother  who  is
    settled in the United Kingdom.


 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the appellant is a minor, an anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The appellant sought entry clearance to join his mother in the UK. This
    was refused because the respondent did not accept the sponsor had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant or that there  were  any  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which would make the  child's
    exclusion undesirable (paragraph 297(e)  and  (f)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules).


 4. The FTTJ found, on appeal, that responsibility for  the  upbringing  of
    the  appellant  was  shared  by  the  sponsor  with   the   appellant's
    grandmother, with whom he lives in Mauritius.  The FTTJ also found that
    there were no serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
    which merited the grant of entry clearance.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and also on human rights grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought and granted in the following terms:


         "The judge's determination is lengthy and carefully reasoned and  a
         point underlying the case and the grounds  is  the  effect  of  the
         grant of the visa  in  2011  referred  to  at  the  outset  of  the
         determination in paragraphs 9-10 and the judge's disagreement  with
         counsel's submissions on the point as set out in paragraph 22.


         Without prejudice to the other grounds there may be some  force  in
         the submission that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  must  have  been
         satisfied in 2011 that the sponsor had sole responsibility and some
         change of circumstances would need to be  identified  in  order  to
         demonstrate that she no longer exercised such responsibility."

 6. Hence the matter comes before me.

Submissions

 7. Both Ms Vidal and Mr Avery agreed that paragraphs 319H and 297  of  the
    Immigration Rules make similar provisions for entry clearance to join a
    parent. Thus the relevant  potential  basis  for  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance in 2011 was the same as that before the  FTTJ,  i.e.  whether
    the receiving parent had sole responsibility for the applicant or  that
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations.


 8. Ms Vidal submitted for the  appellant  that  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to
    appreciate the impact of the grant in 2011 under paragraph 319. The ECO
    must have concluded,  at  that  time,  in  the  absence  of  compelling
    circumstances,  that  the   appellant's   upbringing   was   the   sole
    responsibility of the  sponsor.   The  FTTJ  had  noted  there  was  no
    evidence as to the basis on which the visa had been  granted  in  2011.
    It had been unreasonable therefore to make  findings  contrary  to  the
    appellant's  circumstances  in  2011.  The  only  difference   in   the
    appellant's life was the death of his grandfather,  with  whom  he  had
    lived in  2011.  There  was  sufficient  evidence  of  continuing  sole
    responsibility from 2008.

 9. Mr Avery submitted for the respondent that the FTTJ had dealt with  the
    appeal appropriately; it had been the function of the  FTTJ  to  assess
    the evidence and the FTTJ had not known what evidence  was  before  the
    respondent in 2011. There could, for example, have been a  letter  with
    good reasons why the grandparents were not capable of looking after the
    appellant.   The  issue  was  whether  the  appellant   fulfilled   the
    requirements of the Rules at the date of decision. The FTTJ  had  given
    good reasons for finding responsibility was shared from 2008.

10. Ms  Vidal  referred  me  to  the  appellant's  grandmother's  affidavit
    produced at the appeal hearing. Her evidence is that it is the sponsor,
    who finances the appellant's upbringing, has  sole  responsibility  for
    the child.  There was no reference to this in the decision, only to the
    fact that the grandmother referring to treating the  appellant  as  her
    child.  The FTTJ had failed to take into account all the evidence.

Discussion

11. The witness evidence before  the  FTTJ  was  to  the  effect  that  the
    sponsor, his mother, had had sole  responsibility  for  his  upbringing
    since 2008 and that  he  had  been  living  with  his  grandmother  and
    grandfather in 2011 when he was granted entry  clearance  to  join  his
    mother in the UK.  Whilst the appellant's grandmother says that she and
    her husband (prior to his  death)  treated  the  appellant  like  their
    child, she also says that the sponsor "was the only one taking all  the
    responsibility for the child. The mother of the child is the  only  one
    to finance for the upbringing of the child and she was sending me money
    regularly for the upbringing of her son".   The FTTJ made  no  specific
    adverse credibility findings with regard to the witness evidence.


12. The task of the FTTJ was to make a decision on the  basis  of  all  the
    evidence. That evidence included the grant of entry clearance  in  2011
    under paragraph 319H.  The FTTJ accepted the terms  of  that  paragraph
    were similar to those in paragraph 297.  The 2011 grant was  consistent
    with  the  appellant's  evidence  that  the  sponsor   had   had   sole
    responsibility for his upbringing since his father left  in  2008.   It
    also explained the relative paucity of evidence before the FTTJ on  the
    issue of responsibility for the child's  upbringing  between  2008  and
    2011.

13. The burden of proof was on the appellant.  Entry  clearance  must  have
    been  granted  in  2011  because  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  he
    fulfilled one or more of the relevant criteria in paragraph  319H.  The
    fact of the grant was consistent with the appellant's  claim  that  his
    circumstances in 2011 were similar to those at the  date  of  decision.
    The FTTJ states (paragraph 22) she does "not know what evidence was put
    forward in support of the application in 2011".   This  statement  does
    not take account of the appellant's evidence that  the  application  in
    2011 was made on similar grounds to  that  under  297.   That  evidence
    warranted consideration by the FTTJ and, if she rejected it, she should
    have said so and why. Instead, the FTTJ reiterates the finding she  has
    already made (paragraph 21) that responsibility for the  upbringing  of
    the appellant was shared.  I conclude that the FTTJ's  finding  on  the
    issue of responsibility was made without consideration of the  fact  of
    the grant in 2011 and the likely basis for that grant.  Thus  the  FTTJ
    has failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence  which  should  have  been
    considered in the round with the remaining evidence before a finding on
    the issue of responsibility was made.


14. The FTTJ's failure to factor the grant of entry clearance in 2011  into
    her assessment of the evidence before  coming  to  a  decision  on  the
    nature and extent of the sponsor's responsibility for the upbringing of
    her child renders her findings unsustainable in law. She has failed  to
    take material evidence into  account  in  reaching  her  finding  under
    paragraph 297(e).  Had  she  done  so,  the  outcome  might  have  been
    different. I set her decision aside.

15. The parties' representatives agreed that, in such an  event,  I  should
    remake the decision and this I now do.

16.  It  is  not  claimed  that  the  appellant  is  living  in   difficult
    circumstances or that he has ever done so.  I find that, on the balance
    of probabilities, entry clearance was granted in 2011 on the basis that
    the appellant's mother, the sponsor, had sole responsibility for him at
    that time.  In  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances have changed since the  grant  in  2011  under  paragraph
    319H, I accept that the sponsor continued to have  sole  responsibility
    for the appellant's upbringing, at the date of  decision,  as  she  had
    done since 2008.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error of law, as set out above.


18. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration Rules.




A M Black
                                                              Dated 13  July
    2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award
The FTTJ made a fee award and that stands.


A M Black                                              Dated 13 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
