
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08855/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 September 2016                         |On 4 October 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                         luis enmanuel severino diaz
                       (anonymity directioN NOt MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRATRAY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Young of Counsel instructed by Hodders Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clarke
    promulgated on 17 March 2016.  The appellant, who has now obtained  his
    majority, is a citizen of the Dominican Republic.  He sought permission
    to enter the United Kingdom under the provisions of  paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules as the child of a relevant person settled in  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  findings  and  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge repeatedly refer to the absence or paucity of  evidence.
    It is a case that was determined on the papers  without  representation
    on either side.

2.   The grounds of appeal dealt primarily with  procedural  unfairness  and
    in particular the failure on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    lodge relevant documents.  Reference has  been  made  in  the  skeleton
    argument which I have seen this morning to the case of Cvetkovs (visa -
    no file produced - directions) Latvia [2011] UKUT 212 (IAC).  When  the
    matter was called on today I made the file available to both Mr Kandola
    who acts for the Secretary of State and  Ms  Young  who  acts  for  the
    appellant.  It was immediately  plain  that  there  was  little  or  no
    material in the file and accordingly it was not open to  the  judge  to
    come to the conclusions which she did.

3.   Mr Kandola does not resist the setting aside of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis  of  this  error  of  law.   In  those
    circumstances I therefore allow this appeal.  I set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and I remit the matter for  redetermination.



4.   In order to facilitate a prompt resolution of this matter by the First-
    tier Tribunal I require the Secretary of State to use  best  endeavours
    to file and serve copies of all  documents  lodged  with  the  original
    application.  In  addition,  there  are   various   determinations   in
    procedural history of  this  matter  which  have  been  brought  to  my
    attention by Mr Kandola.  These are to be copied today, with  one  copy
    given to the appellant's representative and the  other  lodged  on  the
    court file for use  when  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hears  the  matter
    afresh.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  set
aside. The matter is remitted to be heard afresh by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge other than Judge Clarke.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




