

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: OA/08767/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 1 November 2017                    |             On 17 November 2017     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                             ANDRA ZOLTAN BANATI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Hungary born on 11 May 1981.  He appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 15 May 2015  refusing  him
    admission to the United Kingdom, a decision which led to his removal on
    that date.  The appellant had been living in the  United  Kingdom  with
    his wife but went back for a short holiday to Hungary on his own on  10
    May 2015.  On 14 May 2015 he arrived at Luton Airport from Budapest but
    was refused entry to the United Kingdom and was removed on 15 May 2015,
    without being given an in  country  right  of  appeal.   The  appellant
    appealed this decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    Tier Tribunal S Gillespie on  5  February  2016.   He  found  that  the
    immigration decision was not in accordance with the law and allowed the
    appeal to the extent  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  make  an
    immigration decision which carries an in country right of appeal if she
    deems it appropriate.  This was in a decision promulgated on 5 February
    2016.

 2. The respondent requested permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and
    permission was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 6  July
    2016 who stated that it is arguable  that  Judge  Gillespie's  decision
    does not adequately disclose clearly the reasons for his  finding  that
    the appellant may be entitled to an in country  right  of  appeal.   He
    found that the appellant appeared not to have demonstrated that he is a
    person who holds a valid EEA family permit or can otherwise prove  that
    he is resident in the United  Kingdom,  with  reference  to  Regulation
    27(2) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.  The Upper Tribunal appeal was heard
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 1 September 2016.  He found that Mr
    Banati has an out of country right of appeal which  he  has  sought  to
    exercise.  He therefore  set  aside  Judge  Gillespie's  decision.   At
    paragraph 10 of Judge Chalkley's decision he states  "Regulation  27(1)
    of the Regulations provides that subject to paragraphs (2)  and  (3)  a
    person may not appeal under Regulation 26 whilst he is  in  the  United
    Kingdom against an EEA decision (a) to  refuse  to  admit  him  to  the
    United Kingdom", which is the case in this appeal. His decision goes on
    to state that subparagraph (2) states that paragraph 1(a) to (aa)  does
    not apply where the person is in the United Kingdom, but in  this  case
    Mr Banati was not in the United Kingdom.  He was  out  of  country  and
    only had an out of country right of appeal.   Judge  Chalkley  remitted
    the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.

 3. Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Agnew heard the appeal on  1  February
    2017.  Her decision states that Mr Banati's appeal is  dismissed  under
    the Immigration European Economic Area Regulations  2006  and  is  also
    dismissed under Article 8 of ECHR.  She  made  reference  to  paragraph
    19(1) of the Regulations which states that a person is not entitled  to
    be admitted to the United Kingdom by virtue of  Regulation  11  if  his
    exclusion is justified on grounds of public policy, public security  or
    public health in accordance with Regulation 21.   She  noted  that  the
    respondent refused the appellant admission to the United Kingdom  under
    Regulation 19 on 15 May 2015, finding that he was not  entitled  to  be
    admitted because his  exclusion  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health in accordance with  Regulation
    21.

 4. This appellant in  Hungary  was  convicted  of  fraud  offences  on  23
    February 2010  and  sentenced  to  ten  months  imprisonment.   He  was
    convicted of fraud offences and sentenced to one year and  four  months
    imprisonment in Hungary on 7 March 2012.  He  was  convicted  of  fraud
    offences and sentenced to two  years  imprisonment  in  Hungary  on  24
    September 2012.  In December  2014  he  was  arrested  in  the  UK  for
    shoplifting and fraud offences but this was not taken any further.

 5. Judge Agnew makes reference to Article 3(1)  of  the  Directive  64/221
    which states that grounds of public policy and public security  are  to
    be based exclusively on the conduct of the person  concerned  and  that
    previous criminal convictions  are  not  in  themselves  to  constitute
    grounds for taking such measures and can only  be  taken  into  account
    insofar as the circumstances which had given rise  to  that  conviction
    were evidence of personal conduct constituting a present  threat  to  a
    requirement of public policy.  She referred to  the  lack  of  evidence
    before her about the appellant's state of health and economic situation
    and noted that she has evidence of his wife working in the  UK  but  no
    evidence of her whereabouts and circumstances and has no evidence  that
    the appellant is exercising Treaty Rights in the  UK,  apart  from  the
    appellant's and his wife's statements.

 6. What Judge Agnew did was undertake an evaluation of the likelihood that
    the appellant would reoffend and what the likely consequences would  be
    if he did.  She balanced the risk of future harm against  the  need  to
    give effect to  the  right  of  free  movement.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant still maintained that he was not guilty of fraud offences and
    was not a criminal.  I have  seen  a  Deportation  Notice  against  the
    appellant dated 21 May 2015.  Judge Agnew found  that  the  appellant's
    statement does not show any reflection  or  wish  to  rehabilitate  but
    protests his innocence and blames others and she  states  that  despite
    the appellant's history of criminal convictions he arrived in the UK in
    2014 and he has not challenged the respondent's assertion that  he  was
    arrested for shoplifting and fraud.  She finds that  this  indicates  a
    strong propensity on the  part  of  the  appellant  not  to  engage  in
    rehabilitation but to reoffend and extract money from others by  fraud.
    She therefore finds that the appellant has a propensity to reoffend and
    poses a risk to the public.  She finds that he continues to  present  a
    genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to prospective  victims
    of his offending.  She finds that his  exclusion  from  the  UK  is  in
    accordance with Regulations. She finds that the exclusion is  justified
    and proportionate when weighed against  the  necessity  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control and avoiding the  threat  to  the  public
    posed by the appellant's presence in the UK, and she finds that in this
    particular case there is no breach of Article 8 of ECHR.

The Hearing

 7. Much to my surprise instead of a representative appearing on behalf  of
    the appellant he appeared himself with a friend who helped to translate
    what was said at the hearing to the appellant.

 8. I asked the appellant how he had got into the United  Kingdom  when  he
    has been excluded and he said he came in a car and just drove  through.
    He said he had wanted to attend the hearing.  This is an appellant  who
    has no in country  appeal.   He  has  an  out  of  country  appeal.   I
    explained that this is an error of law hearing and I felt  he  required
    representation but he told me that his representative  had  not  turned
    up.  I explained that I have to decide if there is an error of  law  in
    the First-Tier Judge's decision.  I asked him what he thought the error
    of law was and he said that the decision is  unfair  as  he  is  an  EU
    citizen and has not had any convictions  against  him  since  2012  and
    these were in Hungary.

 9. I have considered the decision by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Agnew.  I find that she has  carefully  explained  the  situation,  has
    noted that the appellant only has an out of country right of appeal and
    has given proper reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant  should  be
    excluded from the United Kingdom.  She has explained why this exclusion
    is in accordance with the Regulations and has taken  into  account  the
    witness statements provided.  She has also considered Article 8 of ECHR
    and finds that there is no breach of Article 8  and  has  given  proper
    reasons for this finding.

10. I am presuming that the Presenting Officer will contact the immigration
    authorities informing them that the appellant is  back  in  the  United
    Kingdom in spite of the Exclusion Order.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Agnew's decision promulgated on 8 February 2017.

The decision by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew will stand.

Anonymity has not been directed.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray



