
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08435/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2016                      |On 11 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MRS DIL KUMARI PUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Counsel, instructed by N C Brothers &
Co
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on 30 July 1989. She  applied
    for entry clearance on 13 April 2015 to live with  her  spouse  present
    and settled in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules. This application was refused by the respondent on 22 April  2015
    because the respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.   The  appellant
    appealed against the decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  on
    16 August 2016 gave permission for  the  appellant  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that no Tribunal could have made the finding that the appellant
    and her partner are not in a subsisting relationship.

 2. At the hearing, photographs were provided of the appellant's  wife,  in
    an advanced state of pregnancy. One of the reasons given by  the  judge
    when dismissing the appellant's appeal was that no photographs had been
    provided of  the  appellant's  wife's  pregnancy.   I  am  entitled  to
    consider these photographs  because  they  could  not  have  been  made
    available at the time of the hearing because the appellant's  wife  was
    in the early stages of pregnancy. The photographs  shed  light  on  the
    appellant's assertion that his wife was pregnant.

 3. At paragraph 32 the judge stated that he finds that the sponsor's visit
    to Nepal in June 2015 was undertaken  with  the  intention  of  falsely
    showing that he had visited the appellant and  to  explain  his  wife's
    subsequent pregnancy which  had  been  invented  in  pursuance  of  the
    appeal.  The judge did not give adequate reasons for his  finding  that
    the appellant went to Nepal in order to falsely claim that he was in  a
    relationship  with  his  wife,  is  perverse  and  not  a   sustainable
    conclusion on the evidence before the judge.

 4. At the hearing the Home Office Presenting Officer made  no  submissions
    and said that he left the matter to me. I find that the judge fell into
    material error of law when he failed to give good reasons  for  finding
    that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  are  not   in   a   subsisting
    relationship.

 5. Although this was not raised in the grounds of appeal, I consider it to
    be a Robinson obvious point. The judge did not take into  account  that
    the burden of proof would be on the respondent if allegations of  fraud
    are made. There was no credible evidence before the judge  for  him  to
    find that the appellant's claim that he is in a subsisting relationship
    with his wife and that she was pregnant was fraudulent.

 6. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge N Moxon in its entirety and
    I substitute my own decision and I find  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship   and   the
    appellant's wife is pregnant with his child. I find that the  appellant
    visited Nepal to visit his wife for that reason. There is  no  evidence
    perform me upon which I can conclude that the appellant  and  his  wife
    are not in  a  subsisting  relationship.  I  find  that  the  appellant
    satisfies the requirements of the immigration rules to be granted entry
    clearance. Other than the genuineness of  the  relationship,  no  other
    issue was taken by the respondent.

 7. I allow the appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

    Decision

    Appeal allowed under the Immigration Rules

    No anonymity direction is made

Signed                                  Date 8 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I make a whole fee award of any fee  which  has
been  paid  or  may  be  payable  for  the  following  reason.  There   were
insufficient  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appellant's   appeal   by   the
respondent.

Signed                                  Date 8 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

