
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09628/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Hans, instructed by Henry Hyams & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, BAA, was born in 1999 and is a citizen  of  Kenya.   She
    had applied for entry clearance  to  join  her  sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the provisions of paragraph 297 of HC 395 (as amended):

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he/she:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
                  parents  or  a  relative   in   one   of   the   following
                  circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
                      for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom and the other is being admitted on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and



             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to  join  without
                  recourse  to  public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to  join,
                  own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
                  this capacity; and

             (vii)    does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
                  for refusal."

    The appellant's application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    Nairobi on 12 June 2014.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Turnock)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  24
    February 2015, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are primarily concerned with the judge's  alleged
    failure to follow the Upper Tribunal decision in  Mundeba  (Section  55
    and paragraph 297(i)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  The head note reads:

         (i)  The exercise of the duty by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
             assess an  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
             whether there are family or other  considerations  making  the
             child's   exclusion   undesirable   inevitably   involves   an
             assessment of what the  child's  welfare  and  best  interests
             require.

         ii)  Where an immigration decision engages Article  8  rights,  due
             regard must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the
             Child. An entry clearance decision  for  the  admission  of  a
             child under 18 is "an action concerning  children...undertaken
             by...administrative authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best
             interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".

         iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55  UK  Borders  Act  2009
             only applies to children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
             doubtless explains why the Secretary of  State's  IDI  invites
             Entry Clearance Officers to consider  the  statutory  guidance
             issued under s.55.

         iv)  Family considerations require an  evaluation  of  the  child's
             welfare including  emotional  needs.   'Other  considerations'
             come in to play where there are other  aspects  of  a  child's
             life that are serious and  compelling  for  example  where  an
             applicant is living in an  unacceptable  social  and  economic
             environment.  The focus needs to be on  the  circumstances  of
             the child in the light of his or her age,  social  backgrounds
             and developmental history  and  will  involve  inquiry  as  to
             whether:-

                  a.   there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

                  b.   there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

                  c.    there  are  stable  arrangements  for  the   child's
                  physical care;

             The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to  whether  the
             combination of  circumstances  are  sufficiently  serious  and
             compelling to require admission.

         v)   As a starting point the best interests of a child are  usually
             best served by being with  both  or  at  least  one  of  their
             parents. Continuity of residence is another factor; change  in
             the place of residence where a child has grown up for a number
             of years when socially aware is important: see also SG  (child
             of a polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265  (IAC)  [2012]
             Imm AR 939.

 3. It appears from the grounds that the appellant only sought entry to the
    United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  that  there  were  family  and   other
    considerations making her exclusion undesirable.  The  appellant  heard
    evidence from the sister (sponsor) and considered all  the  documentary
    evidence.   She  set  out  in  some  detail  the  nature  of  the  care
    arrangements which had existed  for  the  appellant  in  Kenya.   Those
    arrangements are somewhat convoluted, as were the relationships  within
    the appellant's family.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  DNA  evidence
    before him established on a balance of probabilities that the appellant
    is the full sister of the sponsor in the United Kingdom.   He  accepted
    that the appellant indicated that she no longer wished to live with  Mr
    O in Kenya, stating that "it's very difficult if I am not in  school  I
    get passed to people who look after me ... my  life  is  being  put  at
    risk."  The judge wrote this:

         "There were raised, in the notice of refusal, a number of  concerns
         which have not been satisfactorily addressed.  Although  Mr  O  has
         provided a statement and an affidavit he has not explained  why  he
         is referred to as the husband of the appellant's grandmother or why
         he brought the appellant to the UK and what they  did  whilst  they
         were in the UK.  I am not satisfied that he has properly  explained
         how the appellant came to be in the care of Mrs A who he  described
         as  a  "village  mate."   It  is  difficult  to  accept   ...   the
         circumstances of the appellant would not  be  well-known  and  that
         when Mr O took responsibility for the appellant they would not have
         inquired  into  her  history.   I  am  not   satisfied   that   the
         circumstances of the appellant have been properly detailed and I am
         not satisfied as to the level of  support  she  receives  and  what
         other relatives she has in Kenya.  I am not satisfied that she has
         discharged the burden on  her  to  establish  that  she  meets  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules."

 4. The response of Mr Hans, for the appellant before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    to those remarks was that the judge should have asked questions of  the
    sponsor whom he had before him at the court hearing.  I  disagree.   It
    is the duty of the appellant and her representatives (I note  that  the
    appellant was represented by the same solicitors before the  First-tier
    Tribunal) to present their case in a clear and coherent manner  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   The  concerns  outlined  by  the  judge  in  the
    paragraph which I have quoted above are referred to also in the  notice
    of refusal: it is clear that the ECO was also  confused  regarding  the
    arrangements made for the appellant's care.  It is not  the  case  that
    the judge has determined the appeal on a basis which was completely new
    and which the appellant and her representatives have had no opportunity
    to answer.  It was not for the judge  to  ask  questions  in  order  to
    perfect the appellant's evidence; the judge should only  ask  questions
    necessary to clarify evidence which has already been presented  to  him
    or her.  Crucially, as the judge indicated in the passage which I  have
    quoted, the burden of proof in such appeals rests on the appellant  and
    the judge was fully entitled, on the basis of the  evidence  which  was
    put before him and which he has analysed  in  considerable  detail,  to
    find that the burden of proof had simply not been  discharged  in  this
    instance.  His approach to and analysis of the  evidence  was  entirely
    sound.  He reached a conclusion which was plainly available to  him  on
    the basis of  the  evidence.   In  the  circumstances,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

