
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09252/2014
                                                               OA/09253/2014
                                                               OA/09254/2014
                                                               OA/09255/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                           SABREEN MTASHA EL ANIZI
                            HAMAD FAWZAN EL ANIZI
                            HAMZA FAWZAN EL ANIZI
                           HUSSEIN FAWZAN EL ANIZI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - beirut
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Aman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants and the Respondent's decisions

 1. The Appellants are mother, born in 1974, and her three sons born  1999,
    2002 and 2004.  They are stateless and undocumented  Bidoon  living  in
    Tyre, Lebanon at the time of their application for entry  clearance  to
    join their husband and  father,  Ali  Mbarak  El  Anizi  who  has  been
    recognised as a stateless refugee under the Refugee Convention  by  the
    United Kingdom. His date of birth is given as 1  January  1985  and  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 March 2011.

 2. On 14 July 2014 under reference number 170102  the  Respondent  refused
    the application of each of the  Appellants.   The  mother  was  refused
    because the only documentary evidence of her subsisting marriage to her
    husband  who  is  her  Sponsor  was  "only  a  poor  quality   Marriage
    Certificate".  The Respondent considered she did  not  intend  to  live
    together permanently with her husband.  There was little or no evidence
    of any contact or communication with him over the years in  which  they
    had lived apart.  There was no photographic evidence of their  marriage
    or of having lived a family life together before her  husband  came  to
    the United  Kingdom.   Her  application  was  therefore  refused  under
    paragraph  352A(iv) of the Immigration Rules which requires that  "each
    of the parties intends to live permanently with the other as his or her
    spouse ... and the marriage is subsisting ...".

 3. The Respondent considered the claim by reference to Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.  He referred again to  the  lack  of  satisfactory
    evidence that the mother and the Sponsor were part of a family unit and
    that  they  had  enjoyed  family  life  together  until  he  had  fled.
    Additionally, he considered  the  Sponsor  could  join  the  mother  in
    "Lebanon or another neighbouring country of safety which will  also  be
    close to your cultural way of living, to establish family  life".   Her
    exclusion  from   the   United   Kingdom   was   therefore   considered
    proportionate to the need to maintain effective immigration control.

 4. The children were refused on the  basis  that  their  mother  had  been
    refused  and  the  Respondent  referred  to  paragraph  352D   of   the
    Immigration Rules which provides as follows:-

         '352D.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
               enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order  to  join  or
               remain with the parent who has been granted  refugee  status
               are that the applicant:

                (i)    is the child of a parent who is currently  a  refugee
                    granted status as such under the  immigration  rules  in
                    the United Kingdom; and

                (ii)   is under the age of 18, and

                (iii)   is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
                    is  not  a  civil  partner,  and  has  not   formed   an
                    independent family unit; and

                (iv)   was part of the family unit  of  the  person  granted
                    asylum at the time that the person granted  asylum  left
                    the country of his habitual residence in order  to  seek
                    asylum; and

                (v)    would not be excluded from protection  by  virtue  of
                    article 1F of the United Nations Convention and Protocol
                    relating to the Status of Refugees if he  were  to  seek
                    asylum in his own right; and

                (vi)   if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.'

 5.  On 23 February 2015 the Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision.
     He noted no additional evidence other than the money transfer  receipt
    had been filed with the grounds of appeal.  He noted  the  Sponsor  was
    not the biological father of the child  Appellants  and  there  was  no
    evidence   their   biological   father   had   relinquished    parental
    responsibility. Indeed, there was no information of his whereabouts and
    no evidence he had consented to their going with their  mother  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The Entry Clearance Manager also noted  there  was  no
    satisfactory evidence that the children  were  part  of  the  Sponsor's
    family before he left Kuwait.  Given these matters  he  submitted  that
    any appeal should be dismissed.

First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 6.  The  Appellants  appealed  under  Section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds
    are that the mother is an undocumented Bidoon and was therefore  unable
    to obtain passports or other official  identification  documents.   Her
    husband had been accepted by  the  United  Kingdom  authorities  as  an
    undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait and the discrimination  faced  by  them
    amounted to persecution. The grounds referred to the  determination  in
    NM (Documented/Undocumented Bidoon: Risk) Kuwait  CG  [2013]  UKUT  356
    (IAC).  They asserted the applications for entry clearance were made as
    soon as practicable after the Sponsor's position in the United  Kingdom
    was clarified and he had secured  accommodation  for  himself  and  his
    family.  The other grounds assert the genuineness  and  subsistence  of
    the marriage of the mother and the Sponsor and  disagreement  with  the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. By a determination promulgated on 27 April 2015 Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal       A M S Green dismissed the  appeals  on  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.

 8. On 23 July 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brunnen  granted  the
    Appellants permission to appeal because it was arguable the  Judge  had
    erred in law by proceeding on the  basis  that  the  original  Marriage
    Certificate of the mother and the Sponsor had not been produced to  the
    Respondent.  He noted the Respondent's  decision  referred  to  a  poor
    quality  Marriage  Certificate  but  not  to  a  copy  of  a   Marriage
    Certificate.  Other references to documents made by the Respondent  had
    differentiated  copies  from  original  documents  and   the   Marriage
    Certificate had not been described as a copy.  This went to  the  issue
    whether the mother and Sponsor had entered into a genuine marriage.

 9. Judge Brunnen also considered it was an arguable error of law that  the
    Judge had failed to consider  whether  evidence  of  telephone  contact
    subsequent to the date of  decision  under  appeal  subsequent  to  the
    Respondent's decision shed light on  the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between the mother and the Sponsor as at the date of decision.

10. On the Tribunal file was a response  to  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal asserting that the Judge had appropriately directed himself  and
    conducted a very careful analysis of  the  evidence,  finding  numerous
    deficiencies in it as mentioned at paragraphs  22(iv)  -  (ix)  of  his
    decision; the issue whether the marriage certificate was an original or
    a copy was a minor part of  the  basis  for  the  Respondent's  adverse
    findings and that in any event the document  alone  was  inadequate  to
    demonstrate a lawful marriage.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Sponsor attended the hearing. I explained the purpose and procedure
    to be adopted. He took no active part other than to confirm his address
    as noted on the Tribunal File.

Submissions for the Appellants

12. Mr Mahmood submitted the Sponsor had been accorded  refugee  status  on
    4 June 2013, having arrived on 12 March 2011.  The  original  Marriage
    Certificate had been submitted to the Respondent who had not supplied a
    bundle for  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Sreeraman
    interjected that  whether  the  Marriage  Certificate  which  had  been
    submitted was an original was not considered now to be a live issue.

13. Mr Mahmood continued the Sponsor  had  produced  records  of  telephone
    contact with the mother and  the  Judge  had  been  in  error  to  have
    dismissed such evidence and also the evidence of the money transfers by
    the Sponsor at page 126  of  the  Appellants'  bundle.   I  noted  this
    referred to a single transmission of �620  on  4 August  2014  to  the
    mother in Lebanon.  He submitted  that  although  it  was  evidence  of
    matters after the date of the  decision  under  appeal,  such  evidence
    should have been considered, following the jurisprudence  in  DR  (ECO:
    Post-decision decision) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038 and Naz (Subsisting
    marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT  00040  (IAC).   The
    evidence corroborated  the  subsistence  of  the  relationship  of  the
    Appellant mother and the Sponsor.

Submissions for the Respondent

14. Ms Sreeraman relied on the Respondent's Procedure Rule 24 response.  It
    was accepted that at paragraph 22(v) the Judge may have erred  in  fact
    but in any event it was not material and the decision was justified  in
    respect of other valid findings made by the Judge.

15. The Judge's consideration whether the marriage of the  mother  and  the
    Sponsor was subsisting had been conducted in the proper manner  and  he
    had not erred in his assessment of the evidence  of  telephone  contact
    and the transmission of money.  There was  no  evidence  of  either  of
    these matters in respect of periods before the date of the decision and
    the  Judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph  33  of  his   decision   were
    sustainable.  At paragraph 33 he had concluded there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show there was a genuine marriage between  the  mother  and
    the Sponsor and that they were  living  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  On  that  basis  he  had  declined  to  consider  issues
    relating to the nature of any communications  between  them  concluding
    that even if they were married on the evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he would not have accepted that the relationship  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  That conclusion also disposed of the  appeals  by  the
    children.

Further Submissions for the Appellants

16. Mr Mahmood submitted  the  evidence  before  the  Judge  was  that  the
    Respondent had the original Marriage Certificate  at  the  Beirut  visa
    post.  He had not submitted a bundle for  the  hearing.   I  noted  the
    Respondent's bundle is stamped as filed with the First-tier Tribunal on
    the day after the hearing before the Judge.  A  copy  of  the  Marriage
    Certificate with translation was submitted in  the  Appellants'  bundle
    filed on 27 October 2015.  If the Judge was found to  have  held  there
    was no Marriage Certificate then that was a finding which was  contrary
    to the facts and amounted to a material error of law whether the mother
    and Sponsor were married.

17. The Judge should have admitted the post-decision evidence having regard
    to the jurisprudence  in  DR  (Morocco)  because  it  corroborated  the
    Sponsor's oral testimony at the hearing of matters  at  or  before  the
    date of the decisions under appeal.   The  Sponsor  when  screened  had
    identified the names of the mother and children to be found at p.90  of
    the Appellants' bundle. This was weighty corroborative  evidence.   The
    Appellants  and  Sponsor  had  provided  adequate   evidence   of   the
    subsistence of their relationship and the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

18. Having secured the agreement from both parties that  if  there  was  an
    error of law in the Judge's decision then  the  matter  would  need  to
    heard afresh and remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  reserved  my
    decision.  I now give my decision and the reasons for it.

19. The Judge erred in his treatment of  the  production  of  the  original
    Marriage Certificate.  In the course of the hearing it emerged that  it
    was produced to the Respondent, Consequently, the Judge's finding  that
    the marriage was not a genuine one based on that treatment is an  error
    of fact.  Whether there is a subsisting marriage  relationship  between
    the parties to the marriage.  Given the extent of the Judge's treatment
    of the "Marriage Certificate issue" there is the  likelihood  that  its
    treatment will have influenced or be perceived to have  influenced  his
    treatment of the evidence before him in support of the claim  that  the
    marriage between the mother and the Sponsor is subsisting.

20. Turning to paragraph 22(vii) of the Judge's decision, by the  time  the
    Tribunal file reached me to prepare for the hearing, there  was  in  it
    evidence of telephone records matching the description referred  to  in
    paragraph 22(vii).  Nearly all of the  calls  were  made  to  the  same
    number and are all of a duration which would appear to corroborate  the
    procedure described by  the  Sponsor  and  set  out  by  the  Judge  in
    paragraph 22(vii) of his decision.

21. I am satisfied that these two matters of omission, neither of which are
    attributable to the Judge, were material to and infected his  findings.



22. I go on to refer  to  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellants  are
    documented Bidoon contained in  paragraph  1  of  his  decision.   This
    finding is not made by way of reference  to  any  evidence.   It  would
    appear not to reflect what was said at paragraphs 9,33, 40 and 82-86 of
    the determination in NM (Documented/Undocumented Bidoon:  Risk)  Kuwait
    CG  [2013]  UKUT  356  (IAC)  and  also  paragraphs   88-92   of   that
    determination which state:-

         "88.  It  is  important  that  we  are  clear  about  the  relevant
             terminology.   The  Tribunal  in  BA   distinguished   between
             undocumented  Bidoon,  i.e.  those  who  did  not  have  civil
             identification documents, and documented  Bidoon,  i.e.  those
             who had been documented as citizens of other countries, mainly
             Saudi Arabia and Syria.  This documentation  enabled  them  to
             obtain residency permits and other official papers.

         89.  In HE the Tribunal noted the  distinction  drawn  in  BA,  and
             expressed the view that "civil identification documents" would
             include residence permits and other official papers issued  by
             the Kuwaiti authorities,  but  would  not  include  attendance
             cards, such as that held by HE, since it specified that it was
             not an identity card, or birth certificate where  the  parents
             were not Kuwaiti nationals or legal residents.

         90.  The  March  2011  COIR,  at  paragraphs  19.32-19.34  draws  a
             distinction between documented Bidoon (those  registered  with
             the Executive Committee  for  Illegal  Residents  (the  Bidoon
             Committee) by June 2000) and undocumented Bidoon (those not so
             registered).

         91.  Human Rights Watch (HRW) in their  report  of  12  June  2011:
             "Prisoners of the  Past:  Kuwaiti  Bidun  and  the  Burden  of
             Statelessness" employ the  categorisation  of  registered  and
             unregistered   Bidoon.   This    essentially    mirrors    the
             categorisation in the COIR, as Human Rights Watch  categorises
             the registered Bidoon as those who registered with the  Bidoon
             Committee between 1996 and  2000  as  stateless  residents  of
             Kuwait  with  claims  to  Kuwaiti  nationality.   In   effect,
             according to HRW, from registration flows access to a security
             card, and from possession of a security card  flows  potential
             access to civil documents such as birth,  marriage  and  death
             certificates and passports. It  is  clear  from  this  report,
             which  we  have  found  to   be   especially   helpful,   that
             registration  is  the  gateway  to  relevant  and  potentially
             significant documents.  However, since  it  is  clear  that  a
             person may be refused renewal of their security card, and  the
             evidence shows that possession of a security card  is  crucial
             for access to the range of benefits set out at paragraphs  38-
             45  above,  we  conclude  that  the  distinction  between   24
             documented  and  undocumented  Bidoon  remains  the  point  of
             significance, albeit on the basis of possession of a  security
             card rather than "civil identification documents" as  held  in
             HE.

         92.  The situation of the undocumented Bidoon on the basis of  this
             more recent  evidence appears to  be  essentially  similar  to
             that of the undocumented Bidoon as assessed in HE in terms  of
             the significant lack of access to basic benefits and rights."

23. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained material errors of law such that it should be set  aside  and
    the matter heard afresh.

24. Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact finding  which  will
    be required, the provisions of s.12(2) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  I  conclude  the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to decide.

Anonymity

25. There was no request for an anonymity direction or order  and  although
    there are minor children I do not find that any is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.

    The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    to be made.

    No anonymity direction or order made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 05. i. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

