
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/09943/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd April 2014                               |On 11th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                       Omotoyosi Olajunmoke Makanjuola
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ume-Ezeoke (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Wyman, promulgated on 16th April 2014, following a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 2nd April 2014.  In the determination, the judge  allowed  the
    appeal of Omotoyosi Olajunmoke Makanjuola.   The  Respondent  Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born  on  26th
    February 1985.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  dated  27th  February  2013,  refusing   her
    application for entry clearance as the child of a  person  present  and
    settled  in  the  UK,  that  person  being  her  mother,  Miss  Omolara
    Makanjuola.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant's sponsoring  mother,  Miss
    Omolara Makanjuola, that she was in regular contact with her  daughter,
    the Appellant, by telephone, by email, and  through  Skype.   She  even
    visited her daughter in February 2013 when she travelled to Nigeria for
    her mother's funeral (paragraph 22).  The sponsoring mother lived in  a
    two bedroom property with her partner and her two  other  children  who
    are aged 4 and 6 (paragraph 23).  She had two jobs.  She  worked  as  a
    receptionist for Travel Lodge and she  also  worked  as  a  hairdresser
    (paragraph 26).  The sponsoring mother  sent  money  to  the  Appellant
    daughter through friends who were going  to  and  fro  from  London  to
    Nigeria, rather than through Western Union transfers, because  one  had
    to pay a commission to Western Union and, "further, her daughter  would
    have to go to the bank to pick up the money" so  that  "it  was  simply
    easier to give people money in cash" (paragraph  29).   The  judge  had
    regard to paragraph 297 of HC 395 which was the applicable  Immigration
    Rule in this case.

 4. With respect to the judge's findings, it was noted that the  sponsoring
    mother "has provided a birth certificate of the child which  names  the
    Sponsor as the mother of the child", although  this  birth  certificate
    was only issued in 2009, some fourteen years after  the  birth  of  the
    child.  However, the judge went on to say that, "I note  in  this  case
    the Respondent has not alleged that the birth certificate is  false  or
    fraudulent in any way.  I accept that the Appellant is a child  of  the
    Sponsor" (paragraph 47).

 5. The judge also found, that during the time that the  sponsoring  mother
    was in the UK, it was the child's  grandmother  who  was  "the  child's
    primary carer" and that the Sponsor did not  visit  the  child  over  a
    lengthy period although, "I accept the Appellant spoke to her mother by
    telephone and more  recently  by  Skype"  (paragraph  49).   Since  the
    Sponsor could not provide evidence of remittances sent to  support  her
    daughter, and there had  been  no  visits,  the  judge  held  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 297(1)(e) of HC 395.

 6. However, consideration was then given to paragraph  297(1)(f).   Unlike
    the former provision, this does not deal with "sole responsibility" but
    deals with "serious and compelling family or other considerations which
    make exclusion of the child undesirable".  Here  the  judge  held  that
    "the child's grandmother has recently died and this is  a  serious  and
    compelling consideration that has occurred in this case".  Indeed,  the
    judge observed  that,  "I  note  that  the  death  certificate  of  the
    grandmother has been provided ..." (paragraph 53).   Moreover,  it  was
    the death of the grandmother  that  led  the  Appellant  to  make  this
    application in February 2013" (paragraph 54).

 7. The issue of accommodation was then considered and it was held  by  the
    judge that there was no statutory overcrowding (see  paragraphs  55  to
    56).  Particular attention was given to the fact  that  the  sponsoring
    mother had a second job (paragraph 59) and the additional  income  that
    was coming in (see paragraph  59).   The  sponsoring  mother's  current
    partner also had an income (paragraph 60).  The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge gave inadequate reasons
    for the  findings  on  material  matters.   First,  the  judge  wrongly
    accepted the relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor in  the
    absence of DNA evidence.  Second, the judge wrongly failed to take into
    account the possible presence of other relatives in Nigeria  who  would
    be able to look after the Appellant.  Third, there was  an  absence  of
    evidence in  relation  to  the  receipt  of  earnings  to  satisfy  the
    maintenance requirements.  Fourth, the adequacy  of  accommodation  was
    assessed without adequate proper proof.

 9. On 22nd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 14th July  2014,  Ms  Kenny,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    stated that there were a number of flaws in the  determination.   There
    was no DNA evidence which although not a requirement under  the  Rules,
    would have been beneficial, given that the birth certificate was issued
    fourteen years after the birth.  This was a matter raised by  the  ECO.
    It was not addressed at the hearing by the provision of  DNA  evidence.
    Second, there was a question of  relatives  (paragraph  53)  who  could
    provide care for a 14 year old child even where the grandmother had now
    passed away.  Third, maintenance was not properly reasoned by the judge
    because, although evidence in relation to maintenance was  provided  in
    the Appellant's bundle, it does  not  show  that  the  Sponsor  was  in
    receipt of any of the earnings from the  company  (see  paragraph  60).
    Fourth, the judge held that the Sponsor  currently  received  a  rebate
    from Greenwich Council "indicating she is the only adult living in  the
    property" (paragraph 61).  However, as the judge himself found this was
    incorrect because the Sponsor was living with a Mr  Ogunbele  and  both
    have stated  that  they  resided  at  the  named  address.   Therefore,
    evidence in relation to accommodation should not have been accepted.

11. For his part, Mr Ume-Ezeoke submitted that DNA was not necessary.   DNA
    evidence was costly.  It is true that  a  birth  certificate  had  been
    provided  after  fourteen  years  but  it  was  accompanied  by   three
    photographs.  There was no evidence from the Respondent that the  birth
    certificate was false.  The judge  dealt  with  this  point  expressly.
    Second, the grandmother had died (see paragraphs  53  to  54)  and  the
    judge found that the sponsoring mother had taken over responsibility in
    a way that the child had now  been  placed  in  the  most  exceptional,
    compassionate circumstances, thus necessitating the application of  the
    child to come to the UK  (see  paragraph  54).   With  respect  to  the
    maintenance of the child, the sponsoring mother had two jobs and  there
    was also her partner.   As  regards  accommodation  (at  paragraph  55)
    details of the accommodation were  expressly  included  in  the  bundle
    before the judge.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  This is because
    the Grounds of Appeal by the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer  amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.   It  is
    true that the birth certificate is fourteen years after the date of the
    birth.  However, this is not unknown in developing countries.  Official
    documentary evidence, such as in relation to matters of birth, is  only
    produced when it is necessary in many cases.

13. It was for the Respondent to produce evidence that  this  was  a  false
    document.  It was for the judge to assess its veracity.  This the judge
    did.  The judge found it  to  be  a  genuine  document.   Although  the
    Sponsor had not visited the Appellant child over  a  number  of  years,
    because during this time she was without proper immigration  status  in
    the UK, she had remained in touch by telephone and by Skype, which  the
    judge accepted as a fact (paragraph 49).

14. Furthermore, the judge was careful to exclude the possibility of  "sole
    responsibility" having been satisfied as a test  on  the  facts  before
    him.  But the judge then  carefully  went  on  to  consider  the  other
    provisions of the rule  and  found  that,  in  circumstances  that  the
    grandmother had now passed away, and the application in  February  2013
    arose only consequent upon the death of the grandmother, the  Appellant
    child was placed in  the  most  serious  and  compelling  circumstances
    (paragraph 53) that  was  a  finding  which  was  open  to  the  judge.
    Finally, in relation to matters of accommodation and  maintenance,  the
    judge considered the evidence (from paragraphs 57 onwards) in terms  of
    the  availability  of  the  accommodation  and  the  monies  that  were
    available and made a finding of fact which was  entirely  open  to  the
    judge.

Decision

15. There is no material error of law in  the  regional  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

16. No anonymity order is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014


