
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/09203/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On March 18, 2015                    |On March 23, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         MISS STACY CRYSTAL BAMANYA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bobb (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  national  of  Uganda.  On  December  12,  2012  she
    submitted an  application  to  join  the  sponsor,  Tracy  Kavuma  (her
    mother), under paragraph  352D  HC  395.  The  respondent  refused  her
    application on February 19, 2013.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 10, 2013 and the  matter  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lawrence (hereinafter  referred
    to as the "FtTJ") initially on July 14, 2014. Having heard the evidence
    he reserved his decision  and  on  July  23,  2014  he  issued  further
    directions because he felt unable  to  properly  determine  the  appeal
    without having sight of a copy of the sponsor's  asylum  determination.
    The notice of July 23, 2014 refers to the  hearing  of  July  14,  2014
    being adjourned and to be heard on  August  26,  2014.  Directions  for
    further documents to be served on both the appellant's  representatives
    and  the  Tribunal  were  attached  to  the  notice.  The   appellant's
    solicitors requested an adjournment of that  hearing  by  letter  dated
    July 25, 2014 but this  request  was  refused  on  July  30,  2014.  An
    adjournment request was then renewed on August 1,  2014  but  this  was
    again refused on August 6, 2014 for the same  reason  namely  an  agent
    could be instructed.

 3. On August 11, 2014 a letter before action  was  sent  to  the  Tribunal
    threatening judicial review proceedings both in respect of the  refusal
    to adjourn and the re-opening of  the  earlier  hearing.  The  Tribunal
    agreed to refix the hearing date for October 8,  2014.  On  August  15,
    2014 the appellant's solicitors sought an  explanation  for  what  they
    viewed as a "re-opening" of the case  and  on  September  9,  2014  the
    Regional Adjudicator ruled the case was to stay as listed.

 4. The hearing resumed on October 8, 2014 and following that  hearing  the
    FtTJ dismissed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and  Article
    8 ECHR in a decision promulgated on October 20, 2014.

 5. The appellant lodged lengthy grounds of appeal on December 8, 2014  and
    within those grounds she submitted the FtTJ had erred procedurally  and
    by failing to make findings under Article 8.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler granted permission to appeal on
    January 21, 2015 finding  it  arguable  the  FtTJ  may  have  erred  by
    obtaining evidence that in the manner he did and that this  action  may
    have played a part in his consideration of the other issues.

 7. The appellant was present and was represented as set out above. My full
    record  of  Mr  Bobb's  submissions  is  recorded  in  the  record   of
    proceedings but were based as follows:

      a. Procedural irregularity.

      b.  Inadequate findings under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. Mr Bobb argued that the FtTJ had  materially  erred  in  reconvening  a
    second hearing on October 8, 2014 because at the end of the hearing  on
    July 14, 2014 evidence and submissions had been given and the FtTJ  had
    reserved his decision. He submitted there was no legal basis to re-open
    the hearing. He referred me to  the  paragraphs  [34]  and  [37]  of  R
    (Periasamy Mathialagan) v London Borough of Southwark [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    1689 and paragraph [61] of R (Broxbourne Borough council) and North and
    East Hertforshire Magistrates Court and  Geoffrey  Oliver  [2009]  EWHC
    695. The FtTJ erred by investigating the matter himself and effectively
    was doing the respondent's job. Justice was not seen to be done and his
    findings were tainted with impropriety. Those findings were  then  used
    in his assessment of the Article 8 claim and  the  FtTJ  erred  by  not
    having regard to the fact the sponsor sent money and clothing  and  the
    appellant thanked her in  cards  as  demonstrated  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.

 9. Mr Tarlow submitted Mr Bobb's submissions were meritless. The case  was
    not concluded until a determination was promulgated and  the  FtTJ  was
    entitled to call the matter back if there was something that  concerned
    him. An example of this occurring  was  country  guidance  cases  where
    parties were often recalled when issues arose that the Tribunal  wanted
    their views on. If the FtTJ had called for the determination and  dealt
    with the appeal without giving the parties an  opportunity  to  address
    any issue raised then that would be a material  error.  Here  the  FtTJ
    directed that certain documents be provided and then  listed  the  case
    for further evidence. He could have reconvened the court and then asked
    for the evidence and then reconvened for a further hearing.  In  either
    case the FtTJ did not act unlawfully. As regards Article 8 he submitted
    the FtTJ considered all the evidence  and  made  a  number  of  adverse
    findings that undermined the sponsor's credibility.  The  sponsor  does
    not like the conclusions reached and is hoping for a second chance.

10. I reserved my decision.

    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR OF LAW

11. Mr Bobb did not initially appear at the July hearing but following  the
    issuing of directions he has taken  over  conduct  of  the  appellant's
    appeal. His position since August 2014 is that the FtTJ  acted  outside
    of his power. Mr Tarlow's response to this submission  is  simply  that
    the case is not concluded until a determination is issued.

12. Mr Bobb submitted that the FtTJ had no power to reconvene  the  hearing
    after submissions had been concluded but Rule 45(1) of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 confirms that "The Tribunal
    may give directions to the parties  relating  to  the  conduct  of  any
    appeal or application." Rule 45 then sets out how the  Tribunal  should
    deal with matters. Rule 51 of the 2005  Rules  makes  clear  that  "The
    Tribunal may allow oral, documentary or other evidence to be  given  of
    any fact which appears to be relevant to an appeal  or  an  application
    for bail, even if that evidence would be inadmissible  in  a  court  of
    law."

13. Mr Bobb has referred me to two cases but I do not find  they  have  any
    bearing on how the FtTJ  should  approach  the  case.  The  case  of  R
    (Periasamy Mathialagan) v London Borough of Southwark [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    1689 involved the making of liability orders against the  applicant  in
    his absence. An application was submitted to quash the liability orders
    and to invite the magistrates to exercise judicial discretion and to re-
    open the case. The Court of Appeal refused the application and Mr  Bobb
    argues that this is authority to support his submission that  the  FtTJ
    had no power to re-open this case in October 2014. The second case of R
    (Broxbourne  Borough  council)  and   North   and   East   Hertforshire
    Magistrates Court and Geoffrey Oliver [2009] EWHC 695 is also relied on
    and concerned an abatement notice and what happened at court.

14. The appellant was given permission to appeal on this issue but I do not
    find any merit to this ground  of  appeal.  This  is  not  a  case  for
    instance where the FtTJ indicated in court in July he was  allowing  an
    appeal and then changed his mind in October. He heard the evidence  and
    reserved his decision and whilst reviewing the  evidence  he  concluded
    that he needed further  information  before  he  could  reach  a  final
    conclusion. He issued directions,  which  he  is  entitled  to  do  and
    invited further submissions. Neither of the cases produced by  Mr  Bobb
    have any similarity to the case before me. The events that occurred  in
    court are different but more importantly the hearing before the FtTJ is
    not concluded until he issued a written determination  as  set  out  in
    Rule 22 of the 2005 Rules.

15. Mr Tarlow made the point that there are many instances where cases  are
    called back for further submissions and this case was no different. The
    FtTJ issued directions that he believed would enable him to  reach  the
    right conclusion. There was no unfairness  in  the  procedure  and  the
    parties were both given  an  opportunity  to  call  evidence  and  make
    submissions.

16. I am satisfied that the main ground advanced did  not  demonstrate  any
    error of law.

17. The second ground challenged the FtTJ's  approach  to  Article  8.  The
    FtTJ's considered the evidence and found in  paragraph  [22]  that  not
    only did the sponsor never have any responsibility  for  the  appellant
    but he also found the appellant was not part of  the  sponsor's  family
    unit when the sponsor left Uganda. The FtTJ had serious concerns  about
    the sponsor's credibility and these findings were no doubt in his  mind
    when he approached the Article 8 claim. Although the FtTJ accepted  the
    sponsor and appellant were related as  claimed  he  was  not  satisfied
    there was family life. The sending of money  and  clothing  do  not  in
    themselves create a family life and the FtTJ's findings on  Article  8,
    whilst brief, were open to him.

18. In the circumstances there is no material error in law.

    DECISION

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law. I uphold the original determination.

20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated: March 23, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made because none was requested. If a request had been  made
I would not have made an award because documents supporting the appeal  were
submitted after the application had been submitted.



Signed:     Dated: March 23, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

