
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/09180/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - kingston
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          YOLAND KAYDIAN ARMSTRONG
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Panagiotopoulou of Counsel instructed by Edwin
                    Coe, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (the ECO) appeals against the  decision  of
    Judge Beg of the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FTT)  promulgated  on  3rd
    August 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Jamaican citizen born 11th November  1988  who
    applied for entry clearance to enable  her  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her husband Andrew George Armstrong (the Sponsor) who is a
    British citizen.  When the application was made it  was  conceded  that
    the Appellant could not satisfy the financial requirements of  Appendix
    FM, and entry clearance was requested outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    and the Appellant relied upon Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention
    on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 4. The application was refused on 4th July 2014.  It was not accepted that
    the  Sponsor  and  Appellant  were  in   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship, although this decision was reversed by an Entry Clearance
    Manager on review.  It was not accepted that the financial requirements
    of the Immigration Rules could be satisfied, and  this  aspect  of  the
    decision was upheld on review.

 5. The subsequent appeal was heard by the FTT on 9th July 2015.   The  FTT
    found that compelling circumstances existed, and after hearing evidence
    from the Sponsor, dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, but
    allowed it with reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. This caused the ECO to apply for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FTT had made a material
    misdirection of law as it was difficult to see how the FTT  could  find
    compelling circumstances in order  to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, when it was  conceded  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed with reference to the rules.

 7. It was contended that Article 8 does not confer a  choice  of  domicile
    and is not a general dispensing power.  The Appellant could have made a
    further application for entry clearance.

 8. It was contended that the FTT had referred to Hayat v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1054, and Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL.   The  ECO  contended  that
    these cases concerned Appellants already in the United  Kingdom  and  a
    further application for entry clearance would  have  been  particularly
    onerous given the specific circumstances involved, but  there  were  no
    such barriers present in  this  case  which  would  prevent  a  further
    application for entry clearance.

 9. It was contended that the FTT had erred  by  failing  to  consider  the
    weight to be afforded to the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control, as expressed by section 117B(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

10. It was submitted that consideration by the FTT  of  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 was selective in that the FTT  had  placed  reliance  upon
    paragraph 33, but should have considered  paragraphs  40,  51  and  82,
    which confirm that a departure from the Immigration Rules is  necessary
    only in compelling circumstances.  It was submitted that  had  the  FTT
    applied SS (Congo) appropriately, it would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion in relation  to  this  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge J M Holmes who found that arguably the FTT had  failed
    to find exceptional compassionate circumstances,  and  had  adopted  "a
    freewheeling approach to the content of the Immigration Rules."

11. Following the grant  of  permission  the  claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  applied  the
    relevant case law and had made findings open to  it  on  the  evidence.
    There was no material misdirection in law and the  FTT  had  considered
    the rights of the Claimant's child in Jamaica, and  the  Sponsor's  two
    children in the United Kingdom.  It was not accepted that the  FTT  had
    been selective in considering SS (Congo).

12. The Tribunal issued directions making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.  I was asked  to  note
    that in SS (Congo) the Court of Appeal had indicated that there  was  a
    wider margin of appreciation when considering whether to grant leave to
    enter, as opposed to leave to remain.

14. Mr Kandola submitted that the public interest in effective  immigration
    control had not been given  sufficient  weight  by  the  FTT,  and  the
    appropriate remedy was for the Appellant to make a further  application
    for entry clearance.

15. Mr Kandola pointed out that the Sponsor's  mother  had  given  evidence
    that she would be able to offer support, and it was contended that  the
    FTT had not taken this into account.  With the benefit of this support,
    the Sponsor may be able to work full-time, which would mean that it may
    be possible for the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules  to
    be satisfied.  It was clarified that it  was  not  suggested  that  the
    Sponsor's two British children should  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    relocate to Jamaica.  The case made by the ECO, was that there were  no
    compelling circumstances to justify granting the appeal under Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules,  as  a  further  application  for  entry
    clearance could be made.

16. Mrs Panagiotopoulou relied upon her rule 24 response.  She pointed  out
    that there was no mention in the grounds seeking permission to  appeal,
    of the FTT failing to take into account the evidence of  the  Sponsor's
    mother.  It was submitted that the grounds amounted to  a  disagreement
    with findings which had been made by the FTT, and that  those  findings
    were open  to  the  FTT  to  make  on  the  evidence.   The  compelling
    circumstances were set out by the FTT in paragraphs 16  -  18  and  the
    case law had been correctly considered.

17. By way of response, Mr Kandola explained  that  his  reference  to  the
    Sponsor's mother was made in connection with the requirement that there
    should be compelling circumstances if an appeal was to be allowed under
    Article 8 outside the rules.  In this case it was  submitted  that  the
    Sponsor's mother stated that she could look  after  the  children,  and
    therefore  this  would  enable  the  Sponsor  to  undertake   full-time
    employment which would mean that there is a reasonable  chance  of  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM being  satisfied  so  that  if  a
    further application for entry clearance was made, the  application  may
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The application for entry clearance was made  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  financial  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules, as set out in Appendix FM.  It is clear that the FTT
    understood the nature of the application.  I do not find that  the  FTT
    made a material misdirection of law for the following reasons.

20. The FTT made no reference to the cases of Hayat and Chikwamba and it is
    not clear why the ECO made reference to  those  cases  in  the  grounds
    seeking permission.

21. There was no reference by the FTT to the  Appellant  making  a  further
    application.  It was not the Appellant's case, as presented to the FTT,
    that  the  financial  position  had  changed  so  that  the   financial
    requirements of Appendix FM could be satisfied.

22. The FTT was aware of the weight to be attached to the  public  interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control,  and  there  is  specific
    reference to this in paragraph 15 in which the FTT  sets  out  in  full
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  There is further reference to the public
    interest in paragraph 18,  in  which  the  FTT  concludes  that  having
    considered the evidence as a whole, it  would  not  be  in  the  public
    interest to deprive the Appellant and her son from having a family life
    with the Sponsor and Sponsor's daughters in the United Kingdom.

23. There is clearly a typing error in paragraph 18 when the FTT refers  to
    the Appellant  and  the  Appellant's  daughters  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom, (as it is clear that the reference should be  to  the  Sponsor
    and Sponsor's daughters).

24. I find no material error made by the FTT, when considering SS  (Congo).
    In my view the FTT erred in relying upon paragraph 33 which is set  out
    in paragraph 10 of the decision, as paragraph 33 relates  to  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules, rather than leave  to  enter.   A
    more appropriate paragraph to rely  on  in  entry  clearance  cases  is
    paragraph 40,  which  is  in  fact  set  out  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.  However the principle followed by  the  FTT  was
    correct.  As set out in paragraph 40 of SS (Congo);

         "However, it remains possible to imagine cases where the individual
         interests at stake are of a particularly pressing nature so that  a
         good claim for LTE can be established outside the  rules.   In  our
         view, the appropriate general formulation for this category is that
         such cases will arise where an application for LTE  can  show  that
         compelling  circumstances  exist  (which   are   not   sufficiently
         recognised under the new  Rules)  to  require  the  grant  of  such
         leave."

25. The FTT at paragraph 11 recorded;

         "In considering the family background including  the  vulnerability
         of the Sponsor's  two  young  daughters,  I  find  that  there  are
         compelling reasons to consider this matter outside the rules."

26. In  the  same  paragraph  the  FTT  went  on  to  recognise  that  when
    considering proportionality, this  involved  striking  a  fair  balance
    between  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the  interests  of  the
    community.

27. The correct test for considering  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, has therefore been confirmed in SS  (Congo)  as  being  that  of
    compelling circumstances not being sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    rules.  This is the test applied by the FTT.

28. Those compelling circumstances set out by the FTT, are that the Sponsor
    is the primary carer of his two daughters  who  are  British  citizens.
    They  were  born  in  2003  and  2005  and  are  now  aged  12  and  10
    respectively.  Their mother, the  Sponsor's  former  partner,  died  of
    cancer at a young age in February 2013.  It was not suggested  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the Sponsor's daughters, who  had  always
    lived in the United Kingdom, to relocate to Jamaica.

29. The FTT also took into account that the Sponsor is the primary carer of
    his two daughters, so he has been unable to take full-time  employment,
    and therefore is  unable  to  satisfy  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

30. The FTT also took into account the British citizenship of the Sponsor's
    son in Jamaica, and placed some reliance upon MA and SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) and did  not  err  in
    law in so doing.

31. I conclude that  the  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, do evidence a disagreement with the findings made
    by the FTT, but they do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall         1st February 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FTT stands so does the decision to make  a  full  fee
award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall         1st February 2016

