
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09103/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ, Belfast                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                   ibukunoluwa oluwatosin adekogbe marcus
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Barr, Simon Barr Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals this permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on 8 October 2018  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer in  Lagos
    to refuse to issue him with an EEA family permit to join his brother in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant's brother is an Irish citizen as  is
    his wife another wife is also a British citizen.  There is as the judge
    noted a long history to this application but in essence  the  issue  in
    this case that the judge decided was whether or not the brother  was  a
    qualified person.  As it now transpires that was not something that was
    necessary because the  brother  was  in  fact  a  holder  of  permanent
    residence and indeed he was issued with a permanent residence  card  in
    February 2013 and thus whether he was or was  not  employed  is  not  a
    relevant issue.

 2. The other area which is an error of law and received by  the  Secretary
    of State is this was an accompanying case and on that basis,  but  what
    was not in issue was whether duty rights would be in play.   There  was
    clearly perhaps through no fault of the judge an error of law  in  this
    case in that the parties proceeded on a fundamentally  mistaken  basis.
    The result of this was that there was no proper consideration about the
    issue of dependency which is a matter which needs to be considered  and
    for that reason the decision will need to be remade on that issue.

 3. It is my view that given the history of this case  and  the  length  of
    time it has taken, some five years in total in a number of cases,  that
    this should be reluctantly remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as it is
    likely to be heard more quickly than if retained in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 4. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
    on the issue of dependency between the appellant and the sponsor.


Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
