
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
OA/09234/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd October 2017                        |On 17th October 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                           clive takudzwa karinda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Nyawanza of Genesis Law Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe born on 14th  August  1997.
    He applied to the British High Commission Pretoria for entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom as the dependant of his mother, Nyarai  Muchenje.
    That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in  a  Notice  of
    Decision dated 11th May 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and  his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 20th December 2016.  He decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons
    given in his Decision dated 30th January 2017.   The  Appellant  sought
    leave to appeal that decision and such permission was granted  on  16th
    August 2017.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the provisions of paragraph 297(e)
    and (f) of HC 395.  Leave to appeal has not been granted in respect  of
    that decision.  Indeed, leave to  appeal  is  limited  to  the  Judge's
    decision that Article 8 ECHR did not apply.  As  the  Judge  stated  at
    paragraph 36 of the Decision, this was "due to an almost complete  lack
    of any evidence of family life between the Sponsor and the  Appellant".
    At the hearing before me, Mr Nyawanza argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in reaching this conclusion.  He had dealt with the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights in a single sentence.  He  had  not  gone  on  to
    consider the proportionality of the Respondent's decision.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to her Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there was no such  error  of  law.   She  argued  that  the  Judge
    properly directed himself and gave adequate reasons for his  decisions.
    Any error of law in respect of Article 8 ECHR was not material  as  the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the   relevant
    Immigration Rule.  The Judge had made a finding open to him  concerning
    the lack of evidence of the Appellant's family life with his mother.

 5. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    set aside.  The Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules  was  an  issue  before  the  Judge  as  recorded  at
    paragraph 28 of the Decision.  The Judge dealt with that matter in  the
    most cursory way on the basis that there was an almost complete lack of
    any evidence of family life  between  the  Appellant  and  his  mother.
    However there was clearly more evidence  than  that  relating  to  this
    particular subject as recorded at paragraphs 12 to 21 inclusive of  the
    Decision.  The Judge's failure  to  deal  with  this  evidence  in  the
    context of Article 8 ECHR rights  and  his  failure  to  make  findings
    thereon in my view amount to a material error of law.

 6. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal  as  far  as  it
    relates  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights.   This  is  in
    accordance with the provisions of  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements.  There is a substantial amount of fact-finding still to  be
    made.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  as  far  as  it  relates  to  the
Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal as mentioned above will be remade in  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.



Signed                              Date   13th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton




