
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09985/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2014                              |On 12 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                petru guglea

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Moldovia and his  date  of  birth  is  30
    March 1981.  He made an application for entry clearance  as  a  partner
    under Appendix FM.  His application was refused  in  a  decision  of  4
    October 2013 by the Entry Clearance Officer in Warsaw on the basis that
    the appellant did not meet the English  language  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on the basis that he spoke English to a  satisfactory
    standard and there was no English language test centre in  Moldova  and
    he was unable to travel outside Moldova because his passport  was  with
    the British Embassy there.  It was asserted by  the  appellant  that  a
    test centre is now in Moldova and he is booked  on  a  course  in  June
    2013.  His wife, the sponsor, was 36 weeks' pregnant.

2.   The Entry Clearance Review  Manager  maintained  the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer because the appellant could have requested  the
    return of his passport in order to travel outside Moldova in  order  to
    take the test.

The Decision Before the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant's appeal was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Canavan  in  a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 25 April 2014.  The appeal was determined on the  papers
    at the request of the appellant.  The judge made findings at paragraphs
    6 to 8 as follows:

         "6.  The appellant has provided a perfectly reasonable  explanation
             for not being able to provide  an  approved  English  language
             test certificate with the application.   No  issue  was  taken
             with  his  claim  that  an  approved  test  provider  was  not
             available in Moldova at the time.  Although the appellant  had
             not formally claimed an exemption in the application  form  it
             seems clear that the circumstances were such that  they  might
             engage paragraph E-ECP.4.2(c) of Appendix FM.   The  paragraph
             provides  for  an  exemption  where  there   are   exceptional
             circumstances that prevent the applicant from  being  able  to
             meet the requirement prior to entry to the UK.  Paragraph  5.7
             of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  (Chapter   8:
             Section FM 1.21  -  Partners  and  Parents,  English  Language
             Requirement) states that "applicants who are  nationals  of  a
             country with no test centre and who have made  an  application
             for entry clearance/leave to enter from that country  will  be
             exempt from the requirement."


         7.   I find that it would be unreasonable and  disproportionate  to
             expect an applicant to  have  to  travel  outside  their  home
             country  in  order  to  obtain  an   English   language   test
             certificate from an approved UKBA provider.  This is likely to
             be the reason why the guidance states that an applicant  would
             be exempt from the requirement  in  such  circumstances.   The
             respondent failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  came
             within one of the  exceptions  contained  in  the  immigration
             rules.  The respondent also  failed  to  consider  whether  to
             exercise discretion in view of the fact that it seems to  have
             been  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with a British citizen and that he was
             applying to join his wife and child in the UK.  I am satisfied
             that the circumstances pertaining at the date of the  decision
             could properly be described as exceptional if  there  were  no
             facilities for the appellant to  obtain  an  approved  English
             language test in his home country at the date when he made the
             application.  For these reasons I conclude that the  appellant
             met the requirements of paragraph E-ECP.4.2(c) of Appendix FM.


         8.   I conclude that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
             law and the immigration rules."



The Grounds and Oral Submissions

4.   The respondent made an  application  for  leave  to  appeal  which  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Caruthers in a decision  of
    10 June 2014.  The Secretary of State argued in the grounds  of  appeal
    that the policy requires the appellant makes his application  from  his
    country of nationality (which there is no test centre).  The  appellant
    in this case is a citizen of Moldova and he  made  his  application  in
    Warsaw where there is a test centre.  In any event, the appellant could
    have requested the return of his passport or he could have made a fresh
    application.

5.   At the hearing before me the sponsor, Mrs Violeta Guglea attended  with
    her employer, Mr David Sunderland.   Mr  Tufan  made  oral  submissions
    during which he conceded that  the  appellant  had  in  fact  made  his
    application online in Moldova.  When I pointed out to Mr Tufan that  it
    appeared to me that the facts of the case fall squarely with the policy
    (a copy of which Mr Tufan produced) he said that he could not  disagree
    with that.  The relevant part of  the  policy  (July  2012  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions Chapter 8, Section FM 1.21) reads as follows:

         "Applicants who are nationals of a country with no test centre  and
         who have made an application for  entry  clearance/leave  to  enter
         from that country  will  be  exempt  from  the  requirement.   This
         exemption does not apply to  applicants  applying  in  country  for
         leave to remain, as test centres and facilities  to  learn  English
         are readily available in the UK."


6.     At the hearing before me Mr Sunderland expressed  concern  about  the
    conduct of the Secretary of State during  the  proceedings  but,  as  I
    explained to him, the purpose of the hearing before me was confined  to
    whether or not the judge materially erred.


Conclusions

7.   There is no material error of law. I have had regard to the case of  AG
    & Others (policies; executive discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UK00082 and specifically at paragraph 50 which reads as follows:

         "For  ourselves  we  have  little  doubt  that:  contrary  to   the
         submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department before us - there are cases in which a  finding  that  a
         decision is 'not in accordance with  the  law'  on  the  ground  of
         failure to apply a policy should lead to a substantive decision  in
         the claimant's favour, with a  direction  that  leave  be  granted.
         There will be no need to base  such  a  decision  on  human  rights
         grounds, because it is demanded by the more detailed provisions  of
         the 2002 Act.  But the cases in question  are  unusual.   They  are
         those in which (1) the claimant proves the  precise  terms  of  the
         policy, which (2) creates a presumption, on the facts of his  case,
         in favour of granting leave, and (3) there is either nothing at all
         to displace the presumption, or nothing that, under  the  terms  of
         the policy, falls for consideration.  If all those factors apply to
         the case, the  appeal  should  be  allowed,  with  a  direction  as
         indicated."

8.   In my view the decision-maker did not exercise  the  discretion  vested
    in him and the decision is not in accordance with the  law  and  it  is
    appropriate for the Tribunal to require a  decision-maker  to  complete
    his task by reaching a lawful decision on the  outstanding  application
    along the lines set out in SSHD & Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148.  However, the
    judge in my view did not err in allowing the  appeal  outright  because
    there was obviously no doubt in  her  mind  that  the  appellant  would
    benefit from the policy (it is similarly clear to me that he does)  and
    on that basis it was open to her to allow the appeal substantively.   I
    accept that this is an unusual course of action to take but, having had
    regard to AG & Others, it is one that was open  to  the  judge  on  the
    facts in this appeal.

9.       The final decision of the  judge  was  expressed  as  allowing  the
    appeal under the rules (see [9]). However, it is clear to me  that  she
    meant to allow it substantively because it was not in  accordance  with
    the law. She allowed the appeal under section 86 (3) (a)  of  the  2002
    Act.   I take the unusual  step  of  making  a  direction  pursuant  to
    Section 87 of the 2002 Act  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  gives
    effect to the decision and grant entry clearance to the appellant.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 8 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


