
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09555/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st July 2013                                |On 10th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal judge a jordan
                   Deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE A A WILSON

                                   Between

                            mr georgy berezitskiy
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Eastey of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons


 1. On 12th March 2013 a decision of the Upper  Tribunal  given  by  Deputy
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson  was  promulgated  in  respect  of  this
    appellant.  Subsequent to that an application for permission to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal was lodged by Counsel who appeared in  front  of
    Judge Wilson.  That related primarily  to  an  argument  of  procedural
    unfairness as to the question of the family reunion policy.   This  had
    been raised both before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The Respondent had failed to produce  that  document  and  a
    last opportunity was given to the Respondent to do so until 20th  March
    2013.  The promulgation of the decision prior to  that  date  therefore
    was asserted procedural unfairness.

 2. That application was considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson, who  in
    a memorandum and directions dated 1st May 2013 noted that an email  had
    been received on 19th March that contained three links.   Judge  Dawson
    considering Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and in particular sub-paragraph (2) considered that the  direction
    requiring the  Respondent  to  comply  by  20th  March  may  have  been
    overlooked.  The judge concluded;

         "... unless I receive a  proposal  to  the  contrary  within  seven
         working days of the date of the sending out of the  memorandum  and
         these directions, the decision of Judge Wilson will be  set  aside.
         In such events the hearing will  be  restored  before  him  and  an
         opportunity  given  to   the   parties   to   make   such   further
         representations as they are advised in response to the  email  from
         Ms Kenny and the information contained therein.

         A copy of the  email  is  annexed  to  this  memorandum  and  these
         directions."

    Neither party replied opposing that  proposed  course.   The  Appellant
    requesting a copy of the attached letter from Lorna Kenny and  also  in
    due course filing a short further witness statement we  have  therefore
    considered initially, neither advocate addressing the issue before  us,
    whether having regard to Rule 43 sub-Section (2) it is  appropriate  to
    set aside the decision. There is no dispute that the determination  was
    promulgated prior to the  date  specified  and  we  therefore  set  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal of the 12th March 2013 aside  under
    Rule 43.

 3. The general background of the appeal of  this  Appellant  is  that  his
    Sponsor and her husband had been accepted as  refugees  in  the  United
    Kingdom and by the time of the application subject to  the  appeal  had
    both been granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Immigration Rule  that  had  been  considered  appropriate  by  the
    Respondent was therefore paragraph 317 of HC 395 as amended.

 4. It is appropriate to set out the letter  from  Lorna  Kenny,  a  Senior
    Presenting Officer dated 19th March 2013.  This is by way of  an  email
    that was sent to the Field House correspondence section on that date.

         "Subject:  For the urgent attention of Judge Wilson

         Attachment: Accompanying Letter - Grant  of  Asylum  and  Leave  to
         Remain.doc

         Re:  OA/09555/2012 Mr Georgy Berezitskiy

         Please could you forward the information below to Judge Wilson?   I
         am providing this in response to a direction set by him  at  appeal
         hearing OA/09555/2012  on  27/02/13,  the  deadline  for  which  is
         20/03/13.  The direction was to disclose when  the  Family  Reunion
         Policy was withdrawn and replaced.

         The following has been confirmed to me  by  the  lead  for  refugee
         family reunion policy who introduced the relevant rules.

         The Part 8 rules for relatives of refugees came into  effect  on  4
         July 2011.  In addition to  the  Statement  of  Changes  (HC  1148)
         announcing this, which I referred to  at  the  hearing,  a  written
         ministerial statement was also made to Parliament  when  the  Rules
         were laid.

         (email link set out)

         The guidance on refugee family  reunion  policy  was  published  in
         accordance with this on 05/07/2011.

         (email link annexed to our determination)

         There was no formal  announcement  withdrawing  the  discretion  to
         grant leave outside the rules  for  Other  Dependent  Relatives  of
         beneficiaries of international protection.

         I have also been directed to the guidance published in  July  2011,
         which was previously available on the UKBA website and can  be  now
         found at

         (national archive link set out and annexed to our determination )

         For clarity, I have attached a copy of the  letter  confirming  the
         sponsor's grant of asylum and leave to remain.

         Kind regards"

 5. The attached grant of leave to the Sponsor in this  matter,  Mrs  Irina
    Kishikova was dependent to her husband  Victor  issued  on  15th  March
    2005.

 6. At the hearing on 1st July 2013 neither advocate had produced a copy of
    those documents.   Mr  Bramble  however  did  produce  a  copy  of  the
    Statement of Immigration Rules laid before Parliament on 13th June 2011
    in confirmation that the Sponsor was granted indefinite leave  on  11th
    May 2011.  We were also given by Mr Bramble a copy of the policy family
    reunion for asylum seekers.  It is appropriate in view of its shortness
    to set it out here.

         "Family reunion for asylum seekers,  partners  and  families  child
         dependent relatives

         This page explains how asylum seekers can apply to be reunited with
         the family members they left behind when they fled to the UK.

         People who flee  to  the  UK  to  seek  asylum  can  include  their
         dependants in their application for  asylum,  if  those  dependants
         have travelled with them to the UK.   However,  we  recognise  that
         families can become fragmented in cases of asylum, depending on the
         speed and manner in which the person has fled.

         If you are a recognised refugee or  have  been  given  humanitarian
         protection in the UK, our family reunion programme allows you to be
         reunited with your family members (that is, those who were part  of
         your family unit before you fled).

         Under  the  Immigration  Rules,  only  your   pre-existing   family
         (husband, wife, civil partner or unmarried/same-sex  partner,  plus
         any children under 18 who formed part of the family unit  when  you
         fled to seek asylum) can apply to enter the  UK  under  the  family
         reunion programme.  However, we may allow family reunion for  other
         family members if there are compassionate reasons  why  their  case
         should  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.       Our
         emphasis.

 7.  Mr  Bramble  in  his  submissions  argued  that  this   argument   was
    fundamentally misconceived.  Firstly, the amendment to the  Immigration
    Rules corrected the difficulty of persons only having limited leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom making appropriate applications for family and
    other relatives.  The revised Rule 319(v) -

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom as the parent,  grandparent  or  other
         dependent relative of a person  with  limited  leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  refugee  or  beneficiary  of
         humanitarian protection"

    mirrored exactly the terms of the requirements for a father aged 65  or
    over  as  under  paragraph  317.   There  was  also  echoed   in   319W
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   In
    both Immigration Rules there is a requirement that  the  applicant  can
    and is financially wholly or mainly  dependent  on  the  relative  with
    limited leave to enter  or  remain  as  a  refugee  or  beneficiary  of
    humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom  and  can  and  will  be
    accommodated adequately together with any dependants  without  recourse
    to public funds in accommodation which the  Sponsor  owns  or  occupies
    exclusively.

 8. The suggestion that the application for entry clearance would be  dealt
    with differently under Rule 319 was argued therefore had no  substance.
    In relation to the policy Mr Bramble was equally clear the  matter  was
    not really advanced at all by the  matters  set  out  in  Miss  Kenny's
    email.  For example the  policy  at  4.7  simply  recorded  a  previous
    decision responses for granting  humanitarian  protection  before  30th
    August 2005.  This Sponsor of course,  was  granted  leave  after  that
    date.  In any event that simply  records  the  decision  of  making  an
    application and not the terms of that.

 9. What was not disputed is that on occasions there may be  provisions  of
    family reunion for other family members for the  compassionate  reasons
    why the case  should  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Within the Respondent's bundle is set out a letter in  support  of  his
    application  dated  23rd  December  2011  from  his  solicitors.   That
    concludes after setting  out  the  circumstances  for  the  application
    requests -

         "We also asked you to consider the compassionate  circumstances  in
         this case.  Mr Berezitskiy is an elderly widow  with  a  number  of
         health  conditions.   He  needs  the  support  of  his  only  close
         relative, his daughter Irina Kishikova who is in the UK.   He  also
         has grandchildren in the UK.

         It is submitted that to refuse entry clearance in this  case  would
         represent a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  applicant's
         right to a family life and would therefore constitute a  breach  of
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights."

10. It was an agreed position between the parties that the decision of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer of  27th  April  2012  did  not  consider  such
    matters.

11. Ms Eastey's position was firstly that the policy was in existence.   It
    had not been considered by the Respondent and that  we  should  firstly
    consider the existence of the policy in the consideration of the public
    interest when assessing proportionality with the decision  in  relation
    to Article 8, as set out in AJ v Kosovo [2008]UKAIT 00082  and  if  the
    Appellant were unsuccessful on that aspect  in  any  event  the  matter
    should be returned to the Entry Clearance Officer for consideration  of
    that policy.

12. We directed Ms Eastey to Macdonald's Immigration  Law  &  Practice  8th
    Edition Section 12.197 on family reunion and in particular  footnote  5
    which related to an assertion the requirements to be  satisfied  mirror
    those of the refugee family reunion describes  in  preceding  paragraph
    the family reunion for those with  discretionary  leave  must  normally
    await the settlement of the Sponsor which in this case  is  six  years.
    The first supplement to the  8th  Edition  of  Macdonald's  amended  to
    12.197 to -

         "Other family members of persons with  limited  leave  as  refugees
         with  humanitarian  protection  that  his  parents,  grandchildren,
         children, siblings, uncles and aunts over the  age  of  18  may  be
         granted entry clearance or leave to  enter  or  remain  on  similar
         terms as such family members of settled and non-refugee Sponsors."

13. Another matter that was then contended by Ms Eastey,  although  not  in
    the application and not within the terms of an application  under  Rule
    43 was that the decision of 12th March 2013 contained an error  in  its
    assessment of paragraph 317.  Reliance  was  made  in  support  of  the
    argument by reference to the case of Mohamed v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 331.



14.  In Mohamed the court was considering the provisions of  paragraph  317
    sub-Section (e) -
         "a parent or grandparent under  the  age  of  65  if  living  alone
         outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances and mainly dependent financially on relatives settled
         in the United Kingdom."

15.  It  was  argued  by  Ms  Eastey  that   the   12th   March   decision,
    notwithstanding the Court of Appeal decision failed to  allow  for  the
    fact that "but for" the support from the Sponsor in the United  Kingdom
    that the Appellant's circumstances would  be  such  severe  that  there
    would only require  to  be  one  result,  namely  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance as  it  was  alleged  the  circumstances  were  clearly  most
    compassionate.

16. At the end of the hearing we formerly reserved our  decision  which  we
    now give with our reasons.

17. As we recorded above the decision of the Upper Tribunal of  12th  March
    2013 was promulgated prior to the receipt of the email from Lorna Kenny
    of 19th March 2013 and was earlier than the direction given  in  court.
    That decision is set aside and we have carried out a full review of the
    appeal.

18. In relation to that we have considered closely the materiality  of  the
    material that is now placed before  us  and  to  what  to  extent  that
    impacts, if at all, on the decision.  In respect of the arguments as to
    the appropriateness of using Rule 319(v) we are satisfied  that  indeed
    nothing turns on that issue at all.  It is essentially  a  mirror  Rule
    for someone who's Sponsor, unlike the Sponsor in this appeal  does  not
    have indefinite leave to remain.

19. In relation to the policies that have been asserted  we  are  satisfied
    that in the policies adduced to us that there is nothing in  them  that
    clarifies  or  limits   the   meaning   of   the   word   compassionate
    circumstances.  The compassionate circumstances were clearly stated  in
    the letter from the solicitors that we have highlighted  above.   There
    was  no  reference  to  a  policy  to  guide  the  ECO  in  considering
    exceptional circumstances but it is clear there is provision  to  grant
    an application where there are-as contended here- we may  allow  family
    reunion for other family members if there are compassionate reasons why
    their case should be considered outside the Immigration Rules.

20.   It is therefore appropriate to decide whether that is an exercise  of
    discretion outside the Rules for the terms  of  that  generally  to  be
    considered both by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on appeal.

21.  What is clear is the immigration decision appealed is silent  on  this
    issue properly before them for  a  decision.  To  that  extent  we  are
    satisfied  the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the   accepted
    principles of  administrative  law.  Subsequently  to  the  immigration
    decision there was a review  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager.  After
    consideration we are have decided the review is not clear as to whether
    he was satisfied there was no relevant guidance or  whether  indeed  he
    was following the departmental guidance.

22. In accordance with the decision of the AIT in AG Kosovo we have proceed
    to determine whether the appeal falls to be allowed  either  under  the
    Rules or Human Rights before considering this point further.

23.  The Appellant's position is set out in paragraph 15 of Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Wilson's decision of 12th March.  The judge  was  satisfied  that
    the question of dependency in paragraph  317(iii)  had  not  been  met.
    Nothing has been put before  us  that  can  lead  us  to  revisit  that
    conclusion.

24. In relation to the argument that there was an incorrect analysis of the
    "but for" test we observe of course that this was not raised to in  the
    original application.  As this is a matter that has been raised  before
    us and relates primarily to an issue of law we have however  considered
    it appropriate to determine it.

25. We are satisfied that this again has no relevance to the outcome of the
    determination.  This is because the decision of  Mohamed is in relation
    to a materially different sub-paragraph of the  Rule-  relatives  under
    the age of 65.

26. For the avoidance of doubt we adopt all the  factual  findings  of  the
    12th March.

27. We are satisfied the relevant immigration rule is Paragraph 317. We are
    satisfied that the Appellant is not wholly maintained  by  the  sponsor
    who contributes approximately 1/3rd of his expenses and  will  continue
    to do so.

28.  Following AG Kosovo dealing with the question of the  asserted  breach
    of Article 8 we are satisfied that the refusal of  entry  clearance  in
    these circumstances does constitute  a  substantial  interference  with
    family life requiring justification. Having  regard  to  the  steps  in
    Razgar we are satisfied that the interference is lawful. It is made  in
    pursuance of immigration control a legitimate aim. It  is  a  necessary
    step the appellant fails the relevant immigration Rule.

29. As to the question of proportionality we have considered whether  there
    any compassionate  circumstances  which  we  take  as  the  finding  in
    Paragraph 15 of the Upper Tribunal  decision  of  the  12th  March.  In
    assessing that we are  satisfied  that  in  the  absence  of  a  lawful
    decision  on  the  exercise  by  the  respondent   when   compassionate
    circumstances exist we can not adequately evaluate  the  weight  to  be
    given  to  the  justification  of  the  immigration  decision  in   our
    consideration of Article 8 (2).

30. We accept that there are good reasons why the Appellant and his  family
    (sponsor) would wish him to come  to  the  UK  but  equally  there  are
    arguable reasons why the Respondent can point to public policy  matters
    essentially the Sponsors daughter inability to provide support  without
    any additional burden on public funds to justify the  decision.  Albeit
    in circumstances where as Judge  Wilson  found  and  which  finding  we
    adopt; the Appellant would in due course be able  to  move  funds  from
    Russia.

31. We are satisfied that while the letter from the  solicitors  requesting
    admission for compassionate circumstance was considered  post  decision
    by the entry Clearance Manager there is nothing in that  decision  that
    elucidates whether there was any guidance or not. If there was internal
    guidance that should be set out.

32. The application therefore returns to the Respondent to await  a  lawful
    decision and in these circumstances we satisfied that we can not accept
    the justification  in  relation  to  Article  8  (2).  We  are  however
    satisfied it is appropriate to direct no relief, save for the making of
    a lawful decision in this respect  as  an  adverse  decision  could  be
    reviewed.

33. Summary of Decision

Application  for  review   of   Deputy   Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Wilson's
determination of 12th March 2013 and the provisions of Rule 43 allowed.

Immigration Appeal dismissed.

The exercise of  discretion  by  the  Respondent  was  not  lawful  and  the
applicant awaits a lawful decision from  the  respondent.  To  that  limited
extent the Appellants Human Rights (Article 8) have been infringed  but  the
Upper Tribunal directs no relief in this respect save for the  making  of  a
lawful decision.






Signed: Andrew Wilson                        Date 10th October 2013


Judge A A Wilson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson


















