
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09109/2013
                                                               OA/09112/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 05th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                     MR ISHTIAQ AHMED (first appellant)
                     MRS MEHRUN NISA (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E Daykin - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are appeals by Mr Ishtiaq Ahmed and Mrs Mehrun Nisa, citizens  of
    Pakistan, husband and wife, born 1st July 1945  and  1st  January  1950
    respectively.  They appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore issued on 17th April  2014  dismissing  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds their appeals against the
    decision of the Respondent made on 12th  March  2013  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as  adult  dependent  relatives  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Rule applied in this case was EC-DR1.1.

 2.  On  10th  June  2014  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal.  She said:

         "2.  There is force in the argument  in  the  second  part  of  the
             grounds that the Judge erred  in  law  in  his  assessment  of
             Article 8 ECHR.  The Judge does not make clear findings as  to
             whether or not family life exists between the  Appellants  and
             Sponsor but it appears that he considered it did given the way
             the second part of paragraph 37 determination describes family
             life continuing.  There  is  certainly  material  which  could
             indicate that there is family life between the Appellants  and
             their children in the UK.  It is arguable that the  Judge  did
             not give adequate reasons for his conclusion that family  life
             was not engaged given the matters referred to at  paragraph  9
             of the grounds.  I observe that it may well be that the reason
             the Judge appears to have confined his analysis of  Article  8
             ECHR in the main terms of the Rules was the effect of the case
             of Gulshan (although the Judge does  not  refer  to  the  case
             specifically) but again  given  the  matters  referred  to  at
             paragraph 9 of the grounds it is arguable that the  Judge  did
             not give adequate reasons for  any  implicit  conclusion  that
             there were not even arguably good grounds for  granting  leave
             outside the Rules.

           3. The ground relating  to  the  Immigration  Rules  is  thinner.
             Whilst it appears from the end of paragraph  36  determination
             that the Judge reached his finding under the Immigration Rules
             on the basis of the nursing  care  that  the  Appellants  were
             receiving in Pakistan, there appears to have been no  evidence
             provided which met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
             that the required level of care was not available in Pakistan.



           4. For the avoidance of doubt all grounds may be argued."

 3.  The  grounds  submitting  that  an  erroneous  conclusion  under   the
    Immigration Rules was reached allege that the Judge failed to take into
    account that the professional nursing staff are only present two  hours
    of the day and that there  has  always  been  one  of  the  Appellants'
    children present since the last resident son left Pakistan in  November
    2012.  They take it in turns to take time off work to  care  for  their
    parents temporarily.  It is submitted that the reality of the  evidence
    was that the Appellants' father needs 24 hour care  and  the  other  22
    hours of physical assistance is provided by whichever son is  there  at
    the time.  It is submitted that the  finding  of  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellants had failed to show that they  were  unable,  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the Sponsor,  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care because it is not available and there  is  no  person  in
    Pakistan who can reasonably provide it  or  it  is  not  affordable  is
    materially flawed.

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Daykin submitted that it is clear from  the
    evidence that was given at the hearing before Judge Moore that only two
    hours of help is given by the nurse and that the rest of  the  care  is
    provided by the family.  The Judge did not factor the constant care  of
    the Appellants' sons into his assessment.  Oral evidence to this effect
    was given.  She conceded that perhaps the requirements  of  FM-SE  have
    not been met but these factors are relevant to Article 8.

 5. The position of Mr Avery  was  that  the  Appellants  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  No evidence was provided of the  amount  of
    care required or that it is not available.

 6. In response Ms Daykin asked me to consider the Respondent's IDI in  the
    bundle at page 301 in particular paragraph 9(g).   She  submitted  that
    this appeal should have been properly considered outwith the Rules.

 7. In his determination Judge Moore set  out  the  relevant  law  and  the
    position of the Respondent.  The position of the Respondent was that it
    was feasible for at least one of the children to return to Pakistan  at
    different  times  to  satisfy  the  cultural/religious  needs  of  both
    Appellants in relation to the professional care provided.

 8. Judge Moore said at paragraph 25 that a letter from Dr Asad Usman dated
    25th October 2012 confirmed that the First Appellant is a diabetic and
    hypertension patient and that fourteen years earlier he had suffered  a
    stroke.  He was unable to do his daily routine  and  totally  dependent
    upon his wife.  Dr Usman also said that both  Appellants  were  totally
    dependent on their sons but Judge Moore said that he would presume that
    such a statement simply follows information provided  to  Dr Usman  by
    either of the Appellants.  He also  did  not  find  it  consistent  for
    Dr Usman to say that whilst both Appellants were dependent upon  their
    sons, the First Appellant was totally  dependent  on  his  wife.   This
    statement appeared to him to  suggest  that  the  First  Appellant  was
    coping as a result of being dependent  upon  his  wife.   There  was  a
    further letter from Dr Asim Hameed dated 8th November 2012  in  respect
    of the Second Appellant confirming her to suffer from  diabetes,  lower
    back pain, degenerative disease,  osteoporosis  and  osteoarthritis  of
    both knees.  The doctor said that she  was  a  high  risk  patient  for
    fracture and had been under his treatment for the last four  years  and
    needed "special attention at home and while moving".  The difficulty in
    her movement was due to her osteoarthritis.  The  Judge  accepted  that
    she would have difficulty carrying out some  of  the  daily  tasks  for
    which her husband needed assistance.  He noted that  the  nursing  care
    provided included the supervision of an  exercise  regime  as  well  as
    assisting the First Appellant with cleaning, bathing and other  hygiene
    issues.  There is a maid to assist the Second Appellant  with  cooking.
    Judge Moore went on to consider the submission of Ms Daykin that  even
    if such nursing staff and similar carers could provide 24  hour  a  day
    care provision this would be inadequate, since it does  not  take  into
    account the  emotional  support  provided  by  the  children  to  their
    parents, bearing in mind the  cultural,  religious  and  gender  issues
    relating to Pakistan.  She noted that what is required in order to meet
    the requirements of the Rules is as set out in paragraph E-ECDR2.4  and
    2.5 of the Rules -

         "The applicant, or if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         Sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
         a result of age, illness or disability require  long-term  personal
         care to perform everyday tasks.

         The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         Sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  Sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
         living, because -

              (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
                  who can reasonably provide it; or

              (b) it is not affordable."

 9. Judge Moore found that the provisions of the Rules were not met.  It is
    clear from the papers before  me  that  there  was  no  information  or
    evidence before the Judge to justify a grant of entry  clearance  under
    the Rules and that the documentation required under Appendix FM-SE  was
    not before him either.    There was no  reliable  evidence  before  the
    Judge that the Appellants require 24 hour care.  There was no  evidence
    that the Second Appellant is unable to provide any care to her  husband
    or to what extent the gaps in the care required are not being met.

10. The issue of culture, religion and gender relied upon by Ms  Daykin  is
    dealt with at paragraphs 32 and 33 of the determination.   Judge  Moore
    took into account the guidance in the IDI which  states  that  decision
    makers should bear in mind "any relevant cultural factors, such  as  in
    countries where women are unlikely to provide support".  He  considered
    the evidence of the Sponsor that he has concerns about  the  fact  that
    his father is nursed by female nursing staff but concluded that  whilst
    it would undoubtedly be preferable for family members to assist in  the
    provision of the required care it is not a prerequisite  of  the  Rules
    that any such family member has to provide such care and it  cannot  be
    the case that simply because for cultural  reasons  a  particular  male
    individual would have a preference for a male nurse  to  provide  care,
    an appeal should be allowed.  He considered  evidence  of  the  Sponsor
    that he had done research in Pakistan  and  could  find  no  care  home
    providing the necessary  care  and  support  and  said  he  found  this
    surprising.

11. In all the circumstances and in particular the fact that no documentary
    evidence of the required level of care was provided I find  that  there
    is no material error of law in the findings of  Judge Moore  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

12. I turn now to Article 8 ECHR.  What is  submitted  is  that  the  Judge
    failed to make adequate findings as to whether or not there  is  family
    life between the Appellants and their family.  It had been submitted by
    Ms Daykin that the level of dependency  between  the  Sponsor  and  his
    parents amounted to family life and any interference with that would be
    disproportionate.  Judge Moore took into account that on  the  evidence
    before him the Sponsor in the UK had the ability and means  to  support
    his parents in Pakistan and would continue to do so.   He  went  on  to
    say:

         "In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the decision  of  the
         Respondent would be an interference with  the  exercise  of  either
         Appellant's right to respect for their family  life  and  therefore
         would not engage Article 8.  I am satisfied that family life  would
         continue for the foreseeable future in the same way that it has  at
         least since November  2012  when  the  last  remaining  child  left
         Pakistan."

13. It may be the case that the Judge did  not  make  an  absolutely  clear
    finding on the existence of family life but I do not think there is any
    doubt that he did find that family life existed.  The issue then is the
    level of dependency.  He had found that the Rules were not met.  He had
    found that it had not been established that the Appellants required  24
    hour care or that such care was not  available  in  Pakistan.   He  had
    found that there was no justification for a requirement that such  care
    be provided by a family member though he did take account  of  cultural
    mores and of the submissions made by the Sponsor on the need for family
    involvement and emotional support.  He  accepted  that  family  members
    were going to Pakistan to assist with care but that the requirements of
    the Rules could not be met.  It seems to me that in these circumstances
    and in the absence of any established compelling  circumstances  having
    been established, he was justified in  finding  that  any  interference
    with the family life between the Appellants and  the  Sponsor  did  not
    engage Article 8.

DECISION

I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and that that decision shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 1st August 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird


