
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09799/2014
                                                               OA/09793/2014
                                                               OA/09794/2014
                                                               OA/09796/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 December 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                 FAIZA KOKAB
                                  MAIDA ALI
                                 MOAAZ AHMED
                                 WASI AHMED
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. E. Nicholson of counsel (direct access)
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The 1st Respondent, who was born on 23 July  1975,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. The 2nd Respondent, who was born on 20 August 2001,  the  3rd
    Respondent, who was born on 30 September 2005 and the  4th  Respondent,
    who was born on 27 July 1999, are the 1st Respondent's children and are
    also nationals of Pakistan.

 2. On 17 June 2014 the 1st Respondent applied for  entry  clearance  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and the  2nd,  3rd  and  4th  Respondents
    applied for entry clearance as her dependents.

 3. On 23 July 2014 the 1st Respondent attended an interview in relation to
    her application and the Respondents were  refused  entry  clearance  on
    that same day. The Respondents applied against these  decisions  on  20
    August 2014 and their appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maciel on 4 August  2015.  She  allowed  their  appeals  in  decisions,
    promulgated on 19 August 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed against these decisions and on  7  October  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  granted  her  permission  to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  At  the  hearing,  counsel  for  the
    Respondents provided me with a copy of the Respondents' response to the
    Appellant's notice of appeal, which was dated 26 October 2015. He  also
    provided me with a copy of the Respondent's bundle, which  was  not  in
    the Tribunal's file. He also referred me to some documents  which  were
    contained in the bundle provided for a judicial review  that  was  also
    currently before another Upper Tribunal Judge.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. On 30 November 2015 counsel for the Respondents faxed  a  copy  of  his
    skeleton argument and a reply from the Home  Office  to  a  freedom  of
    information request to the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  response,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer faxed a skeleton argument on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to the Upper Tribunal on  1  December  2015.  I
    took time to read these documents before hearing oral submissions  from
    the parties.

 6. In his skeleton argument the Home Office Presenting Officer stated that
    he continued to rely on the grounds previously submitted  but  that  he
    sought to clarify the first ground. This ground asserted that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    section 19B of the Race Relations  Act  1976  and  section  29  of  the
    Equality Act 2010.The ground clarified that at the date of the decision
    and the hearing section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 referred to section 29 of the Equality Act 2010  and  not  the
    Race Relations Act, which it had replaced. Counsel for the  Respondents
    did not object to this amendment and I  exercised  by  case  management
    powers under rule 5(3)(c) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, as amended,  and  permitted  the  Appellant  to  make  this
    amendment.

 7. The Home Office Presenting Officer also  sought  to  rely  on  a  "new"
    ground of appeal, which asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
    made a material error of law by accepting  that  the  Guidance  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) - version 6.0 ("the guidance") could be read as  stating
    that it was only those who prima facie meet the  points  threshold  for
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) who would potentially be called for an  interview
    by an entry clearance officer. Counsel for the Respondents argued  that
    I should not permit this amendment as it meant that he did not have the
    opportunity  to  make  a  Rule  24  response.  After  hearing   further
    submissions by both parties about the substance of the appeal, I  found
    that  this  ground  merely  responded  to  an  integral  part  of   the
    Respondents' case and that, therefore, the  Respondents  would  not  be
    disadvantaged by its addition. Therefore, I exercise my case management
    powers again to permit the amendment.

 8. I did not admit the reply to the Freedom of Information request, as the
    statistics attached to it were not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and were of limited relevance in the light of the decision in SK (Proof
    of indirect racial discrimination) India [2006] UKAIT 00067.

 9. As a consequence of Section 88A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the grounds upon which the  Respondents  could  appeal
    against the decision to refuse them entry clearance were very  limited.
    However, at the date of their appeals they could appeal  under  section
    84(1)(b) of that Act, as then in force, on the basis that  the  refusal
    was unlawful under section 29 of the Equality Act 2010.

10. The Respondents original grounds to the First-tier  Tribunal  were  far
    wider and also referred to section 19B of the Race Relations  Act  1976
    as well at the Equality Act 2010. They also  submitted  that  they  had
    suffered  direct  discrimination  in  the   manner   in   which   their
    applications had been assessed by the  entry  clearance  officer.  This
    ground was not dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  who  found
    in paragraph 20 of her  decision  that  the  1st  Respondent  had  been
    indirectly discriminated against.

11. The Respondents also relied on the manner in which the 1st Respondent's
    interview was carried out. This ground is no longer relied upon but  it
    is the subject of a separate application for judicial review, which has
    been granted permission in the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds also made a
    number of points which went to the question of whether she  could  meet
    the criteria for entry clearance as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  which  did
    not attract a right of appeal.

12. In paragraphs 6 and 13  of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Maciel referred to  the  Respondents  having  rights  of  appeal  under
    section 19B of the Race Relations Act 1976,  which  was  no  longer  in
    force. However, at the end of paragraph 20 she also  mentioned  section
    29 of  the  Equality  Act  2010  and  allowed  the  appeal  under  this
    provision.

13. Counsel for the Respondents argued that this was a decision  which  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on  the  evidence  before  her.
    However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not remind  herself  of  the
    relevant criteria contained in sections 19 and 29 of the  Equality  Act
    2010. Nor did she consider the evidence in the light of these criteria.



14.  Section  19(3)  of  the  Equality  Act  2010  outlines  the   relevant
    characteristics which may found the basis for a  successful  claim  for
    discrimination. These include "race" and section 9 of the Equality  Act
    2010 clarifies that "race" includes "nationality". In paragraph  16  of
    her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that "it was contended
    that [the] requirement for interview is additional as a result  of  her
    race which she would  otherwise  not  have  had  to  fulfil".  Then  at
    paragraph 20 of her decision she concluded that "persons  applying  for
    Entrepreneur visas from Islamabad will  be  Pakistani".  There  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find  that  applicants
    for visas in Islamabad would be exclusively nationals of Pakistan.

15. Section  19(2)  requires  the  Respondent  to  identify  a  "provision,
    criterion or practice" which the Entry Clearance Officer applied  which
    indirectly discriminated against the 1st Respondent. I accept  that  in
    substance  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  identified  this  as   the
    requirement in the Guidance to  interview  all  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    applicants  if  they  have  sufficient  points  to  qualify  for  entry
    clearance.

16. For the purposes of section 19(2)(a) it was also necessary to show that
    this requirement applied to  those  who  did  not  share  the  relevant
    characteristic because they were not nationals of Pakistan. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not refer to this requirement but in  paragraph
    20 of her decision she did not find that this requirement was  met.  In
    contrast, she said that  "Mr.  Nicholson  contended  that  all  of  the
    applicants who pass the initial assessment are interviewed. There is no
    evidence of this before me". Therefore, even if she  was  applying  the
    substance of this sub-section, she clearly did not  find  that  it  was
    met.

17. Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer to sub-section
    19(2)(b) which required her to identify how being required to attend an
    interview would put the 1st Respondent "at  a  particular  disadvantage
    when compared with person with whom [she] does not  share"  a  relevant
    characteristic as a national of Pakistan. She merely  stated  that  she
    found "that had the [1st Respondent] not been interviewed, there  would
    be nothing upon which to base any refusal". This does not amount  to  a
    finding of discrimination or meet the requirements of Section  19(2)(b)
    of the  Equality  Act  2010.  In  oral  submissions,  counsel  for  the
    Respondents also argued that selection for an interview on the basis of
    a local profile amounted  to  indirect  discrimination  but  failed  to
    identify how this amounted to discrimination on the basis of race.

18. Page 19 of the Home Office Guidance - Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  -  version
    6.0, which was valid from 11 July 2014, states that "if  the  applicant
    meets the points threshold  for  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  but  displays
    either general or specific risk characteristics, shown  on  local  risk
    profiles, you must either ask them to submit  further  information  and
    evidence or invite them for an interview". It  also  states  that  "the
    number of applicants  selected  for  interview  or  asked  for  further
    evidence varies between posts depending on  the  risk  profile  of  the
    applicants. The risk and liaison officer  network  (RALON)  teams  hold
    local profiles  to  support  selection  for  interview".  However,  the
    operative phrase is "to support selection for  interview",  which  does
    not mean that interviews could not be arranged on another basis and  to
    comply with the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  referred  to
    below.

19. In addition, paragraph 5.2 of  the  report  of  the  Independent  Chief
    Inspector of the UK Border Agency on An  Inspection  of  the  Risk  and
    Liaison Overseas Network (RALON)  in  Islamabad  and  the  United  Arab
    Emirates: January - April 2010 stated that "RALON  was  not  supporting
    the visa operation in the  region  as  well  as  it  or  Visa  Services
    Directorate wanted" and in paragraph 5.3 it said  that  "visa  services
    were not routinely using risk profiles as part of the  decision  making
    process".

20. Furthermore, the guidance had to  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the
    Immigration Rules themselves. In particular, paragraph 245DB(f) of  the
    Immigration Rules makes it clear that an entry clearance  officer  will
    need to consider whether an applicant genuinely intends and is able  to
    establish, take over or become the director of one or more  businesses;
    genuinely intends to invest the required amount of money and  that  the
    money in question is genuinely available to him  or  her.   Sub-section
    (h) also states that the entry clearance officer reserves the right  to
    request additional information to support the assessment in  (f).  This
    additional information may have to be obtained by means of an interview
    at whatever post an application is made at. In my view this means  that
    an entry clearance officer will retain a discretion to  interview  over
    and above any guidance provided to him or her.

21. In paragraph 22 of his skeleton argument Counsel  for  the  Respondents
    also sought to rely on an unreported  case.  I  considered  whether  to
    admit this case in the light of paragraph  11  of  Practice  Direction,
    which can be found at pages 604 - 613 of Phelan. I  note  that  counsel
    has not certified that the proposition he wishes to rely on  cannot  be
    found in a reported case.  In addition, the case went to the  issue  of
    whether an  interview  process  itself  was  fair  not  to  whether  an
    appellant had been subjected to indirect discrimination.

22. In oral submissions he  also  asserted  that  the  1st  Respondent  had
    suffered from direct discrimination. This was  not  a  finding  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and was not an argument, which was  contained
    in the Respondents' Rule 24 Response.

23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights was not challenged by the parties.

24. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that there were material errors
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  and  findings  and
    that it should be set aside in its entirety. I am also satisfied  that,
    as there will need to be a complete re-hearing, that this is  a  proper
    case for remission to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings did  include
         a material error of law.

      2. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Macial is set aside.

    Directions

    1.   The appeal be re-listed before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other
         than First-tier Tribunal Judge Macial.




    Nadine Finch


    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch Date: 4th December 2015
