
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09633/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 July 2016                               |On 12 July 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                          HOSSAM AHMED HAMDAN ODAT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A S Odat, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash
    promulgated on 25 April 2016.  Mr Odat, whose appeal was determined  on
    the papers, is self-evidently not present but  his  wife,  who  is  the
    sponsor, has made representations on his behalf.

2.   The Entry Clearance Officer in Jordan refused entry  clearance  because
    the income of Mrs Odat did not reach the minimum  threshold  prescribed
    by the Immigration Rules.

3.    It  is  perhaps  regrettable  with  hindsight  that  the  matter   was
    determined on the papers, because the Judge would have  been  aware  of
    the burning sense of grievance which Mrs Odat has concerning  the  fact
    that  two  applications  have  been  differently  determined  by  Entry
    Clearance Officers which, she says,  reveals  a  mutually  incompatible
    approach in relation to gross and net income. She states that when  she
    collated the figures for the second application she did so meticulously
    following the template of the earlier  refusal  and  she  struggles  to
    understand why a different Entry Clearance  Officer  took  a  different
    approach on the second occasion.

4.   The Secretary of State's appeal concerns the  flawed  approach  of  the
    Judge  in  purporting  to  include  the  notional   benefit   of   free
    accommodation as a supplement to the sponsor's income  as  a  means  of
    massaging the figures so as to get them above  the  minimum  threshold.
    The Judge seems to acknowledge (paragraph 30) that this was an  unusual
    course (a "mute point" [sic]), but the conclusion  (paragraph  29)  was
    not open to the Judge under Appendix FM-SE, paragraph 18(8(c) of  which
    prescribes that accommodation allowances should be left out of  account
    in calculating income.

5.   Further, allowing  the  appeal  in  the  alternative  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules is also flawed because the Judge  does  not  identify
    any exceptional circumstance as to why the claim  having  failed  under
    the Rules, it should be considered under Article 8.

6.   Both these matters amount to material errors  of  law  and  I  have  no
    option but to set aside the determination.

7.   The Secretary of State does not seek to keep  the  case  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade and I think that is  right.  The
    issues raised before me are primary fact-finding matters which must  be
    determined afresh by a  different  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  first
    opportunity. I recognise the sense of frustration which Mrs Odat  feels
    with seemingly inconsistent responses from  different  Entry  Clearance
    Officers. In the circumstances I ask that this matter be listed in  the
    First-tier Tribunal at  the  very  earliest  opportunity  with  a  time
    estimate of an hour and a half.

Notice of Decision

1.   Determination of First-tier Tribunal set aside.
2.   Appeal to be remitted to First-tier Tribunal for redetermination  by  a
    Judge other than Judge Shamash.
3.   Rehearing to be expedited and listed on first  available  date  with  a
    time estimate of 1.5 hours.



No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     12 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

























