
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09400/2013
     Oa/09410/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th July 2014                               |On 12th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            (1) MRS SUZANA SHALA
                           (2) MASTER EDUARD SHALA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICEr, WARSAW


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Julian Wells (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox, promulgated on 16th  April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 8th  April  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of Mrs Suzana Shala, and her child Master  Eduard
    Shala.  The Appellants applied  for,  and  were  subsequently  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a mother and child.  Both are nationals  of  Kosovo.
    The First Appellant was born on  26th  February  1986  and  the  Second
    Appellant was born on 4th July 2009.  They applied to join the Sponsor,
    Mr Endri Shala, as the wife and child respectively of the Sponsor.

 3. The ECO rejected the applications because he was not satisfied that the
    First Appellant met  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  There was an absence of personal and business  bank  statements
    for a period of twelve consecutive months, and an absence of  proof  of
    national insurance contributions.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before  the  original  judge,  it  transpired  that  the
    Sponsor  had  employed  an  agent  to  organise  the  entry   clearance
    applications of his wife and child, and his details were given  on  the
    application forms of both applicants.  When,  however,  the  Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer set out to require further information  in  the
    form of personal and business bank  statements  as  well  as  proof  of
    national insurance contributions, the request  was  made,  not  of  the
    agent expressly employed by the Sponsor for this purpose,  but  of  the
    First Appellant, in consequence of which the First Appellant was unable
    to submit the same.

 5. However, "all the documents are now present as evidence at page  29  of
    the Appellants' bundle at paragraphs 14 to 19 of the Sponsor's  witness
    statement" (para 18).  The effect of the refusal by the Entry Clearance
    Officer was that now,

         "The Sponsor travels to Kosovo  regularly  though  their  prolonged
         separation is undesirable.  A fresh application may  be  futile  if
         the Appellants have no  right  to  enter  and  the  Respondent  now
         accepts that the required documents exist  so  the  Appellants  are
         entitled  to  enter  the   UK   therefore   any   interference   is
         disproportionate."  (para 19)

 6. In making  his  findings,  the  judge  observed  that  the  Appellant's
    representative had  "ultimately  conceded  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed under the Immigration Rules" (para 21).  Therefore, regard  had
    now to be given to Article 8 ECHR.

 7. In this respect, the  judge  concluded  that  "the  available  evidence
    demonstrates that family  life  exists  between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellants" (para 23).   However,  it  was  well-established  that  the
    Respondent is not  required  to  respect  the  Appellant's  country  of
    choice.  The Sponsor had made a conscious decision to separate from the
    Appellants and the Respondent's decisions did not  interfere  with  the
    private arrangement.  Therefore,  the  appeals  had  to  be  dismissed.





Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application broadly make the following  points.   First,
    the judge failed to identify which documents were missing  and  whether
    any information or document which was  missing  fell  under  the  ECO's
    evidential flexibility policy.

 9. Secondly, although the judge considered Article 8 ECHR (from  paras  21
    to para 24), the judge was wrong  to  conclude  that  interference  was
    justified by the public authority on the grounds of economic  wellbeing
    of the country or the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control
    because the Appellant's husband actually contributes to the UK  economy
    and the Appellants do  not  have  any  adverse  criminal  history  that
    necessitates their exclusion under  immigration  control.   Third,  the
    judge failed to consider Section 55 of BCIA 2009 in terms of  the  best
    interests of the child.

10. On 19th May 2014, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the judge had arguably failed to give proper consideration to Article 8
    or to Section 55 BCIA 2009 in that this was a case where the child  was
    separated from the  British  citizen  father  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Article 8 was sparsely dealt with and arguably inadequate.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 14th July  2014,  Mr  Wells,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants, submitted that the judge had failed  to  deal
    with Article 8 in a  proper  and  systematic  fashion  but  had  simply
    adopted the position that Parliament was entitled to  past  legislation
    that circumscribed private and family life rights in the manner that it
    did.  There was no consideration, for example, of  the  fact  that  the
    Sponsor met the maintenance requirements.

12. There was no consideration of the fact that  both  of  the  Appellant's
    children were British citizens.  The second child was  born  after  the
    application was made.  If  the  children  were  British  citizens  then
    Section  55  BCIA  directly  fed  into  the  assessment  of  Article  8
    considerations.  At paragraph 22 of the determination, the judge refers
    to Razgar, but does so in the context of the Respondent being "afforded
    a margin of appreciation in  the  administration  of  this,"  which  is
    plainly inadequate as an application of the "Razgar principles."   This
    is especially so given that at paragraph 23,  the  judge  accepts  that
    family life exists between the Sponsor and the Appellants.

13. Indeed, the Sponsor's marriage with  the  First  Appellant  took  place
    after his settlement in the UK.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that
    there was a conscious decision on the part of the parties  to  separate
    by the Sponsor coming to the UK and leaving Kosovo behind in  a  manner
    that was a matter of choice.

14. Finally, Mr Wells submitted that  the  Appellant's  representative  was
    wrong at the hearing to have conceded that the  Immigration  Rules  did
    not apply in a way as to benefit the Appellants.

15. The whole issue was whether the Appellant could produce  the  documents
    that had been requested.   The  requests  had  not  been  made  of  the
    Appellant or the Sponsor, but of the  agent,  whose  sole  purpose  was
    simply to assist in making the actual application.

16. However, the email address provided on the application form was that of
    the Sponsor, not the agent, and therefore the email request should have
    been made not of the agent, but of the Sponsor,  who  would  have  been
    able to provide the necessary documents.

17. There was a document verification report but this had not been shown to
    the Sponsor or the Appellants.

18. For her part, Miss Kenny submitted that there was no error of law.  The
    Appellants should make a fresh application.  It had  been  conceded  by
    their Counsel that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration  Rules.
    Article 8 was their only hope.  However, Article 8 cannot  be  used  to
    circumvent the Immigration Rules.

19. In reply, Mr Wells submitted that the judge's findings were  inadequate
    at every level as far as Article 8 was concerned.  He  gave  simply  no
    consideration to the fact that the children were British citizens.   He
    was wrong to say that there had been a voluntary choice to leave Kosovo
    to come to the UK when the marriage took place after  the  Sponsor  had
    already come to the UK.  The email address provided on the  application
    form had not  been  used  by  the  Respondent  or  her  officers.   The
    documentation which was in issue was readily available and was actually
    provided before the judge once the Sponsor had found out what had  gone
    wrong.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside  this  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  The most important  reason  is  that  the  consideration  of
    Article 8 has been inadequate.  The Razgar  principles  have  not  been
    properly followed.  The essence of  Razgar  is  not  that  there  is  a
    "margin of appreciation" afforded to the Respondent.

21. The most significant factor in the application of the Razgar principles
    to this case would have been the British  citizen  status  of  the  two
    children which was simply not considered by the judge.

Re-Making the Decision

22. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.



23. First, the request in relation to the missing documents, in the form of
    the most basic documents, such as even the sponsorship undertaking, was
    not made to the Sponsor, whose name appeared on the  application  form,
    together with his email details.  It was made  to  the  agent  who  had
    simply filed the application.

24. If the contact information existed on the application form,  there  was
    no reason why the request could not have been made to both parties.  If
    only a single party was to be  contacted,  it  had  surely  to  be  the
    Sponsor, whose email details were given on the application form.

25. Second, once it had become clear to  the  Sponsor  that  the  necessary
    documentation  had  not  been  forwarded,  it  was  then   subsequently
    disclosed by the Sponsor,  because  it  plainly  existed,  and  it  was
    considered by the judge who observed that, "all the documents  are  now
    present as evidence at page 29 of the  Appellants'  bundle  ..."  (para
    18).  On this basis, the Appellants  would  have  succeeded  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

26. Third, and in any event, the  Appellants  would  have  succeeded  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The judge accepted that family  life  existed  between
    the Sponsor and the Appellants (para 23).  But he was wrong then to  go
    on to  say  that  "the  Respondent  is  not  required  to  respect  the
    Appellants' country of choice" (para 23).  That was  the  beginning  of
    the assessment.  It was not the end of the assessment.

27. What was crucial was the existence of the British citizen children  who
    have  a  constitutional  right  to  come  to  the  country   of   their
    nationality, in circumstances where their sponsoring father  was  in  a
    position to maintain and support them and where their "best  interests"
    under Section 55 BCIA clearly indicated their physical  residence  with
    their father at their young age,  so  that  they  could  look  to  both
    parents for everything that young children look to their parents  in  a
    normal family life.  The Sponsor is a contributing member  of  society,
    who works and pays taxes and  there  were  no  factors  that  militated
    against him.  Neither, were there factors that  militated  against  the
    Appellants themselves, because none of them had criminal records.

28. In short, if the Razgar principles were to be applied  correctly,  then
    Lord Bingham's tabulation (at para 17) meant the following.  First, the
    proposed decision interfered with the exercise of the Appellants' right
    to respect for their private and family life.  Second, the interference
    had consequences of such gravity as to potentially engage the operation
    of Article 8.  This is clear from the evidence  before  the  judge  (at
    para 19) that the Sponsor now has to travel to Kosovo regularly because
    "their prolonged separation is undesirable."  Third, the  decision  may
    have been in accordance with the law in that the necessary  information
    was not submitted timeously to the Respondent.  However, in  coming  to
    this conclusion, allowance must be made for the fact that  the  request
    was not made of the Sponsor.  Fourth, the interference is not necessary
    in a democratic society in the  interests  of  the  protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others or the economic wellbeing of the country.
     The Sponsor contributes to the economy.  The Appellants  do  not  have
    any criminal records and are not in any way undesirable.  Finally,  the
    interference is disproportionate to the legitimate public end  that  is
    sought to be achieved.  The judge had recorded the submission  that  "a
    fresh application may be futile if the Appellants have a right to enter
    and the Respondent now accepts that the required documents  exist  ..."
    (para 19).

29. In these circumstances, the appeal is allowed under Article 8.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed.

31.         No          anonymity          order          is          made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014


