
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/10023/2014
     oa/10028/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 26th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          miss Yididya Nigsse Kinfe
                          mr Sofonias Nigsse Kinfe
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Taiwo, Legal Representative, UK Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For the sake of easy reference I shall continue to refer to parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal  namely  that  the  Appellants
    Miss Kinfe and Mr Kinfe will be  described  in  this  decision  as  the
    Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Ethiopia  whose  appeals  were  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott in a decision promulgated on 9th January 2017.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed that  decision  and  set  out  detailed
    grounds.  It was submitted that whether or not  an  independent  family
    unit had been formed was a question of fact and  the  facts  here  were
    that the Appellant's own evidence was that she was not  in  touch  with
    her children for nearly seven years.  The children had lived with their
    grandmother quite independently.  It was therefore  not  open  for  the
    judge to find that Rule 352D(iii) was met.

 4. Furthermore it was a requirement for the Sponsor to leave  the  country
    of habitual residence in order to seek asylum but that had not happened
    in this case and the judge had noted that the Sponsor  had  spent  some
    five years in Greece without seeking such  protection.   This  evidence
    was that no such intention existed.

 5. The Appellants failed to meet the Rules and had  failed  to  deal  with
    Sections 117A to 117D in the Article 8 assessment  which  in  terms  of
    Dube (Sections 117A - 117D) [2015] UKUT 0090 was a  material  error  in
    law.

 6. Before me Mr Clarke for the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  there
    were material errors and the decision should be set  aside  and  remade
    with the appeal being dismissed.  Reliance was placed on  the  grounds.
    It was clear that the children had in fact formed an independent family
    unit and when the judge used the phrase  that  this  was  "a  pragmatic
    necessity" (see paragraph 32 of the decision) that was an  unreasonable
    finding.  Furthermore the position was that the  Sponsor  had  spent  a
    considerable time elsewhere before she claimed  asylum  including  five
    years in Greece.  It was a perverse reading of the Rules to  allow  the
    appeal when the Rules said that she had to leave her country  in  order
    to claim asylum.  There was a further material error under Article 8.

 7. For the Appellants Ms Taiwo said it was important to note  the  Sponsor
    was a refugee.  There were many reasons why persons did not clam asylum
    in the first country outwith their own country of nationality.  It  was
    critical to note that she had fled out of necessity and that  had  been
    found to be true by the Secretary of State.  Accordingly the  Secretary
    of State had taken into account that there was reasonable justification
    for her not claiming asylum in Greece.  While the  Article  8  decision
    had not looked at Section 117 of the 2002 Act reference had  been  made
    to Razgar and the important  point  was  that  this  was  a  matter  of
    substance and not form.  There was no material error in the decision.

 8. I reserved my decision.



Conclusions

 9. The judge found (paragraph 30) that the Appellants  were  part  of  the
    Sponsor's family when she left Ethiopia.   She  went  on  to  find  the
    Sponsor credible (paragraph 31) and concluded that although there  were
    years when there was no contact between the Appellants and their mother
    this did not mean that the Appellants had formed an independent  family
    unit.  The Appellants were very young dependants when their mother  was
    deported and their grandmother had no option but to  look  after  them.
    Her financial support for them had not been continuous but the relevant
    Rules do not require there to be such support.

10. The judge went on to note that the fact that they were left at  a  very
    young age with their grandmother when their  mother  was  deported  and
    found that this was not a decision to form an independent  family  unit
    but a pragmatic necessity.  In my view that is a fair  finding.   There
    is no suggestion that the children were married or had formed  a  civil
    partnership or had formed an independent family unit.  It was  open  to
    the judge, at the very  least,  to  find  that  this  was  a  pragmatic
    necessity. It followed that this part of the Rules were complied  with.



11. The arguably difficult part of the Judge's decision is the finding that
    the Appellants complied with paragraph 352D(iv) namely that  they  were
    part of the family unit when the person left the country "in order  to"
    seek asylum.

12. It is important to note that the Sponsor did have to leave her  country
    of habitual residence and did claim asylum at a later  date  which  was
    granted.  The possible difficulty with the finding  is  the  fact  that
    there were several years between the two events but the  rules  do  not
    lay down any period of time which has to be complied with.   The  point
    taken by Ms Taiwo is that the Secretary of State must  have  considered
    the delay in the mother claiming asylum at some point but  nevertheless
    held that she was still a refugee.  As the judge put it the Sponsor was
    deported and separated from her children against her will and that  set
    in train her decision to seek asylum at a later date.  In my view there
    is nothing perverse or irrational about the judge concluding  that  the
    provisions of 352D(iv) were met.  She gave full reasons and while there
    was a significant delay in the claiming  of  asylum  the  fact  of  the
    matter is that the Sponsor was obliged to leave her country because  of
    a fear of persecution which  we  know  is  true  because  she  achieved
    refugee status in the United Kingdom albeit at a  later  date.  It  can
    therefore be inferred that the Sponsor left her country "in  order  to"
    claim asylum and the facts of this case are therefore rule compliant.

13. Accordingly it seems clear to me that there is no material error of law
    with the judge concluding that the Appellants met the  requirements  of
    352D and the judge was therefore correct to allow the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. It is true that the judge did not consider Section 117 of the 2002  Act
    in terms of Article 8 and this was  a  clear  error.   However  in  the
    context of this case where the appeal had already  been  allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules the error was not a material one and it  did  not
    affect the outcome.

15. Accordingly in these circumstances there is no material error of law in
    the judge's decision which must stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed    J Macdonald                            Dated 26th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
