



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: OA/10122/2015

                                                  OA/07592/2015

                                                  OA/10123/2015

                                                  OA/10124/2015

                                                  OA/10125/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |                    Decision and Reasons |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 16 October 2017               |                    On: 30 October 2017  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                       Entry clearance officer: Amman

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     S A
                                   L M M A
                              3 minors, M, H, S
                      (anonymity directions continued)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Symes, counsel (instructed by Selva & Co)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the respondents  as  "the
      claimants" and to the  appellant  as  the  ECO.  Unless  and  until  a
      tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimants  are  granted
      anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
      identify them or any member of their family.  This  direction  applies
      both to the ECO and to the claimants.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The ECO appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge GA Black who allowed the claimants'  appeals  on  human
      rights grounds.

   3. The claimants are the children of their sponsor, a former refugee, who
      is now a British citizen. Two of the claimants  are  adults,  born  in
      December 1994 and August 1996  respectively.  The  remaining  children
      were aged 15, 16 and 17 at the date of the hearing before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal. The claimants' mother is currently living in Jordan.

   4. The claimants originally appealed from abroad against the decisions of
      the ECO revoking and refusing their applications for  entry  clearance
      as children/dependent relatives under Appendix FM.  The  appeal  arose
      out of the decisions to refuse their human rights claims and to revoke
      entry clearances previously granted to the three minor  claimants  and
      the two adults. They applied to join their natural father.

   5. The ECO granted each of them a right to appeal.

   6. Judge Black set out the background facts in some detail. The claimants
      had been  separated  from  their  father  although  he  had  had  sole
      responsibility   for   their   upbringing   and   exercised   parental
      responsibility in the absence  of  their  mother,  whom  their  father
      believed was dead. Their father had been rendered unconscious after  a
      bomb at the family home. When he awoke  in  hospital  he  was  led  to
      believe that his wife had died in the explosion by her relatives,  who
      successfully sought to deprive him of her land.

   7. However the sponsor admitted at interview in August  2015  that  their
      mother was alive and that a false declaration had been made [5].

   8.  Pursuant  to  that  interview  the  ECO  revoked  and   refused   the
      applications for entry clearance. The ECO was  satisfied  that  family
      life could continue as it  had  in  the  past  with  visits  from  the
      sponsor.

   9. The claimants, however, had in the meantime made their way to  the  UK
      and claimed asylum here. The claims are yet to be determined - [8].

  10.  The  claimants  nonetheless  proceeded  with  their  entry  clearance
      appeals. Judge Black accepted that  the  appeals  had  not  lapsed  by
      operation of law as there  was  no  statutory  provision  that  deemed
      appeals abandoned merely because the  individuals  pursuing  them  had
      made their way to the UK [9-10]. That finding has not been  challenged
      by the ECO before the Upper Tribunal.

  11. Judge Black found that the sponsor was  lacking  in  credibility.  She
      considered that the  revocation  of  the  entry  clearances  had  been
      justified. She noted, however, that circumstances had changed and that
      the  children  had  now  entered  the  UK.  Having   regard   to   the
      circumstances at the date of hearing their  private  and  family  life
      would face disproportionate interference  if  they  were  required  to
      depart the UK. They had lived with their  father  for  just  over  one
      year. They had travelled to the UK using Brazilian passports  provided
      by their mother and then claimed asylum.

  12. She found at paragraph [16] that family life was  established  between
      the sponsor and the children, given the visits made by him to see  his
      children in Jordan which he had done over the past ten years.  He  had
      maintained contact with them, provided financial support and paid  for
      their education.  This  he  had  done  with  their  mother  and  other
      relatives.

  13. She noted that the claimants have lived with  their  father  for  just
      over a year in the UK. There was no evidence to show why the  children
      cannot return to Jordan where they have lived since 2005 and had  been
      educated at school and university as well as having  been  financially
      supported by their father. They could be looked after by their  mother
      or by one of the adult children who were capable  of  caring  for  her
      siblings.

  14. However, she found that there would be disruption to  their  lives  if
      returned, albeit that they had lived in the UK for a relatively  short
      period. The children were 15, 16 and 17 and are at a significant  time
      educationally.  She  took  into  account  that  there  is  a  parental
      responsibility agreement signed  between  the  claimants'  mother  and
      their father and that a hearing was scheduled on 7  February  2017  at
      the family court. The evidence showed that one of the claimants was  a
      vulnerable adult.

  15. Judge Black had not seen any independent report or  assessment  as  to
      the children's emotional, social  or  educational  circumstances.  She
      accepted  that  family  proceedings  had  been  initiated  which   "in
      themselves are encompassed in the right to family life." She had  some
      concerns in the light of the medical records  for  one  of  the  adult
      claimants which appeared to show that she is a vulnerable  adult,  and
      which referred to problems with her father. Social services have  been
      involved.

  16. The final decision would lie with the family court who would have  the
      benefit of a full assessment.

  17. Whilst finding that the level of deception and manipulation  had  been
      great, the children were not to be punished for the actions  taken  by
      their father. They  are  now  settled  in  school  and  appear  to  be
      attending well and getting good results.

  18. Judge Black  considered  the  proportionality  of  the  decision.  The
      position of one of the other young adults had not  been  addressed  in
      the skeleton argument. However, she found that the pragmatic  approach
      was for the family to remain together as a unit. There was no evidence
      how or where the two relatively young adult  children  would  live  if
      removed. She accepted  the  argument  that  they  would  be  "stranded
      siblings" - Gurung [2012] EWCH 1629 (Admin).

  19. On 16 August 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes granted the  ECO
      permission to appeal. In granting permission, he  stated  that  it  is
      arguable that the Judge inferred that the Article 8 appeal concerned a
      removal decision when none had been made and in  any  event,  even  if
      there had been a removal decision, she approached the Article 8 appeal
      from the wrong premise. The claimants could resume the status quo that
      had endured for many years, living in safety  with  their  mother  and
      extended family and being visited by their father as and when he chose
      to do so.

  20. Mr Clarke relied on the ECO's grounds. There were  two  challenges  to
      the decision. First, he submitted that the decision  appealed  against
      was the revocation of entry clearance on the  grounds  of  dishonesty.
      There had been no decision to expel the claimants from the  UK.  There
      was thus no link between the ground on which the  appeal  was  allowed
      and the original decisions.

  21.  The  second  ground   contended   that   the   decisions   were   not
      disproportionate. The Judge  identified  no  features  that  had  been
      overlooked. Reference was made in the reasons for  appealing,  to  the
      factors considered by the Judge which informed the proportionality  of
      the decision. Those had been  identified  at  [16]  of  her  decision.
      Accordingly, it was contended that she had  used  Article  8  in  this
      instance as  a  general  dispensing  power  in  a  way  not  permitted
      following Patel.

  22. Mr Clarke identified and set out  the  relevant  paragraphs  in  Judge
      Black's decision including at [11] and [15-16].

  23. The burden was on the claimants to demonstrate that the  decision  had
      been unlawful under s.55. There was no evidence before her to  justify
      her finding that the decision in the family  courts  would  likely  be
      successful.  Having  identified  the  matters  which  appeared  to  be
      inconsistent with the children's s.55 rights, the ultimate finding was
      perverse in the circumstances. It is  difficult  to  see  how  such  a
      decision could properly have been made.

  24. In reply, Mr Symes relied on his response. He  also  referred  to  his
      skeleton argument produced to the First-tier Tribunal.  He  emphasised
      that family proceedings are afoot. The Court of Appeal had  recognised
      in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133 that the right to private  and
      family life encompasses  an  opportunity  to  establish  and  maintain
      family relationships on a firm legal footing  which  may  require  the
      grant of leave to remain rather than  merely  an  undertaking  not  to
      remove [72]. What was not appropriate was to have left  the  appellant
      in that case in limbo in this country with temporary admission and the
      promise not to remove her  until  the  contact  application  had  been
      concluded.

  25. He submitted that there was  accordingly  no  alternative  option  for
      family life to be enjoyed other than the claimants' relocation to  the
      UK. Their father had worked here and had  a  business  in  Egypt.  The
      claimants had no right to live in Egypt and were at present unlawfully
      in Jordan.

  26. The reality before the Judge was that the children were in school  and
      were doing well. He submitted that in an appeal under s.82(1)  against
      the decision, the Tribunal may consider any  matter  which  it  thinks
      relevant to the substance of the decision, including a matter  arising
      after the date of the decision.

  27. This was an appeal on human rights grounds  although  the  Rules  were
      clearly relevant.

  28. He submitted that it is also clear from the  recent  decision  of  the
      Upper Tribunal President in AT (Eritrea) [2016] UKUT 227 that the fact
      that the interests of a child are in issue would be  a  countervailing
      factor which tends to reduce to some degree the width of the margin of
      appreciation  which  the  State  authorities  would  otherwise  enjoy.
      Article 8 has to be interpreted and applied in the  light  of  the  UN
      Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989).

  29. This does not simply provide a trump card so that  a  child  applicant
      for positive action to be taken by the State in the field  of  Article
      8(1) must always have  their  application  acceded  to.  However,  the
      interests of the child are a primary consideration.  The  age  of  the
      child, the closeness of  their  relationship  with  the  other  family
      members in the UK and whether the family could live together elsewhere
      are likely to be important factors which should be borne in mind.

  30. He submitted that the  First-tier  Judge  acted  compatibly  with  the
      governing legal principles in her decision.







      Assessment

  31. The ECO treated the decision to involve the refusal of a human  rights
      claim. The claimants'  decisions  carried  a  right  of  appeal  under
      s.82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  It  is
      provided under s.92 of the 2002 Act that an appeal against  the  entry
      clearance must be brought from outside the  UK.  As  contended  by  Mr
      Symes there is no limitation that it must also be continued only  from
      abroad.

  32. At the date of hearing, Judge  Black  noted  that  the  claimants  had
      arrived in the UK. In those circumstances, the Tribunal  was  entitled
      to consider any matter thought to be relevant to the substance of  the
      decision including a matter arising  after  the  date  of  decision  -
      s.85(4).

  33. Judge Black found that  there  was  no  statutory  provision  that  in
      principle prevents an appellant from continuing with an out of country
      appeal in country and entering and making an asylum claim [9].

  34. She had regard to the relationships between the  claimants  and  their
      father, noting  that  s.92(4)  only  provides  that  appeals  must  be
      instigated and issued out  of  country.  Thereafter,  the  section  is
      silent. There is no provision in the Act as to  the  procedure  to  be
      followed in a variety of circumstances including when an appellant has
      entered the UK [10].

  35. In the circumstances Judge Black properly considered the situation  as
      at the date of hearing on 24 January 2017 on the basis that they  were
      now established in the UK and the child claimants were the subjects of
      pending family proceedings.

  36. Nor is there any substance in the contention that the Judge might have
      inferred that the Article 8 appeal concerned a removal  decision  when
      none had been made.  The  Judge  was  aware  that  the  claimants  had
      outstanding asylum applications which had yet to be  decided.  In  the
      circumstances there was no basis for any  contention  that  she  might
      have wrongly concluded that there were removal decisions.

  37. It is evident from  the  assessment  and  findings  from  her  lengthy
      paragraph [16] that there were pending Family  Court  proceedings  and
      that the  children  were  at  a  significant  moment  of  their  lives
      educationally.

  38. She had regard at [17] to the statutory factors  in  s.117A-C  of  the
      2002 Act. She concluded that on the evidence  as  it  stood,  '....the
      family life for the children and their interest which are  of  primary
      consideration is capable of outweighing the  public  interest'  (sic).
      She also had regard to  the  two  young  adults  and  found  that  the
      pragmatic approach was for the family to remain  together  as  a  unit
      including the relatively young adults. Nor was their any  evidence  as
      to how or where they would live if removed.

  39. Judge Black was referred to the Court of Appeal decision in MS  (Ivory
      Coast), supra. This had been set  out  in  some  detail  in  counsel's
      skeleton argument before her.

  40. In MS it was accepted that a decision to remove an  applicant  in  the
      process of seeking a contact order may violate Article 8, particularly
      because their removal during  such  proceedings  would  both  prejudge
      their outcome  and  threaten  the  applicant's  subsequent  meaningful
      involvement therein: outcomes which might  breach  Article  6  of  the
      Human Rights Convention.

  41. As submitted by Mr Symes from decisions such as RS (India) [2012] UKUT
      002018, it is evident that there will be cases where an appeal  should
      be allowed pending the final determination of family law proceedings .



  42. Mr Clarke also expressly submitted that the decision  of  Judge  Black
      was in the circumstances, perverse. The very factors relied on by  the
      ECO as rendering removal proportionate were found by the Judge to make
      such removal disproportionate.

  43. A very high hurdle must be mounted in  a  "perversity"  challenge.  In
      Hayes v Willoughby [2013] UKSC 17 at [14],  relied  on  by  Mr  Symes,
      rationality is not the same as reasonableness.  Lord  Sumption  stated
      that reasonableness is an external, objective standard applied to  the
      outcome of a person's thoughts or intentions. The question is  whether
      a hypothetically reasonable person in his position would have  engaged
      in the relevant conduct for the purpose  of  preventing  or  detecting
      crime. A  test  of  rationality,  by  comparison,  applies  a  minimum
      objective standard to  the  relevant  person's  mental  processes.  It
      imports a requirement of good faith, a requirement that  there  should
      be some logical connection between the  evidence  and  the  ostensible
      reasons for the decision, and (which will usually amount to  the  same
      thing) an absence of arbitrariness, of capriciousness or of  reasoning
      so outrageous in its defiance of logic as to be perverse.

  44. Contrary to Mr Clarke's assertion, however, I find that the Judge  has
      properly considered the basis upon  which  the  claimants'  Article  8
      appeals should succeed.

  45. Her decision under Article 8 was in effect a holding position, pending
      the outcome of the Family Court proceedings scheduled for a few  weeks
      after the date of hearing. Judge Black  has  properly  identified  the
      relevant factors on both sides of the balancing exercise. She referred
      to  the  father's  deception  and  manipulation,  against  the   other
      circumstances including in particular, the family  court  proceedings,
      the fact that the children were at a significant moment of their lives
      educationally and the vulnerability of one of the adult claimants.

  46. She properly applied RS (India), supra, allowing  the  appeal  pending
      the final outcome of the family law proceedings.  Judge Black has come
      to a conclusion available to her on the evidence presented. There  was
      an obvious logical connection between the evidence and her  reasoning.
      Her decision was in  the  circumstances  was  neither  irrational  nor
      perverse.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.


      Signed           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Mailer                23
      October 2017

