
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
OA/10577/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 February 2016                    |    On 4 March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MINA BEGUM RUMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed instructed by Ethnic Community Service UK
Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to  the  appellant
    as the respondent (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant was born on 1 October 1989 and  is  a  female
    citizen Bangladesh.  By decision dated  31  July  2014  the  respondent
    refused the appellant's application for entry clearance to  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of Mr Ali Azmal (hereafter referred  to  as  the
    sponsor).  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Bartlett) which, in a decision promulgated on 8 September 2015  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The outcome of the appeal turns on a single  issue.   Inter  alia,  the
    appellant was required to meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE1(n):
    (n) The gross amount of any  cash  income  may  be  counted  where  the
    person's specified bank statements show the net amount which relates to
    the gross amount shown on their payslips (or in the relevant  specified
    evidence provided in addition  to  the  specified  bank  statements  in
    relation to non-employment income).  Otherwise,  only  the  net  amount
    shown on the specified bank statements may be counted.

    The sponsor was paid by his employer in cash.  The  sponsor,  in  turn,
    paid cash sums into his bank account but retained some cash for his own
    use.  As a consequence, the sum shown in the sponsor's bank  statements
    were less that the sums appearing in  the  wage  slips  and  were  also
    insufficient  to  meet  the  minimum  income  requirements  imposed  by
    Appendix FM.  The judge acknowledged this deficiency [35] but concluded
    that, because the respondent had carried a check with HMRC  this  check
    confirmed full amounts of net salary paid to the  sponsor,  the  appeal
    should be allowed under the Immigration Rules notwithstanding that  the
    failure of the appellant  and  sponsor  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM-SE1(n) (i.e. "only the net amount shown  in  the  specified
    bank statements may be counted" as evidence of the  required  level  of
    income).

 3. Mr Ahmed,  for  the  appellant,  urged  the  adoption  of  a  purposive
    construction of the Rules given that it was clear  that  the  appellant
    had produced documentary evidence  confirming  the  required  level  of
    income.

 4. I disagree with Mr Ahmed.  The requirements of Appendix  FM-SE  do  not
    provide some general gloss or guideline to indicate how the substantive
    Rules might be met.   They  are  strict  requirements  imposed  by  the
    Secretary of State.  In the particular case, whilst I am aware that the
    sponsor may not have understood  the  intricacies  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, he could easily have complied with  the  requirements  of  those
    Rules by paying his  entire  net  salary  into  his  bank  account  and
    thereafter removing cash from the account  for  his  own  use.   It  is
    difficult to see why either the respondent  or,  indeed,  the  Tribunal
    should assist an appellant and sponsor in circumstances where they have
    not assisted themselves.  I note what the judge says regarding the HMRC
    document but that document is not one of the documents  required  under
    Appendix FM-SE.  It is not for the Tribunal to amend  the  requirements
    of the  Rules  to  suit  the  particular  circumstances  of  individual
    claimants.  It follows that the decision should be set  aside  and  the
    decision in respect of the ECO's refusal remade dismissing the  appeal.



 5. I note that Article 8 ECHR was pleaded in the grounds of appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal but no reference was  made  to  Article  8  in  the
    appellant's submissions to the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  8
September 2015 is set  aside.   I  remake  the  decision.   The  appellant's
appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi  dated
31 July 2014 is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
(Article 8 ECHR) grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 26 February 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

























