

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10540/2012
                                                               OA/10541/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2013                           |On 06 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AJA
                                     ASF

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. These appeals are subject to an anonymity order made by the First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. The appellants are citizens of Somalia.  The first appellant was  born
      on 21 April 1926 and the second appellant was born on 21 October 1994.
       The second appellant is the adopted daughter of the  first  appellant
      and they have lived together in Nairobi, Kenya since March 2009.   The
      first appellant is the father of the sponsor ("AJ").  He came  to  the
      UK and was recognised as a refugee  in  2001.   He  became  a  British
      citizen in 2007.  He lives in the UK with his wife, who joined him  in
      July 2005, and son who was born in the UK in 2010.

The Appeals' History

   3. These appeals have a protracted history.  The appellants first applied
      for entry clearance to join  the  sponsor  on  19  June  2009.   Their
      applications were refused on 15 July 2009.  They appealed to the First-
      tier Tribunal.  The appeals were heard by  Judge  Knowles  on  28  May
      2010.  It was accepted before Judge Knowles that the appellants  could
      not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  paras  317  and
      297 respectively of HC 395 as they could not establish that they would
      be adequately maintained and accommodated in  the  UK.   Instead,  the
      appellants relied upon the Secretary of State's Family Reunion  Policy
      and Article 8 of the ECHR.  Judge Knowles made  a  number  of  factual
      findings.  He accepted the relationship between the first  and  second
      appellant was akin to that of father and daughter.  Judge Knowles also
      accepted that, prior to the sponsor coming  to  the  UK  and  claiming
      asylum, the appellants lived in his household and had formed a  family
      unit.  Judge Knowles allowed the appellants' appeals on the basis that
      the ECO had not considered  the  application  of  the  Family  Reunion
      Policy to the appellants and that therefore his decisions were not  in
      accordance with the law.

   4. Subsequently, the ECO considered the  appellants'  appeals  under  the
      Family Reunion Policy but concluded that the policy could not apply as
      the  sponsor  was  not  a  refugee  but   was   a   British   citizen.
      Consequently,  on  18  January  2011,  the  ECO  again   refused   the
      appellants' applications.

   5. The appellants again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeals
      were heard by Judge L Murray on 4 October 2011.  Judge Murray  allowed
      each of the appellants' appeals on the basis that the ECO's  decisions
      were not in accordance with the law  because  he  had  been  wrong  to
      conclude that the Family Reunion Policy  did  not  apply  because  the
      sponsor had ceased to be a refugee  on  becoming  a  British  citizen.
      Judge Murray concluded that the  Supreme  Court  in  ZN  (Afghanistan)
      [2010] UKSC 21 had decided that the family reunion provisions  in  the
      Immigration Rules, namely paras 352A and 352D applied even  where  the
      sponsor, who had come to the UK and been granted refugee  status,  had
      subsequently become a British citizen.  Judge  Murray  concluded  that
      that approach equally applied  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  Family
      Reunion Policy.

   6. Having allowed the appellants' appeals  on  that  basis  Judge  Murray
      nevertheless concluded that the respondent's decisions did not  breach
      Article 8 of the ECHR.   The Judge found (at para 35)  that,  although
      family existed between the appellants, it did not  exist  between  the
      appellants and the sponsor as she was not satisfied that there was "an
      unusual degree of emotional dependency"  between  the  appellants  and
      sponsor.  In addition, Judge Murray went  on  to  find  that,  in  any
      event, the respondent's decision was proportionate.  In reaching  that
      finding,  Judge  Murray  concluded  that  the  appellants  could   not
      establish that they fell within the Family Reunion Policy on the basis
      that  their  circumstances  in  Kenya  could  not  be   described   as
      "compelling, compassionate circumstances".   Given  that  finding,  it
      might be thought somewhat surprising that the Judge allowed the appeal
      on the basis that the respondent had failed to consider the  Secretary
      of State's Family Reunion Policy since, on Judge Murray's findings the
      appellants simply did not fall within the terms of the policy.      Be
      that as it may, the appellants did not seek to  appeal  against  Judge
      Murray's decision.  That might well be because they had, in  a  sense,
      partially  succeeded  as  their  applications  were  remitted  to  the
      respondent to consider the application of the Family Reunion Policy.

The Present Appeals

   7.  The  ECO  now  considered  the  appellant's  applications  for  entry
      clearance for a third time.  On 8 December 2011, the ECO again refused
      each of the appellants' applications for entry clearance.  Relying  on
      the findings of Judge Murray, the ECO concluded  that  the  appellants
      did not satisfy the requirements of the Family Reunion Policy  on  the
      basis that their circumstances  were  not  "compelling,  compassionate
      circumstances".   Further, in relation to Article 8 the ECO  concluded
      that there was no reason to go  behind  Judge  Murrays'  findings  and
      decision that Article 8 was not breached.

   8. The appellants again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appeal
      came before Judge A E Walker on 1 July  2013.   The  appellants  again
      relied upon the Family Reunion Policy and Article 8 of the  ECHR.   In
      paragraph 29 of her determination, Judge Walker recorded:

           "29.  It was accepted by both parties that only if I  find  that
                 there was  any  change  in  the  appellants'  circumstances
                 between 18.01.2011 and 18.12.2011 ("the  relevant  period")
                 will the appellants have any chance of a successful appeal.
                  This is because 18.01.2011 was the date  of  the  decision
                 appealed against to IJ Murray and therefore sets  the  date
                 of her findings and 18.12.2011 is the date of the  decision
                 which is before me.  This  approach  follows  the  case  of
                 Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR Extra-Territorial Effect)
                 Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702 which  is  authority  for  the
                 proposition   that   the    first    Immigration    Judge's
                 determination should always be the starting point but  that
                 facts happening since the first determination can always be
                 taken into account at a subsequent hearing."

   9. Judge Walker then went on to consider the additional  evidence  relied
      upon by the appellants.  She rejected the  appellants'  argument  that
      the situation in Kenya was worsening  and  did  not  accept  that  the
      situation had worsened in reality in the "relevant period".  She found
      that the first appellant was able to access suitable care and that the
      situation had not changed during the "relevant period".   At  para  34
      she concluded:

           "34.  It follows from these findings that I conclude that  there
                 has not been any  change  of  circumstances  or  additional
                 evidence in the relevant period which  would  cause  me  to
                 alter or contradict the comprehensive findings made  by  IJ
                 Murray in her determination of 08.10.2011. "

  10. At para 35, Judge Walker confirmed the findings of IJ Murray that  the
      second appellant's emotional tie was with the first  appellant  rather
      than the sponsor.

  11. At para 36, Judge Walker concluded:

           "36.  It follows from my findings above  that  the  respondent's
                 refusal of the applications was justified.  There has  been
                 no change in circumstances in the relevant period  and  the
                 findings of IJ Murray must stand."

  12. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
      14 August 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  (DJ  Appleyard)  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal.   Thus, the appeals came before me.

The Submissions

  13. At the hearing, Mr  Hodgetts  (who  now  represented  the  appellants)
      relied upon the grounds of appeal dated 4 August 2013 drafted  by  him
      which he developed in his oral submissions.

  14. Mr Hodgetts' central argument was that the Judge had been wrong in law
      to take as  her  "starting  point"  Judge  Murray's  adverse  findings
      applying Devaseelan ([2003]  Imm  AR  1).   He  submitted  that  Judge
      Murray's findings were legally unsustainable.  In that  latter  regard
      he developed six points which can be summarised as follows.

  15. First, Judge Murray misdirected herself in concluding that the  Family
      Reunion Policy was only relevant in assessing  proportionality.  There
      was no option to the decision maker other than to apply the policy  in
      the appellants'  favour.   Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  that  was  a
      misreading of the AIT's decision in AG and Others (Policies: Executive
      Directions;  Tribunals'  Powers)  Kosovo  [2007]   UKAIT   00082   and
      inconsistent with the Court of Appeal's decisions in R  (Tozlukaya)  v
      SSHD [200?] EWCA  Civ  379  and  Miao  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  75.
      Secondly, Judge Murray  misdirected  herself  as  to  the  meaning  of
      "compelling, compassionate circumstances"  under  the  Family  Reunion
      Policy in having regard to the fact that the appellants' circumstances
      were "no different to other Somalis living in Kenya" (at  para  46  of
      the determination).   Thirdly, given the appellants' circumstances  it
      was irrational for Judge Murray to  find  that  an  85  year  old  man
      sharing a single room of about 4 metres by 4  metres  with  a  teenage
      girl who was his carer amounted to "adequate living  conditions"  (see
      para 42 of the determination) and  it  was  irrational  to  find  that
      overall their situation did not amount to  "compelling,  compassionate
      circumstances".  Fourthly, Judge Murray failed to  take  into  account
      the "best interests" of the second appellant who was  a  14  year  old
      girl sharing a single room with her 85 year old adopted father and who
      was unable to go to school.  Finally, Judge Murray misdirected herself
      in finding that there was no "family life" between the appellants  and
      sponsor in the UK upon whom they were  wholly  economically  dependent
      applying the requirement that there be an "unusual degree of emotional
      dependency" (see para 35 of the determination).  Mr Hodgetts submitted
      that this was consistent  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
      Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and the factually nuanced  approach
      set out in the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Ghising  (Family  Life  -
      Adults - Gurkha Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

  16. Mr Hodgetts submitted that the errors in Judge Murray's  determination
      were Robinson obvious even if they were not raised before Judge Walker
      by the appellants' representative and, in effect,  he  submitted  that
      Judge Walker should have taken the points for herself.   In  addition,
      he indicated that he would formally withdraw the  concession  made  by
      the (then) appellants' representatives  and  he  referred  me  to  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in NR (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
      856 in support of that.

  17. Neither in his grounds nor oral submissions did Mr  Hodgetts  directly
      challenge any aspect of Judge Walker's  reasoning  in  dismissing  the
      appeal other than her reliance upon Judge Murray's  findings  and  her
      application of Devaseelan.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that Judge Murray's
      decision was not under appeal. He pointed out that  her  decision  had
      never  been  appealed.    He  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  in
      Devaseelan which allowed Judge Walker  to  go  behind  Judge  Murray's
      factual finding on the basis that Judge Murray's findings were  flawed
      in law.  In any event, Mr Richards submitted that this  had  not  been
      argued before Judge Walker.  The appellants had been represented by an
      experienced advocate before Judge Walker  and  he  had  accepted  that
      Judge Walker could only find in the appellants' favour  if  there  had
      been  a  "material  change"  in  circumstances  since  Judge  Murray's
      decision.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  that  was   a   significant
      concession by the appellants' representative and it could  not  be  an
      error of law for Judge Walker to do  precisely  what  the  appellants'
      representative had asked her to do.     Mr Richards submitted that the
      errors were not Robinson obvious points.

Discussion and Analysis

  19. The first issue which I  must  address  concerns  the  application  of
      Devaseelan and whether Judge Walker was required,  despite  any  legal
      errors in Judge Murray's determination,  to  take  her  finding  as  a
      "starting point".  The second issue is what is the relevance, if  any,
      of  the  concession  by  the  appellants'  representative  that  Judge
      Murray's findings  should  only  be  departed  from  if  there  was  a
      "material change of circumstances" since her decision?

  20. Devaseelan was a case in which the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was
      asked to consider the relevance and effect  of  findings  made  by  an
      adjudicator in an appellant's asylum appeal when subsequently a second
      appeal, after the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998, came
      before an adjudicator where the same appellant relied upon  his  human
      rights arising from essentially the same  factual  matrix.    The  IAT
      laid down a number of guidelines at [37]-[42].  It is not necessary of
      set out  those  guidelines  in  full;  suffice  it  to  say  that  the
      underlying approach is that the first adjudicator's  determination  is
      the "starting  point"  and  is  an  authoritative  assessment  of  the
      appellant's status at the time  it  was  made.   However,  the  second
      decision maker must reach a decision on the appellant's situation  and
      claim at the date of the second hearing.  Any facts arising since  the
      first determination must always  be  taken  into  account.   Facts  in
      relation to circumstances before the  first  decision  but  having  no
      relevance to it may also be taken into account by the second  decision
      maker to the extent that they are relevant to the issues in the second
      appeal.  These matters are set out in Guidelines (1)-(3)  in  [39]  of
      the IAT's determination.  The IAT then went on to give guidance on the
      assessment of evidence at the second  appeal  hearing  which  was  not
      considered by the first decision maker.

  21. To what extent if any, can the second decision maker look  behind  the
      findings in the first determination not on the basis that there is new
      evidence about subsequent factual matters which may  justify  a  (now)
      favourable decision for an appellant, but rather so  as  to  undermine
      the findings of the Judge in the first appeal?  There are a number  of
      passages in the determination of the IAT which  touch  upon,  and  are
      relevant to, this issue.

  22. At [37] the IAT said this:

           "37.    ...the   first   adjudicator's   determination    stands
                 (unchallenged,  or  not  successfully  challenged)  as   an
                 assessment of the claim the appellant was then  making,  at
                 the time of that determination.  It is not binding  on  the
                 second adjudicator; but, on  the  other  hand,  the  second
                 adjudicator is not hearing an appeal  against  it.   As  an
                 assessment of  the  matters  that  were  before  the  first
                 adjudicator it should simply be regarded  as  unquestioned.
                 It may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of  the
                 hearing  before  the  second  adjudicator  may   be   quite
                 different from what might have been expected from a reading
                 of the first determination only.  But it is not the  second
                 adjudicator's  role  to  consider  arguments  intended   to
                 undermine the first adjudicator's determination."

  23. The  IAT  would  appear  to  preclude  the  very  challenge  that  the
      appellants seek to bring in this  appeal  to  Judge  Murray's  earlier
      decision.  In effect, the appellants' submissions amount to an  appeal
      against  Judge  Murray's  decision  (which  was  never  brought)  and,
      contrary to what is said in the final sentence of the  above  passage,
      would have required Judge Walker "to consider  arguments  intended  to
      undermine" Judge Murray's determination.

  24. Read alone, these comments would be a complete answer to Mr  Hodgetts'
      submissions seeking to demonstrate that Judge  Walker's  decision  was
      flawed in law.

  25. Likewise in stating that the first Judge's determination is always the
      "starting point", in guideline (1) the IAT states that:

           "In principle, issues such as whether the appellant was properly
           represented,...are irrelevant to this".

  26. That, of course, as a submission in a second appeal would amount to  a
      legal challenge to the findings of the first Judge  on  the  basis  of
      unfairness arising from inadequate representation.

  27. Having stated that, however, the IAT returned to the  situation  where
      in a second  appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  appellant  was  poorly
      represented in guideline (7) at [41]. Having set out  in  its  earlier
      guidelines (4) and (6) at [40] and [41] that a second Judge should  be
      circumspect in relying on evidence that was available but  not  relied
      on in the earlier appeal, the IAT noted that that reasoning was:

           "Greatly reduced if there is  some  very  good  reason  why  the
           appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first
           adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him."

  28. The IAT cautioned that "such reasons will be rare".  Specifically, the
      IAT considered the argument that there was error  or  incompetence  on
      the part of the appellant's representatives at  the  earlier  hearing.
      Although the IAT noted that: "an adjudicator should be  very  slow  to
      conclude that an appeal before  an  adjudicator  had  been  materially
      affected by a representative's error or incompetence" the IAT did  not
      exclude such a possibility as permitting the second Judge to rely upon
      the evidence and reach findings, potentially, different from those  of
      the first Judge.

  29. Although the  IAT  was  concerned  specifically  with  an  appellant's
      reliance in a second appeal on evidence that could have been submitted
      at the earlier appeal hearing,  the  underlying  point  is  that  that
      findings of the first Judge may have to be revisited in the  light  of
      error or unfairness that are beyond the appellant's control.

  30. That, in my judgement, is reinforced by the passage  in  [42]  of  the
      IAT's determination which immediately follows:

           "42.  Having  said  that,  we  do  accept  that  there  will  be
                 occasional cases  where  the  circumstances  of  the  first
                 appeal were such that it would  be  right  for  the  second
                 adjudicator  to  look  at  the  matter  as  if  the   first
                 determination had never been made. (We  think  it  unlikely
                 that the second adjudicator would, in such a case, be  able
                 to build  very  meaningfully  on  the  first  adjudicator's
                 determination, but we emphasise that, even in such a  case,
                 the first determination stands as the determination of  the
                 first appeal.)"

  31. It seems to me that in that passage, the IAT (entirely understandably)
      left open the  possibility  that  in  the  interests  of  justice  the
      circumstances of the first appeal might be such that the second appeal
      should not take the findings in the first appeal as the starting point
      and should reach findings as if the first appeal had  never  happened.
      That passage, in my judgement, provides a cautionary note to the IAT's
      view expressed at [37] (which I have set out above) that the Judge  in
      the second appeal should not consider argument intended  to  undermine
      the first Judge's determination.  The circumstances will no  doubt  be
      rare and exceptional, for example where there was  obvious  procedural
      irregularity or unfairness at the first hearing or where the  findings
      are flawed because of patent errors of law.

  32. The Court of Appeal approved Devaseelan in Djebbar v SSHD [2004]  EWCA
      Civ 804; [2004] Imm AR 497.  The Court of Appeal rejected a number  of
      challenges made to the substance of the IAT's guidelines  set  out  in
      Devaseelan.  Dealing with guideline (7) concerned with allegations  of
      error or incompetence by legal representatives at the  earlier  appeal
      hearing and that such incompetence could result in  reporting  to  the
      Immigration Services Commissioner, Judge LJ (as he then was)  at  [39]
      said this:

           "39.  In our judgement no-one benefits if [the  representatives]
                 are not so reported, and the requirement that  they  should
                 be does not impinge on the second adjudicator's  obligation
                 to act on findings of legal incompetence in the  course  of
                 the first adjudication if such findings are justified."

  33. That, in my view makes clear that the Court of Appeal  contemplated  a
      Judge in a second appeal reaching findings (inconsistent with those of
      the first Judge) in circumstances where there has been incompetence by
      the appellant's previous legal representatives.  That gives support to
      the IAT's expression at [42] of "occasional  cases"  where  the  Judge
      would be entitled to disregard findings in a previous  appeal  hearing
      for very good reasons.

  34. In approving the approach in Devaseelan and the guidance, the Court of
      Appeal emphasised that the guidance was flexible.  Judge  LJ  said  at
      [40]:

           "40.  We have no reason to believe  that  adjudicators  approach
                 this  guidance  as  if  they  were   construing   statutory
                 regulation, or apply it as if it were,  without  regard  to
                 the true merit (or otherwise)  of  the  fresh  application.
                 The great value of the guidance  is  that  it  invests  the
                 decision  making  process   and   each   individual   fresh
                 application  with  the   necessary   degree   of   sensible
                 flexibility and desirable consistency of approach,  without
                 imposing  any  unacceptable  restrictions  on  the   second
                 adjudicator's  ability  to  make  the  findings  which   he
                 conscientiously  believes  to  be  right.    It   therefore
                 admirably fulfils its intended purpose."

  35. In my judgement, in an appropriate  case  a  Judge  hearing  a  second
      appeal may have good reason to decide afresh the relevant facts in  an
      appeal without regard  to  a  Judge's  earlier  findings  where  those
      findings are clearly and obviously undermined by procedural  or  other
      legal error.  But, given the importance of finality and  certainty  in
      judicial decision-making, those situations are likely to be  rare  and
      exceptional.  Where the previous Judge's  decision  has  already  been
      subject to an unsuccessful appeal, I find it difficult to  contemplate
      circumstances in which a second Judge could entertain any challenge to
      the  first  Judge's  findings.   The  appellant  will  have  had   his
      opportunity to challenge those findings by way of further  appeal  and
      has not succeeded.  Likewise, where there was no  appeal  there  would
      have to be a very good reason why the party affected  did  not  appeal
      and challenge at the findings at  the  appropriate  time  and  in  the
      appropriate way before a second judge could contemplate entertaining a
      challenge to the earlier findings.

  36. Here, the appellant's appeal was allowed in part, namely on the  basis
      that the respondent had not considered the Family Reunion Policy.   It
      may  be  that  the  appellant's  representative  (wrongly)   did   not
      appreciate that the appellant could, nevertheless, appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal against the adverse decision and findings made under  Article
      8.  I am  not  persuaded  that  this  would  have  been  a  sufficient
      justification,  had  she  been  asked,  for  Judge  Walker   to   have
      entertained the  challenge  which  Mr  Hodgetts  now  makes  to  Judge
      Murray's findings and, if made good, to have  disregarded  them  as  a
      "starting point"  and  to  have  reached  her  own  view  untrammelled
      findings based upon the evidence before her.

  37. I, therefore, reject Mr Hodgetts' first submission.

  38. The arguments were not, however, made to Judge Walker who was asked to
      determine the appeal on the basis that both  Judge  Murray's  findings
      and decision to  dismiss  the  appeals  under  Art  8  stood  and  the
      appellants could only succeed if there had been a material  change  of
      circumstances since Judge Murray's decision.  That leads me to turn to
      the second issue in these appeals  which,  in  my  view,  presents  an
      insuperable obstacle to the appellants succeeding.

  39. I see no basis upon which Judge Walker can be said to  have  erred  in
      law in determining the appeal on the basis of the  concession  by  the
      appellants' legal representative that (1) Devaseelan  applied  in  the
      sense that the facts found by Judge Murray were  the  starting  point;
      and (2) that her decision in respect of Art 8 (and the Family  Reunion
      policy) were correct on those facts since only a  material  change  of
      circumstances would allow the appellants to now succeed.   There is no
      challenge to Judge Walker's finding that no  change  of  circumstances
      was established.

  40. Mr Hodgetts did not draw my attention to any authority which suggested
      that a Judge could not proceed to determine an appeal on the basis  of
      the concession of the sort made in this case by the appellant's  legal
      representative.   Instead,  Mr  Hodgetts  relied  on   the   case   of
      NR(Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  856  and,  as  I  understood  his
      submission, that the appellants could now  withdraw  that  concession.
      There is no doubt that in NR (Jamaica) the Court of Appeal  recognised
      that a tribunal had a discretion  to  allow  a  party  to  withdraw  a
      concession  "if  in  its  view  there  is  good  reason  in  all   the
      circumstances for that course to be taken" (per Goldring  LJ  at  [12]
      adopting SSHD v Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 at [22]  per  Kennedy
      LJ).  However, I do not consider  the  NR  (Jamaica)  can  assist  the
      appellants in these appeals.

  41. NR (Jamaica) was concerned with the  issue  of  whether  a  concession
      could be withdrawn at an evidential  hearing  either  of  the  initial
      appeal (where the concession had been made in the refusal letter)  or,
      on further appeal, where an error of law had been identified  and  the
      appellate tribunal was itself remaking the decision.  That, of course,
      is not the position in these appeals.  No  doubt,  if  Judge  Walker's
      determination were set aside,  the  appellants'  representative  could
      seek to withdraw the concession made to Judge Walker.  That would be a
      matter for the discretion of the Tribunal remaking  the  decision.   A
      concession cannot, however, be withdrawn before an appeal tribunal  so
      as to affect the legality of the  Judge's  decision  based  upon  that
      concession.  Judge Walker's decision was based  upon  that  concession
      and, in my judgement, she was fully entitled to do so.  It was made by
      an experienced representative in this field of law.  I do  not  accept
      Mr Hodgetts' submission that Judge  Walker's  failure  to  detect  and
      consider any legal errors in Judge Murray's determination gave rise to
      a Robinson obvious point of Convention law which Mr  Hodgetts  is  now
      entitled to rely on so as to  override  the  concession  made  by  the
      appellants' legal representative before Judge  Walker.   Judge  Walker
      did not 'miss' a point of Convention law which  she  was  required  to
      take despite it not being raised by  the  appellants'  representative.
      The  appellants'  representative  dealt  with   the   application   of
      Devaseelan and all that is now said is  that  the  Judge  should  have
      applied Devaseelan differently.  Judge Walker did what she  was  asked
      to do and found against the appellants on the evidence before her.  Mr
      Hodgetts' submission, in my judgement, is not sustainable.  As I  have
      said, her assessment of the evidence and her adverse findings are  not
      challenged in the Grounds and, therefore, in my judgment, they  stand.



Decision

  42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
      appeals did not  involve  the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   Those
      decisions stand.

  43.  The  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are,  therefore,
      dismissed.








                               Signed








                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
