

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10087/2013
      OA/10088/2013
      OA/10089/2013
      OA/10090/2013
      OA/10091/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On November 11, 2014                 |On November 17, 2014        |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          miss ursule mabiala kembi
                         miss kerene zawadi mpukuta
                          mr junior mpanzu mpukuta
                         mr hugues massamba mpukuta
                           mr aime luvuezo mpukuta
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ritchie (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Holmes (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, at the date of their applications on February 11,  2013
    were aged 24, 15, 17, 19, and 13 respectively, and are citizens of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo. They each applied for entry clearance  to
    join  their  parents  who  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  with   the
    appellants' seven-year-old sibling. The respondent refused all of their
    applications in separate refusal letters dated March 20, 2013.

 2. The first and fourth-named appellants' applications,  as  adults,  were
    considered under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules but were  refused
    as the respondent was not satisfied they satisfied the requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR of Appendix FM.

 3. The remaining appellants' applications were considered under  paragraph
    297 HC 395 but were refused as the respondent was  not  satisfied  they
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 297 HC 395.  Additionally,  the
    applications of the second  and  third-named  appellants  were  refused
    under paragraph 320(3) HC 395.

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April  25,  2013
    and on  July  4,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Ferguson
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard  their  appeals  and  in
    determination promulgated on August 27, 2014 he  refused  their  claims
    under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on September 26,  2014  and  on
    October  7,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Omotosho  gave
    permission to appeal on the basis the FtTJ's approach to article 8  was
    possibly flawed.

 6. The appellants' parents (Mr Mukongo and Mrs Kamalandua) were present at
    the hearing and were represented by Mr Ritchie.

SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 7. Mr Ritchie relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted:


      a. The FtTJ placed too much weight on  the  fact  the  appellants  and
         their parents had been separated  and  without  contact  with  each
         other for substantial parts of their lives. In doing  so  the  FtTJ
         erred by not having regard to the decision  of  Sen  v  Netherlands
         (2003) EHRR 81 in which the Court affirmed  the  principle  that  a
         biological parent-child  relationship  will  always  give  rise  to
         family life and there is a presumption in favour  of  the  children
         and parents living together. The FtTJ failed to have regard to  the
         fact that the family had been separated  because  the  parents  had
         fled and the parents had only  recently  located  the  children  in
         2011. Since finding  each  other  finances  have  prevented  direct
         contact as well as the appellants' mother's ill-health.


      b. The FtTJ failed to take into account the  prospect  of  the  future
         family life as set out in Ahmadi & Anor, R (on the application  of)
         v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 172.


      c. The FtTJ wrongly ignored the medical opinion that  the  appellants'
         mother's health would improve if her children were with her.


      d. The FtTJ wrongly relied on the fact the pastor was able to continue
         providing support when considering the appellants' circumstances in
         the DRC.


      e. The FtTJ failed to take into account material in the public  domain
         about  conditions  in  the  DRC  including  the  respondent's   own
         operational guidance note that  there  are  no  adequate  reception
         facilities or support for minors with no family in the DRC.


      f. The FtTJ should have applied  the  spirit  of  Section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  even  though  the
         children were not living in the United Kingdom.


      g. The FtTJ wrongly concluded the children's best interests were to be
         in the DRC.


 8. Mrs Holmes relied on the Rule 24 response dated October  15,  2014  and
    submitted:


      a. The grounds are a mere disagreement with the  FtTJ's  decision.  He
         considered all of the  evidence  put  to  him  by  the  appellants'
         representatives and made findings that were open to him. The burden
         was on the appellants to show their best interests  lay  with  them
         living together in the  United  Kingdom  and  Mr  Ritchie  was  now
         attempting to bolster the  appellants'  case  by  submitting  fresh
         material that was not before the FtTJ.


      b. Neither parent had been granted refugee status  and  the  fact  the
         appellants' father had now been granted indefinite leave to  remain
         did not mean he was unable to visit or go to live in the DRC.


      c. Two of the children were refused because they were adults  and  the
         test for them is different than the test for the minors.  The  FtTJ
         had considered the situation and  found  it  was  proportionate  to
         refuse them entry.


      d. In assessing the evidence at paragraph [26] of the determination he
         made findings that were open to him in paragraph [27].


      e. The FtTJ had regard to the  best  interests  of  the  children  and
         section 55 of the 2009 Act. In paragraphs  [28]  and  [29]  of  his
         determination the FtTJ addressed the best interests  of  the  child
         and the findings were open to him.


      f. Their appeals should be dismissed.


 9. Having heard their submissions I reserved my decision.  I  agreed  with
    the representatives that in the event I found an error in law  I  would
    remake the decision without further submissions.

ASSESMENT OF ERROR OF LAW

10. Permission to appeal was given because Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Omotosho felt it was arguable that  the  FtTJ  had  not  made  specific
    findings in respect of each appellant or followed the approach set  out
    in Guslhan (Article 8-new rules-correct approach) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT
    640 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.


11. I have had regard to both the  written  and  oral  submissions  of  the
    representatives and I have read carefully the determination and  papers
    that were submitted to the FtTJ.

12. At paragraph [5] of his determination the FtTJ noted that  the  grounds
    of refusal based on relationship was no longer relied on and  the  FtTJ
    noted-

      a. The respondent maintained the reasons for refusal for the first and
         fourth appellants was based on paragraph E-ECDR 2.4 (long-term care
         requirement), 3.1 (show sponsor can  provide  adequate  maintenance
         without recourse to public  funds)  and  3.2  (sponsor  to  provide
         undertaking that will be responsible for maintenance, accommodation
         and care for five years without recourse to public funds).


      b. The respondent maintained the reasons for refusal for the remaining
         appellants on the grounds they did not  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 297(iv) (maintenance) and (v) (accommodation) HC 395.


13. The FtTJ further noted the respondent no  longer  relied  on  paragraph
    320(3) HC 395 as a plausible explanation had been provided.


14. Counsel for the appellants agreed that the appellants  could  not  meet
    the remaining reasons for refusal as  set  out  above  and  that  their
    appeals would be argued on article 8 ECHR grounds only.

15. The grant of  permission  suggested  the  FtTJ  had  not  followed  the
    approach in Guslhan but I am satisfied the FtTJ considered the  appeals
    outside of the Immigration Rules under article 8 ECHR.  Whilst  he  did
    not quote Razgar that does not amount to a mistake because  it  can  be
    seen he did follow the recommended steps  including  a  proportionality
    assessment. It is the proportionality assessment that  forms  the  main
    thrust of Mr Ritchies' s submissions.

16. The FtTJ had regard to the  following  issues  when  considering  these
    appeals and in rejecting their claims he found:

      a. The medical evidence for Mrs Kamalandua  including  the  submission
         that if her medical condition was so poor how would she be able  to
         cope with two extra adults and three minor children. The  FtTJ  had
         regard to the medical reports including Dr  Cvejic's  report  dated
         May 7, 2014 and the fact the doctors supported her  being  reunited
         with her family because this would provide her with a great  source
         of support but if the  appeal  failed  it  was  likely  to  have  a
         deleterious impact on her  mental  state.  The  FtTj  considered  a
         number of other reports and found that the mother's  mental  health
         problems were longstanding and dated back to  the  time  she  lived
         with her children in the DRC and her medical symptoms  varied  from
         good to bad depending on how she was feeling as  evidenced  by  the
         fact her condition worsened when she learnt  about  the  abuse  her
         youngest child had suffered in the United Kingdom to May 2014  when
         the doctor commented that she had improved and her PTSD  was  under
         control.


      b. The evidence of Mr Mukongo and the fact he stated it was  important
         for him and his wife that the appellants  were  admitted  into  the
         United Kingdom as this would enable them to be a family  and  would
         lead to his wife's health improving.


      c. Neither of the parents had refugee status. The father  had  arrived
         in 1999 and both his and his wife's subsequent asylum  applications
         were refused. In 2009 the father had been given indefinite leave to
         remain outside of the Rules and his wife had been  given  leave  as
         his dependant. Neither  parent  had  established  a  real  fear  of
         returning to the DRC either for the purpose of a visit or to live.


      d. The lack of adequate  accommodation  in  the  United  Kingdom  (the
         parents and child lived in a one-bedroom property) was a factor  to
         be considered. The fact larger  accommodation  was  required  would
         mean recourse to further public funds. The  Local  Authority  could
         not guarantee such a property would even be available.


      e. The importance of families living together as set out in LD  [2010]
         UKUT 278, Muse [2012] EWCA Civ 10 and AAO [2011] EWCA Civ 840.


      f. The fact adult appellants should be considered differently to minor
         appellants. The first and fourth-named appellants were able to care
         for  themselves  on  a  daily  basis  and  could  not  satisfy  the
         maintenance  or  accommodation  requirements.  There  was   nothing
         specific about the adult  appellants  that  outweighed  the  public
         interest of maintaining immigration control.


      g. The best interests of the minor appellants, including  the  British
         child, have to be considered as of first importance  including  the
         fact families should live together, where possible.


      h. The father had not seen his children since 1999 and  had  not  even
         met the youngest appellant.  The mother had not  seen  any  of  her
         children since April 2005. This lack of contact did  not  establish
         more than the usual emotional ties between the adult appellants and
         their parents.


      i. There was a lack of evidence that any of the appellants were living
         in "the most dire  circumstances"  and  little  evidence  of  their
         actual  circumstances  was  presented.  Whilst   photographs   were
         provided  there  was  nothing  in  them,  which  identified   their
         accommodation or living conditions or where the younger  appellants
         went to school or if they did not why they did not  go.  The  adult
         appellants did not work because there were no jobs in Kinshasa  but
         all of them appeared cared for  and  accommodated  with  access  to
         medical conditions.


      j. The appellants had spent all their lives living in the DRC and  are
         all Congolese nationals. None had any  direct  contact  with  their
         mother since 2005 and their father since 1999. In fact, the  fifth-
         named appellant had never met her father.


      k. The question of proportionality between proper immigration  control
         and proper respect for family  life  comes  down  on  the  side  of
         immigration control.


17. Mr Ritchie has sought to  persuade  me  that  insufficient  weight  was
    attached to the concept of family life and too much weight was attached
    to the importance of immigration control.


18. The FtTJ clearly had regard to all of the factors in  this  appeal.  He
    considered the  positions  of  both  the  adult  appellants  and  minor
    appellants and in the case of the adult children he found nothing  that
    went beyond normal emotional ties.

19. On the subject of the appellants' living conditions he found there  was
    a dearth of evidence put forward on their  behalf.  Photographs  are  a
    powerful tool but all the FtTJ was presented with were  photographs  of
    children but there  was  no  evidence  of  their  surroundings  or  any
    evidence that they were living in dire conditions and on the face of it
    they were all healthy and well cared for.

20. The FtTJ acknowledged when the parents last saw their children and  the
    fact they all wanted to be together. He accepted there was family  life
    already and this could continue. He concluded the  public  interest  of
    immigration control  outweighed  their  desire  to  live  as  a  family
    together in the United Kingdom. He also found the  parents  could  have
    visited their children as there was nothing preventing them  travelling
    to the DRC.

21. The FtTJ acknowledged the importance of families being together but  as
    he noted none of the family  members  were  British  citizens  save  of
    course the youngest child  was  now  entitled  to  British  nationality
    because his father  had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He  also  took  into  account  neither  the  parents  nor  the
    appellants spoke English. The parents  were  unable,  at  the  date  of
    decision, to satisfy the Rules on maintenance and accommodation.

22. The FtTJ did carry out a proportionality assessment  acknowledging  the
    family wanted to be together and that children should, where  possible,
    be with their parents but he balanced that against the public  interest
    in maintaining immigration control and he found the  latter  outweighed
    the appellants' desire to come and live in the United Kingdom.

23. Mr Ritchie criticised the FtTJ for not  considering  certain  materials
    about conditions in the DRC  but  when  challenged  he  admitted  these
    articles were not before the FtTJ.

24. Judges are in a no win situation because they are appealed when they do
    look up their own sources and appealed  when  they  do  nothing.  Where
    appellants are unrepresented a judge may  well  feel  it  necessary  to
    check public  documents  if  none  are  placed  before  him  but  these
    appellants  were  represented  throughout  by  solicitors  and  counsel
    appeared for them before the FtTJ.  A  bundle  of  documents  that  was
    relied on was submitted on their behalf and I am satisfied there is  no
    obligation placed on the FtTJ to investigate the matter further.

25. The FtTJ had full regard to  the  medical  evidence  and  the  doctor's
    opinion that her health would be stable if they were allowed to  enter.
    He balanced that against the public interest in maintaining immigration
    control and made a finding that was open to him.

26. The FtTJ had regard to the position of all of the appellants  albeit  I
    accept he did not deal with each appellant in isolation. I am satisfied
    that these were applications for them all to come and live  here  as  a
    family. He did assess the adult appellant's application  separately  to
    the minor appellants' applications because the criteria under the Rules
    was different and his article 8 assessment had regard to the fact  they
    had failed to demonstrate anything other than he usual emotional ties.

27.  The  FtTJ  quite  properly  had  regard  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining  immigration  control  when  considering  their  article  8
    claims. The fact the family want to be together was a factor  the  FtTJ
    was fully aware of and took into account. The FtTJ also considered  the
    medical evidence but found  that  in  light  of  the  mother's  medical
    circumstances it was not in their best interests to  be  cared  for  by
    her.

28. This is a detailed determination in which  he  considered  all  of  the
    available evidence.

29. In the circumstances I find no merit in any of the arguments  presented
    today and I find no error in law.

DECISION


30. There was no material error of law. I uphold the original decision  and
    dismiss all the appeals before me.

31. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I see no reason to  amend
    that Order now.


Signed:     Dated: November 17, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

The appeal was dismissed and no fee award can be made.


Signed:          Dated: November 17, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

