
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10146/2012
     OA/10154/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April 2013                              |On 12 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               AMRITA KOIRALA
                                ANUJA KOIRALA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Ms R. Stichler, Counsel, instructed by N.C. Brothers
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal, born on 1 October 1988  and  1
       October 1990, respectively. They are sisters. On  16  February  2012
       they made applications for entry clearance as  dependant  relatives.
       Following the refusal of their applications under paragraph  317  of
       HC 395 (as amended) they appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Their
       appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hague  after  a
       hearing on 21 January 2013.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of arguable errors  of
       law in the judge's Article 8 assessment. The appeal  before  me  was
       pursued only on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR

Submissions

    3. The submissions on behalf of  the  parties  can  be  summarised.  On
       behalf  of  the  appellants  Ms  Stichler  relied  on  her  skeleton
       argument. She submitted that the judge had  misdirected  himself  in
       terms of the appropriate legal test for the  assessment  of  whether
       there was family life  between  the  appellants  and  their  parent.
       Furthermore, there was no  appropriate  balancing  exercise.  I  was
       referred to the decisions in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising
       (family life-adults-Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC).  In
       relation to the latter decision, the judge had  not  taken  it  into
       account although he was referred to it.

    4. The appellants had never broken away from  the  family  unit.  Their
       mother did not come to the UK until 2011 even though she was granted
       permission to stay in June 2009. She and the two appellants, and her
       son, all applied together but she remained with  them.  In  February
       2012 her son's application was granted but those of  the  appellants
       were refused.

    5. Judge Hague accepted  that  the  appellants  were  being  subsidised
       financially by their mother. However, at [8] and [17] he appeared to
       emphasise the appellants' prospects of obtaining employment in Nepal
       even though there was no evidence before him on that issue.

    6. So far as proportionality is concerned, there is no reasoning on the
       issue. The judge should have  considered  the  'historic  injustice'
       (Sharmilla Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8).  There  was  evidence  in  the
       witness statement of the appellants' mother that  had  their  father
       been allowed to he would have settled in the UK.

    7. Mr Jarvis referred to the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  and  the
       authorities relied on. He submitted that the question of family life
       was fact-sensitive. The judge had recognised the appropriate test in
       terms  of  family  life   between   adult   children   and   parent,
       notwithstanding the criticism of the language he used.

    8. Various aspects of the evidence  were  referred  to  in  Mr  Jarvis'
       submissions. The appellants are not living in the  family  home  but
       are  studying  in  Kathmandu.  It  is  evident  from  [8]   of   the
       determination that the sponsor played  down  the  prospects  of  the
       appellants becoming employed, not only in the context of  Nepal  but
       also in the UK. The judge was entitled to find that  the  nature  of
       their education was such that ultimately they would have a desire to
       obtain employment. Although it was found that they  are  financially
       dependant,  they  are  away  from  home  and  pursuing   educational
       qualifications.

    9. In reply Ms Stichler accepted that the question of family life is  a
       question of fact but it  must  be  decided  with  reference  to  the
       correct  legal  test.  The  judge  had  not  referred  to   relevant
       authorities.

My assessment

   10. It was not contended before me  that  the  appellants  are  able  to
       succeed under the Immigration Rules, and indeed in the determination
       at [12] it was conceded on behalf of the appellants that they  could
       not meet the requirements of paragraph 317. Neither was it suggested
       to me that they come within any policy applicable to the children of
       Gurkhas and there has been no challenge to the decision of the First-
       tier judge on that issue.

   11. At [5] of the determination Judge  Hague  set  out  the  appellants'
       family history, including the fact of the appellants' father  having
       applied for settlement as an ex-Gurkha soldier and his  having  died
       before his application was decided.

   12. It was concluded by the First-tier judge that the appellants do  not
       have family life with their mother. At [17], he stated that "In  the
       case of Kugathas it was held that family life, for the  purposes  of
       Article 8, is not established between  adult  children  and  parents
       save in circumstances of  special  dependency"  (my  emphasis).  The
       appellants' skeleton argument  and  submissions  contend  that  this
       phrase does not represent what was said in Kugathas.

   13. I agree that in referring to what was  decided  in  Kugathas,  Judge
       Hague did use an expression that does not appear in  that  decision.
       The phrase in Kugathas is  in  terms  of  there  being  evidence  of
       further elements of  dependency  "involving  more  than  the  normal
       emotional ties." However, I do not consider that what the judge said
       in his determination indicates  that  he  used  the  wrong  test  in
       deciding the issue of whether  there  is  family  life  between  the
       appellants  and  their  mother.  His  use  of  the  phrase  "special
       dependency" was obviously intended  to  reflect  what  was  said  in
       Kugathas. In addition, when [17] is read as a  whole,  it  is  clear
       that the judge was aware of what had to be established in  terms  of
       family life between adult children and a parent.

   14. Complaint is made about the judge's  reference  to  the  appellants'
       ability to obtain employment, submissions before  me  being  to  the
       effect  that  there  was  no  evidence  as  to  their  prospects  of
       employment in Nepal. However, it was in my view legitimate  for  the
       judge to conclude at [8] that there was no  apparent  impediment  to
       their becoming economically self-reliant and  independent  of  their
       mother. In this context I note that in the notices of  decision  the
       Entry Clearance Officer suggested that the appellants  were  clearly
       studying at a higher level so that they could  take  employment  and
       that there was no reason why they could not  do  so.  In  the  Entry
       Clearance Manager's review it is suggested that the  appellants  are
       healthy  adults  who  are  capable  of  making   a   living.   Those
       observations do not appear to have been contested by or on behalf of
       the appellants in the grounds of appeal or in their evidence.

   15. For the same reasons, I consider that as part of the  assessment  of
       whether the appellants have family life with their  mother,  it  was
       legitimate for the judge to take into account what he  described  as
       their "employment prospects" at [17] of the determination.

   16. It is true that the judge did not expressly refer to the decision of
       the Upper Tribunal in Ghising. I accept that he was referred to  it.
       However, it seems to me that Judge Hague gave  effect  to  what  was
       said in that decision about the need not to apply too restrictive an
       approach to the issue of family life, especially between adults.  At
       [17], after referring to Kugathas and "special dependency", he  said
       that this is "not a hard and fast rule". He noted that  family  life
       does not automatically cease on a  child  reaching  the  age  of  18
       years.  Although I was referred to the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal  in  Sharmilla  Gurung,  I  cannot  see  that  that  decision
       indicates any error in approach by Judge Hague in this case.

   17. He took into account the appellants' ages (they were aged 23 and  21
       at the dates of application). He noted  that  they  are  financially
       dependant on their mother but that they lived away from  home,  were
       studying and had employment prospects. At [11] he  referred  to  the
       fact that for the majority of the time they  would  be  living  away
       from their mother's home in Pokhara, even if she were  still  living
       in Nepal. He also noted in the same paragraph that there is a  wider
       family group in Nepal including three aunts and  their  families  in
       Kathmandu, with three uncles and their families in Pokhara.

   18. As the authorities make clear, and as was accepted on behalf of both
       parties before me, the issue as to the existence of family life is a
       fact-sensitive one. Of course, the facts must be applied within  the
       correct legal framework. In these appeals, I am satisfied  that  the
       judge did  make  his  decision  within  the  context  of  a  correct
       appreciation of the legal framework. He reached conclusions  on  the
       facts that were  open  to  him  and  applied  those  facts  to  that
       framework.

   19. I am  satisfied  that  he  was  justified  in  concluding  that  the
       appellants  did  not  enjoy   family   life   with   their   mother,
       notwithstanding their financial dependence on her and their  contact
       with her.

   20.  On  that  basis,  he  had  no  need  to  go  on  to  consider   the
       proportionality  of  the  respondent's   decision.   Even   if   the
       proportionality assessment could otherwise  be  found  wanting,  any
       error of law  in  the  proportionality  assessment  could  not  have
       affected the outcome of the appeals.

Decision

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to dismiss the appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
       under Article 8 stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 11/07/13
