
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10181/2013
     OA/10180/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th July 2014                               |On 11th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                     (1) miss Osarugue Cynthia Osayamwen
                   (2) miss Osakponmweh Precious Osayamwen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss L Appiah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Woolley promulgated on 16th April 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th  April  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal  of  Miss  Osarugue  Cynthia  Osayamwen  and  Miss
    Osakponmweh Precious Osayamwen.  The Appellants,  subsequently  applied
    for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are both citizens of Nigeria.  They are sibling sisters.
     The first Appellant was born on 28th  November  1996  and  the  second
    Appellant was born  on  27th December  1995.   Both  applied  on  27th
    November 2012 for settlement with their father in the  United  Kingdom.
    The father, Mr H P Emokpaie, is a person present and settled in the UK.
     The ECO was not satisfied pursuant to  paragraph  297(i)(e)  that  the
    Appellants were related to their sponsoring father as claimed.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge considered the question of whether the sponsoring father  had
    taken "sole  responsibility"  for  the  Appellants.   He  followed  the
    Tribunal decision in TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e)  (sole  responsibility))
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 which he purported  to  apply  (see  paragraph
    22).  He  accepted  that  the  Appellants'  mother  had  abandoned  the
    Appellants after they were born "and has had nothing more  to  do  with
    them" (paragraph 23).  He then considered the support provided  by  the
    sponsoring father for his children in Nigeria and noted that there were
    "a large number of copies of MoneyGram and Western Union receipts"  and
    that "some originals had been provided" (paragraph 25).  He noted  that
    some of the money was sent to an adult (paragraph 26).   Other  amounts
    of money were given to other adults (paragraph 27) and the judge  could
    not be satisfied that, given the large number of other  individuals  to
    whom money was apparently given, that it was given for the sole use  of
    his children (paragraph 27).

 4. However, he did also then conclude that, "I accept that the Sponsor has
    been sending some money to the Appellants,  or  at  least  to  Precious
    certainly from 2011 onwards" (paragraph 28).

 5. On the other hand, the judge had no breakdown of figures  in  front  of
    him as to how the money was to be  apportioned,  with  respect  to  the
    children's school needs, or medical bills, or the like (paragraph  29).



 6. Evidence was provided before the judge which was "postdecision" in  the
    form of a  heads  of  nursery  and  infant  school  and  from  St  Mary
    Dedication British International School confirming that the  sponsoring
    father "has been  responsible  for  the  girls'  upkeep  and  education
    through their grandmother ... " (paragraph 33).

 7. Moreover, the grandmother had sworn an affidavit which was  before  the
    judge (paragraph 35).  The judge held that he was  not  satisfied  that
    the father had taken sole responsibility for the children's  upbringing
    (paragraph 37).  He went on to consider other aspects of paragraph  297
    but found that no decision favourable to the Appellants could be  made.
    With respect to Article 8 ECHR, the judge  gave  consideration  to  the
    Appellants' human rights and in particular had regard to Section 55  of
    the BCIA 2009 and held that the Appellants were well  looked  after  in
    Nigeria and that there was no evidence  that  they  would  receive  any
    better treatment in the UK (paragraph 50).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in concluding
    that the money being sent to Nigeria had to be evidenced  as  going  to
    the Appellants because in his statement, the sponsoring father had said
    that, "I send money to my children regularly  through  various  people;
    including extended family members, friends and acquaintances ...  ...".
    The grounds also state that although  some  of  the  money  grams  were
    illegible, the fact was that the judge did have all  of  the  originals
    before her, "which were offered for consideration and declined to  look
    at the original documents or retain them on file".

 9. The judge also irrationally concluded that the Sponsor could not  prove
    how he came to make decisions in the children's lives because there was
    a letter from the Mary Dedication British International School (at page
    16) referring specifically to the first Appellant, Cynthia,  confirming
    that "Mr  Henry  Osayamwen  ...  is  responsible  for  her  upkeep  and
    education ...".  It was also stated that if the judge was concerned  to
    know about the sponsoring father's knowledge of his children's  "likes,
    dislikes, hobbies, and interests" (see paragraph 32), this was a matter
    that the judge should specifically have put to the sponsoring father at
    the hearing, but chose not to do so.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on 20th May 2014 on the basis that the
    judge should have been guided by the well established case law in  this
    jurisdiction of Emmanuel [1972] Imm AR 69; Ramos  [1989]  Imm  AR  148;
    Cenir [2003] EWCA Civ 572; NA (Bangladesh) [2007]  EWCA  Civ  128;  and
    Sloley  [1973]  Imm  AR  54.   In  particular,  however,   the   recent
    affirmation of the principles in these cases as  confirmed  by  Mundeba
    [2013] UKUT 88, should also have been heeded.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 14th July 2014, Miss Appiah,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants relied upon her skeleton argument,  which  was
    before the original judge, and which did refer to the cases that I have
    set out above, especially the older cases (see  pages  3  to  4).   She
    submitted that the ECO did find  that  the  mother  had  abandoned  the
    children.  The ECO then went on to conclude that the responsibility  of
    the sponsoring father was shared with  the  grandmother.   Miss  Appiah
    submitted that the judge should have concluded that, on balance,  given
    the standard of proof was on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    burden of proof had been discharged in the light of  the  fact  that  a
    large number of copies of MoneyGram and  Western  Union  receipts  were
    before the judge (see paragraphs 25 to 26).

12. Secondly, it was well accepted that "sole responsibility" can arise  at
    a later stage, and does not have to be shown  consistently  during  the
    continuum of a number of years, and this was set out at page 5  of  the
    skeleton argument, according to Miss Appiah.  She emphasised also  that
    Grounds 3, 5, and 6, of the Grounds  of  Appeal  before  this  Tribunal
    confirmed that "sole responsibility" had indeed been exercised  by  the
    sponsoring father in this case.

13. For her part, Ms Kenny submitted that the findings were adequate in all
    respects.  The judge had found that money was being sent to a number of
    individuals.  For example, it was sent to Sally Osayuki and  the  judge
    concluded, "it is  not  clear  who  this  person  is"  (paragraph  26).
    However, if the judge had  considered  the  witness  statement  of  the
    Sponsor, it would have been abundantly clear  that  this  is  a  family
    friend.  The witness statement confirms this.  Be that as it  may,  the
    judge had  then  also  concluded  that  from  2011  onwards  there  was
    evidence, which the judge accepted, that money was being  sent  to  the
    Appellants.  It was the sponsoring father's evidence that he  made  all
    the main decisions in the children's life.  Since  1995,  he  had  been
    back to Nigeria four times.  Ms Kenny  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    right to conclude that it was unclear how the  money  was  being  spent
    because there was no breakdown about the schooling  fees,  the  medical
    bills, and other such matters (paragraph  29).   Similarly,  the  judge
    took note of the fact that there was a letter from the  medical  centre
    which stated that Cynthia had been registered with the  practice  since
    2001, but there was  no  mention  of  the  treatment  received  by  the
    daughter.  (Paragraph 34).

14. In  reply,  Miss  Appiah  submitted  that  the  sponsoring  father  had
    submitted evidence that he was exercising responsibility  with  respect
    to his children.  He gave oral evidence.  He explained how he exercised
    responsibility.  He explained also how the money  transfers  were  sent
    every year.  Each one of the money transfers were  counted  out  before
    the judge.  Miss Appiah submitted that she was at the hearing  and  she
    well recalls this.  It was unrealistic  to  cast  doubt  on  the  money
    transfers.

15. As for the core decisions, it was equally  unrealistic  to  reject  the
    sponsoring father's evidence, because this had  been  set  out  in  his
    witness statement (see paragraph 4) and nothing he had  said  had  been
    impugned.  He had given evidence  about  his  role  in  the  children's
    school, who they live with, and their religion.  At paragraph 6, he had
    explained that there is no one else left to look after his children and
    that he provides  them  with  emotional  support.   He  refers  to  the
    father's love for his children.  The judge had said (at  paragraph  34)
    that the sponsoring father had not been  able  to  visit  his  children
    because of his lack of status in the UK.

16. Yet, notwithstanding this, the witness statement  makes  it  clear  (at
    paragraph 4) that the sponsoring father had indeed visited his children
    in 2001, 2002, and 2003, and then  again  in  2011  after  he  had  got
    British  citizen  status  in  this  country.   The  fact  now  was  the
    grandmother had died and was unable to look after the children and  the
    sponsoring father had done what any responsible father would do,  which
    was to apply for the children to join him in this country.   She  asked
    me to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  The older cases, which Miss Appiah has referred  to  in  her
    skeleton argument, confirm that  "sole  responsibility"  can  never  be
    established   in   a   literal   and   absolute   sense.    Inevitably,
    responsibility, in circumstances where the child is living abroad,  has
    to be shared with another adult person in that country.  Fundamentally,
    the judge has erred in two respects.

18. First, the judge had before her "a large number of copies of  MoneyGram
    and Western Union receipts" which she appeared to doubt  because  "some
    originals had been provided but they do not all contain  the  year  the
    money was sent" (paragraph 25).  The fact was that  all  the  originals
    were provided before the judge.  Indeed, the judge failed to give  them
    their due credence in the light of the fact  that  she  also  concluded
    that, "I accept  the  Sponsor  has  been  sending  some  money  to  the
    Appellants, or at  least  to  Precious  certainly  from  2011  onwards"
    (paragraph 28), which was strong evidence in favour of  the  Appellants
    and their sponsoring father.

19. Second, the judge also doubted that the money was being sent to persons
    who could not confirm the use of the monies in favour of the  children.
    For example when reference is made to Sally Osayuki, the judge  states,
    "it is not clear who this person  is"  (paragraph  26).   However,  the
    witness statement of the Sponsor explains that this is a family friend.
     The same applies to the other individuals  that  are  referred  to  at
    paragraph 27.  On a balance of probabilities, there is no reason why  a
    person such as the sponsoring father,  who  has  children  in  Nigeria,
    would send monies to a number of other individuals,  in  preference  to
    his own children, in circumstances where  the  ECO  had  accepted  that
    their mother had abandoned the two Appellant children.  In short, there
    is a degree of scepticism which is unwarranted in the findings of fact.



20. This is clear from other observations by the judge.  For example,  when
    consideration is given to the fact that Cynthia is registered with  the
    medical centre since 2001, it is said that, "there  is  no  mention  of
    treatment received by either daughter or what inputs their  father  has
    had" (paragraph 34).  It was a matter that could easily have  been  put
    to the sponsoring father at the hearing.  There is, indeed,  no  reason
    why it should be assumed that  Cynthia  was  having  treatment  of  any
    serious nature.  Similarly also, where it is said  that  there  was  no
    evidence about the children's schooling, their medical bills, and other
    such expenses, as being paid by the sponsoring  father  (see  paragraph
    29), this assumes that when  the  grandmother  was  looking  after  the
    Appellant children, she needed to have  a  breakdown  of  the  relevant
    figures, such that they could  then  be  presented  to  the  sponsoring
    father in the UK.

21. Such a state of affairs would undoubtedly exist if there was  a  degree
    of distrust between the person receiving  the  monies  and  the  person
    sending them.  In the instant case, it would have been enough  for  the
    sponsoring father just to send the monies to his grandmother to  deploy
    for the upkeep of the children (who are also the grandchildren  of  the
    recipient of the monies).

22. It has to be remembered that the standard of proof is only on a balance
    of probabilities.  It is not beyond all reasonable doubt.  These errors
    arise on account of a failure to consider the old authorities, such  as
    Emmanuel and Sloley, which were referred to in the skeleton argument.

Remaking the Decision

23. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing the appeal for the following reasons.

24. First, on the judge's express findings of fact, the  sponsoring  father
    "has been sending some money to the Appellants, or at least to Precious
    certainly from 2011 onwards" (paragraph 28).

25. Second, there was evidence  before  the  judge,  of  all  the  original
    receipts for the MoneyGram and Western  Union  remittances,  confirming
    the monies sent.

26. Third, there was additionally evidence that money was  being  given  to
    individual adults for the use of the Appellant children.   Once  it  is
    accepted that the Sponsor had been sending some money to the Appellants
    (see paragraph 28 again), it is a reasonable assumption that this money
    was remitted just as  much  through  official  remittances  as  through
    individuals going to and fro from Nigeria to the UK.  Indeed, when  the
    judge refers to "one Sally A. Osayuki" (paragraph 26), this  person  is
    expressly explained in the sponsoring  father's  witness  statement  as
    being a family friend.  At the  very  least,  the  existence  of  these
    individuals, who are being given money, takes  nothing  away  from  the
    judge's  express  finding  that  some  money  was  being  sent  to  the
    Appellants from 2011 onwards.

27. Fourth, the judge had accepted that the Appellants' mother did  abandon
    them not long after they were born (paragraph 23), which is relevant in
    the construction of the requirement of "sole responsibility" under  the
    Rules,  because  the  responsibility  then  inevitably  fell  upon  the
    sponsoring father, and through him, to the grandmother.  I accept  that
    this is the case at least from 2011 onwards.

28. Fifth, the sponsoring father's own evidence in his witness statement at
    paragraph 5 was that, "I send money to my  children  regularly  through
    various  people;  including  extended  family  members,   friends   and
    acquaintances who I trust to give money to my mother for  their  upkeep
    ...".

29. Sixth, given that this is the case, it is immaterial whether the  money
    is subsequently apportioned into school fees or  medical  fees  or  the
    like.  This would only be the case if money was expressly requested for
    school fees or for medical fees.  The evidence is that this is not  how
    the money was either requested or being sent.   The  sponsoring  father
    sent the money for his children's regular maintenance.  The standard of
    proof, being on a balance of probabilities, requires nothing more  than
    this, on facts such as the present.

30. Sixth, there is a letter (at page 16  of  the  bundle)  from  the  Mary
    Dedication British International  School,  where  the  first  Appellant
    attended school, which is to the effect that,

         "We would appreciate any assistance rendered her to enable  her  to
         secure a visa to travel to the UK in order to be with  her  father,
         Mr Henry Osayamwen, who is responsible for her upkeep and education
         through the grandmother, Mrs Osayamwen Mary Ikiol her guardian here
         in Nigeria".

    This letter was not expressly referred  to  by  the  judge  but  it  is
    clearly of utmost importance.  Similarly, a  letter  from  the  Greater
    Tomorrow Nursery and Primary School (which appears at page  19  of  the
    bundle) also stated that the sponsoring father had been responsible for
    the first Appellant's education.

31. Indeed there were similar letters for the second  Appellant  (appearing
    at pages 21 and 24 of the bundle) which have  also  not  hitherto  been
    given proper consideration, but are plainly of very great significance.



32. In short, the requirement of "sole responsibility," as set out  in  the
    Tribunal determination of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049  is  satisfied.
    It is precisely in circumstances such as these that the case of Singh v
    ECO [2002] UKIAT 05102 is applicable as it is stated (at paragraph  37)
    that  there  cannot  be  a  literal  translation  of  the  word   "sole
    responsibility".  Here  the  day-to-day  responsibility  lay  with  the
    grandmother whilst she was alive.  But the decisions in respect to  the
    children's overall upbringing plainly lay with the  sponsoring  father,
    after their mother had abandoned the children.  This appeal is allowed.





Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

34. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014


