

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10097/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2017                         |On 6 November 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                NAEEMA MUNIR
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: no representation
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Kainth promulgated on 13 January 2017 in which the Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal.






Background


     2. The appellant, a national of  Pakistan  born  on  1  January  1979,
        appealed the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to refuse
        her entry clearance to join her husband in the United Kingdom.
     3. As there is no appeal against a refusal under the Immigration Rules
        the challenge was on human rights grounds.
     4. The Judge sets out details of a preliminary issue at [8] - [13]  of
        the decision under challenge relating to a request for  adjournment
        made by solicitors in Birmingham. The Judge noted the  request  was
        previously considered on the day of receipt, 22 December 2016,  and
        refused. The Judge records that the Tribunal clerk  telephoned  the
        solicitors at 10:35 on the day of the hearing 23 December 2016, and
        was told by the representative that he was without instructions and
        not attending. At [11 - 12] the Judge writes:


             11.  The sponsor has been aware with regards  to  the  hearing
                  date, venue and time. I take  into  account  the  Tribunal
                  Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
                  Chamber) Rules 2014, in particular  Rule  28.  I  conclude
                  that it is in the interest of justice to proceed with  the
                  appeal. The sponsor had been aware  of  the  hearing  date
                  since 12 August 2016. It is very regrettable with  respect
                  to  his  sister's  miscarriage,  evidence  of  which   was
                  provided. It does not appear that the sponsor's sister was
                  to  give  evidence.  There  is  no  corresponding  witness
                  statement  from  her  and  no  information  to  suggest  a
                  contrary view. In connection with the  sponsor's  cousin's
                  recent death, no documentary evidence has been provided in
                  support of  the  same.  The  appellant's  solicitors  were
                  spoken to and Mr Hussain advised the clerk of the Tribunal
                  that his office were without instructions.


             12.  There was no appellants bundle.  The  parties  have  been
                  aware concerning the basis for  the  respondent's  refusal
                  decision as early as July 2015 but  appear  to  have  been
                  less  than  proactive   in   providing   the   appropriate
                  papers/evidence/material to counter the objections  raised
                  by the respondent.


     5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  alleging  he  had  been
        deprived of a fair hearing as a result of the refusal to grant  the
        adjournment.  The  appellant  also  alleges  the  Judge  failed  to
        consider the matter with an open mind.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 19 July 2017. The operative part of the grant being  in
        the following terms:


             2.   I note that the judge accepted  in  his  refusal  of  the
                  application for adjournment that it  is  regrettable  with
                  respect to the sister's miscarriage that evidence of  that
                  was provided. The judge went on to state that it  did  not
                  appear that the Sponsor's sister was to give evidence. The
                  judge stated there was no corresponding witness  statement
                  from her and no information to suggest it to the  contrary
                  and that with regard to  the  Sponsor's  cousin's  written
                  statement there is no documentary  evidence  about  it.  I
                  find that there is an error in proceeding with the  appeal
                  once it had been accepted that the sponsor's sister had  a
                  miscarriage. This was a family issue and this  would  have
                  affected the Sponsor attending when he had  to  attend  to
                  the family issues concerning his sister's miscarriage.  It
                  therefore means that he was deprived of an opportunity  to
                  give evidence. I find that it was not just for  the  judge
                  to proceed with hearing the appeal and that  there  is  an
                  error of law in proceeding to hear the appeal.



Error of law


     7. The first observation to make is that it is not the function  of  a
        judge considering an application for permission to  decide  whether
        the judge has made an error of law or not and to make a declaration
        to that effect. The role of a judge at the permission stage  is  to
        decide whether, on the basis of the application made,  any  alleged
        error is arguable.
     8. The papers show the decision of the ECO is dated 29 July 2015.  The
        date of the Entry Clearance Manager's review in which the  decision
        was upheld occurred sometime after.
     9. Following the lodging of the appeal, notice of a pending appeal was
        sent to the British High Commission in Islamabad, the appellant  at
        a 'care of' address in the United Kingdom, and to  the  appellant's
        solicitors, on 8 December 2015. That was followed by  a  notice  of
        hearing which contained specific directions relating to the  filing
        of all  documents  that  a  party  was  seeking  to  rely  upon  in
        connection with the appeal process by a stated date; of  which  the
        Judge notes none were provided.
    10. The appellant remained in Pakistan but has a UK based  sponsor  and
        UK based solicitors. Those solicitors wrote to the tribunal on  the
        22 December 2016 in a letter considered by  the  Judge.  The  exact
        text of that letter is in the following terms:


             We write to you in relation  to  the  above  matter  which  is
             listed for hearing tomorrow. We have just received instruction
             from  client  and  sponsor  to   make   an   application   for
             adjournment. Accordingly  we  request  the  Court  to  adjourn
             tomorrow's hearing to the earliest  available  date  after  28
             days.


             This request  is  being  made  because  it  is  the  sponsor's
             position that the hearing cannot be conducted fairly  tomorrow
             as no documents have been  prepared  and  the  sponsor  cannot
             attend Court tomorrow.


             While the sponsor accepts  that  the  notice  of  hearing  was
             received by him in August and he had ample  time  to  prepare,
             however due to some recent events out of his control,  he  has
             been unable to do so. His original intentions were  to  gather
             as much evidence as he can until start of December so that his
             claim can be substantiated by way  of  up-to-date  documentary
             evidence and to provide the Court with a bundle by first  week
             of December. However,  since  15  November  2016  his  younger
             sister has been very ill relating to pregnancy and has been in
             and out of hospital in such a manner that  the  entire  family
             was consumed in looking after her interest. His sister  had  a
             miscarriage and was discharged from hospital  on  17  December
             2016. Since then the sponsor's cousin has been  very  ill  and
             unfortunately passed away today. It is the sponsor's  position
             that the entire family was in such turmoil  that  it  was  not
             possible for him to concentrate effort behind his wife's case.
             His cousin's funeral will be tomorrow and it is very important
             for him to attend. As such, it is requested that  the  hearing
             for tomorrow is adjourned so  that  the  sponsor  has  a  fair
             opportunity to prepare a bundle and attend court to give  oral
             evidence.


    11.  I  have  also  seen  a  document  headed  'Discharge  Letter   and
        Prescription' in relation to a  named  individual  referring  to  a
        planned admission on 16 December 2016 and discharge on 17  December
        2016. The purpose of  the  admission  was  surgical  management  of
        miscarriage on 16 December 2016  with  overnight  observation.  The
        evidence does not support the contention  that  since  15  November
        2016 the relative has been in such a condition that the sponsor was
        unable to attend to complying with the  directions  issued  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal. It is also noted that  the  records  show  the
        relative was medically fit to  be  discharged,  that  no  follow-up
        appointments were required or  arranged,  and  that  family/friends
        were available. Medication required period of 28 days was  provided
        on discharge. It was not made out that there was  a  need  for  the
        sponsor's continual attendance after the relative was discharged.
    12. Whilst it is  accepted  that  any  event  of  this  nature  can  be
        extremely distressing for those involved,  the  information  before
        the Judge did not establish  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the
        failure to provide  documentary  evidence  which,  if  the  sponsor
        genuinely intended to provide the same by the beginning of December
        could have been provided, yet it was not.
    13. It is also not clear from the information before the Judge why  the
        solicitors were without instructions. They are  clearly  on  record
        and the failure to adequately instruct them is  further  indication
        of a lack of engagement by the sponsor with the appeal process.
    14. The letter also refers to  difficulties  involving  another  family
        member, the cousin, of which there is little evidence regarding how
        close the sponsor was to his  cousin.  The  letter  refers  to  the
        cousin passing away on 22 December 2016 and there been a funeral on
        23 December 2016 yet the Judge noted that no evidence of  this  was
        made available. There was, frankly,  no  evidence  to  support  the
        contention that family events that occurred were such that there is
        a satisfactory explanation for the sponsor's failure to attend  the
        hearing, to instructing solicitors, or to support the finding  that
        the decision of the Judge to proceed amounted to an arguable  error
        of law.
    15. The test in every case when an adjournment request is made is  that
        of fairness and had the sponsor provided  evidence  supporting  his
        assertions that he was genuinely unable to engage with the  process
        and/or to attend, a refusal to adjourn would have been unfair,  but
        no such material was provided.
    16. I do not find the appellant has made out  that  the  Judge  made  a
        procedural error sufficient to amount to a material error of law in
        refusing the adjournment request.
    17. It is also important to note that the Judge  did  not  dismiss  the
        appeal solely as a result of the failure of the sponsor to  attend.
        The Judge proceeded to determine the appeal on its merits referring
        to the decision under the Rules and outside the Rules  pursuant  to
        article 8 ECHR. Within this process the Judge examined the evidence
        provided to the ECO/ECM, which included photographic evidence,  and
        found that in relation to article 8, in light of the finding family
        life existed, the issue was one of proportionality. The Judge noted
        the comments of the Entry Clearance  Manager,  which  considered  a
        post-dated statement written by  the  sponsor  in  support  of  the
        review, that no further material  evidence  had  been  produced  or
        relied upon by the appellant to deal with specific concerns  raised
        in the refusal. Telephone records were  produced  but  no  evidence
        that they belong to the sponsor and adequate evidence to support  a
        claim the parties were maintaining regular and  frequent  telephone
        contact was provided. Evidence of online communications  was  found
        to be very basic and not to indicate any depth of feeling or shared
        experiences.   Although  a  number  of   money   remittances   were
        considered three of the money transfers were found not to be in the
        name of the appellant with seven in the appellant's name which were
        not found to be supportive of  the  claimed  relationship  and  not
        evidenced by a regular pattern of money transfers.
    18. An interview was conducted which the Judge refers  to  at  [25]  in
        which the questions asked were clear  and  unambiguous  and  during
        which the sponsor made statements not  supported  by  the  evidence
        leading to a finding that there was a lack of specific and detailed
        information in respect  of  the  sponsor's  relationship  with  the
        appellant.
    19. The Judge considered section 117 of the 2002 Act and having weighed
        up  the  respective  positions  concluded  that  the  decision   is
        proportionate.
    20. The findings of the Judge were arguably open to him on the basis of
        the evidence made available.  The application seeking permission to
        appeal does not contain any comment or material that would  suggest
        that the conclusion is unsustainable.
    21. No error of law material the decision to dismiss the appeal is made
        out.
    22. If the appellant wishes to enter the United Kingdom it is  open  to
        her to make a fresh application during the course of which she will
        be able to deal with the concerns of  the  ECO  which  led  to  the
        application being refused on this occasion.


Decision

    23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 3 November 2017

