
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 3rd February 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                        IHSAN MOHAMMAD MAHMOUD ALDEEK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  consider  material
         matters; made a material misdirection in law and failed to properly
         apply the law. In  granting  permission,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge referred to a claimed failure on the part  of  the  judge  to
         have proper regard to the medical evidence relating to his  British
         Citizen wife's physical condition or  the  best  interests  of  the
         British Citizen children or the relevant  statutory  provisions  or
         case law.




    Background

      2. Mr Aldeek (a Jordanian citizen) and his  wife,  [MW],  had  met  on
         Facebook in 2010, they married in Jordan on 19th December 2013  and
         until the birth of their child on 13th June 2014 she had  travelled
         to Jordan every three or four months to stay  with  him  for  about
         three weeks at a  time.  [MW]  has  an  adult  son  by  an  earlier
         relationship who lives with  his  grandmother  and  with  whom  she
         remains in contact. She also has a daughter aged 7  by  an  earlier
         relationship who lives with her and has no contact with  her  birth
         father - his whereabouts being unknown.

      3. Since the birth of the child in June 2014, [MW] has  suffered  from
         depression and pelvic pain such that she is unable to  travel.  She
         does not work and  is  reliant  on  Job  Seekers  allowance,  Child
         Benefit and Child Tax Credit. There  was  no  evidence  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal  that  she  was  unable  to  work  for  medical
         reasons.

      4. The application for entry clearance as a spouse was  refused  under
         the Immigration Rules on the basis that Mr Aldeek did not meet  the
         income threshold requirement and that  there  were  no  exceptional
         circumstances such as to merit the  grant  of  entry  clearance  in
         accordance with Article 8 ECHR.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the Mr Aldeek did not meet
         the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    Error of law

      6.  The  appellant  did  not  seek  permission  and  was  not  granted
         permission to appeal the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         that he did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The
         grounds  relied  upon  are  essentially  a  disagreement  with  the
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge on Article 8 to an extent
         asserted to be an error of law. In particular, with regards to  the
         medical  evidence  of  [MW]  health  and  the  aggravation  of  her
         depression due to her husband's  absence;  that  emotional  support
         could not continue through 'modern means  of  communication';  that
         the 7-year-old could be expected to relocate with relative ease and
         that there would be no additional recourse to public funds  on  his
         arrival and that he would obtain gainful employment.

      7. Reliance was placed upon SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

      8. Mr Brown in his submissions stressed the lack of  consideration  by
         the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  of  [MW]'s  medical  evidence.  He
         referred in particular to two letters  in  the  bundle  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal a letter from [MW]'s GP  dated  26th  May  2015
         which  refers  to  her  back  pain  brought  on  by  pregnancy  and
         depression. It concludes that she is "not fit to fly at present due
         to her pains". An earlier letter dated 27th August 2013 from her GP
         refers to stress and states that she fears her mental health  would
         deteriorate dramatically if she were to move to  Jordan.  Mr  Brown
         also referred to [MW]'s witness statement which refers to  'unsafe'
         conditions in Jordan and lack of appropriate accommodation although
         he accepts  there  was  little  background  evidence  available  to
         support  that  assertion.  The  reference  to  'modern   means   of
         communication' does not in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  refer
         to  communication  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  but  to
         communication between her and her older son. This was a  reasonable
         conclusion to draw.

      9. Although there is no direct reference to the letters  to  which  Mr
         Brown drew my attention and although the judge does  appear  to  be
         saying that it is reasonable for the two young British children  to
         go to Jordan, when read as a whole  it  is  plain  that  the  judge
         weighed the evidence as a  whole.  The  decision  to  embark  on  a
         relationship with a foreign national was a decision that  both  the
         appellant and his wife embarked upon. The decision to have a  child
         was a  decision  taken  when  the  appellant  did  not  have  entry
         clearance to come to the UK. [MW] does not have an income and there
         was sparse  evidence  of  the  ability  of  Mr  Akeel's  employment
         prospects. The medical evidence as to flying  was  not  before  the
         entry clearance officer at the date of decision - or the review.

     10. Mr Brown relied  upon  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  in
         particular that where the Rules are not met there  could  be  cases
         where on the particular facts of the case, Article  8  may  require
         leave to enter to be granted. Although  the  relationship  in  this
         case has plainly been legitimately entered  into  the  factors  and
         circumstances outside the Rules are simply insufficient to  require
         the grant of leave to enter. Although there would be disruption  in
         the 7-year old's life if she moved to Jordan, there is  clearly  no
         legal obstruction that could not be  overcome  given  the  lack  of
         contact with her birth father. Whether or not the appellant and his
         wife choose to arrange their family life in that manner is a matter
         of choice for them which springs directly from the fact  that  they
         have  a  relationship  'across  borders  and  nationalities'.   The
         medical evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer and before  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge was simply  inadequate  to  result  in  a
         finding that the outcome of the hearing was perverse.

     11. It may well be that further and additional evidence  submitted,  if
         [MW] continues to be unable to work, could result  in  a  different
         outcome but the decision reached by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         was a decision that was clearly and plainly reasonable and open  to
         him. He considered the evidence before him and reached  conclusions
         on that evidence  that  were  neither  perverse  nor  unlawful  nor
         unreasonable.

     12. There was no error of law in the finding of the First-tier Tribunal
         and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appeal
         stands.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and I do  not  set  aside  the
    decision.




         Date 3rd February 2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
