
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10299/2014
                                                               OA/10297/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd November 2015                |On 8th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                   Mr r n
                                  miss r n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Bramall of Counsel instructed by Sterling Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 3rd September 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Nicholson  gave
    permission to the appellants to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Kaler  in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeals
    against the decisions of the respondent to refuse  entry  clearance  as
    the children of the  sponsor  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  particularly  the   specific
    financial requirements set out in paragraph E-ECC.2.1  subject  to  the
    specific evidential requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE.

 2. In  granting  permission  Judge  Nicholson  thought  that  neither  the
    respondent, the judge or representatives had appreciated that the  less
    onerous financial requirements of  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules should have been applied to the  application  for  leave  as  the
    sponsor appeared to be settled in the  United  Kingdom  as  defined  in
    paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules.  On  that  basis  the  judge  had
    incorrectly  applied  Appendix  FM  when  determining   the   financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and so it was arguable  that  the
    judge erred  in  finding  that  the  sponsor  was  not  in  receipt  of
    sufficient earnings to maintain the appellants.   Judge  Nicholson  did
    not, however, refuse permission on other grounds raised  including  the
    contention that the judge's consideration of human  rights  issues  was
    inadequate and flawed.

 3. Mr Bramall made initial submissions before me in  which  he  maintained
    the contention that the judge should have considered the appeal on  the
    basis that paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules was relevant to  each
    appellant.  He thought that the appeal should be allowed  and  remitted
    back for the respondent to consider financial  issues  under  the  less
    onerous provisions of that rule.  However,  Ms  Johnstone  pointed  out
    that the sponsor had not been granted indefinite leave to remain so did
    not have the settled status required by the rule. Additionally, even if
    he  had,  he  would  have  been  unable  to  show  that  he  had   sole
    responsibility for the children or that the mother of the children  was
    being admitted for settlement on the same occasion.

 4. Mr Bramall conceded that, if the sponsor did not  have  settled  status
    then the  amended  grounds  which  he  had  submitted  based  upon  the
    application of  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not
    succeed.  However, he argued that the issues relating to the  sponsor's
    ability to meet the specific financial requirements set out in Appendix
    FM and FM-SE and the claimed  inadequacy  of  the  Article  8  decision
    remained.  In this respect he continued to rely upon the terms  of  the
    original grounds dated 29th June 2015.  The decision failed to  address
    those points and, in relation to human rights issues, did not  consider
    the existence of private and family life  between  the  appellants  and
    sponsor making the best interests of the  child  appellants  a  primary
    consideration.  Reference was also made to the Upper Tribunal  decision
    in LD (Article 8 best interests of  child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]  UKUT  278
    (IAC) as to the inability of  the  parties  to  enjoy  family  life  by
    correspondence and occasional visits.

Conclusions and Reasons

 5. It is clear that the provisions of paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules can have no application to this appeal because the  sponsor  does
    not have the settled status required by that rule. Thus, I consider the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  of  the  grounds  of
    application as originally put.

 6. The respondent's refusal decision of  1st  August  2014  sets  out  the
    specific areas of financial information in relation  to  the  sponsor's
    pay and  self-employment  that  did  not  comply  with  the  evidential
    provisions of Appendix FM-SE.  In particular, payslips  did  not  cover
    the same period as a company tax return and no personal bank statements
    had been submitted to show receipt of pay covering the same  period  as
    the company tax return.  Further, the required evidence of the  payment
    of dividends had not been given to cover the specific period covered by
    the tax return.  The judge deals adequately with each of  these  issues
    in the decision pointing out that the missing information had not  been
    provided in accordance with the specific requirements of  Appendix  FM-
    SE.  No material error is shown in this respect  even  if  the  sponsor
    continues to maintain that he  had  an  adequate  income  to  meet  the
    overall financial requirements.

 7. In reaching the above conclusion  I  point  out  that  the  grounds  of
    application do not invoke the application of the evidential  provisions
    set out in paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE, no doubt because it is argued
    that the appellant did meet the requisite financial provisions.

 8. As to human rights issues the judge notes  in  paragraph  14  that  the
    appellants had not invoked Article 8 and certainly  no  such  claim  is
    made in the original grounds of appeal  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
    However, the judge concluded  for  herself  that,  as  the  application
    related to minor children wanting to join their father  in  the  United
    Kingdom, she would deal with human rights issues.  She noted  that  the
    appellants' mother had remained in Thailand to care  for  the  children
    although she had been granted entry clearance.  She further noted  that
    the children were well cared for in that country.  Although  the  judge
    does not give specific consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children in that situation it is not possible to say that her rejection
    of the human rights claim would have been different if  she  had.   The
    sponsor had failed to show that he  had  adequate  funds  to  meet  the
    financial requirements for entry clearance for the children  and  there
    was nothing exceptional about their  circumstances  in  Thailand  where
    they were being cared for by their mother.  A fresh  application  could
    be made for entry clearance without change to the present  status  quo.
    On this basis the decision of the First-tier  Judge  does  not  show  a
    material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
