
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10779/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2013                                |On 19 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                    THE Entry Clearance Officer - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Miss Vera Mitzi Matel Francisco
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr D Samuels of JDS Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Entry Clearance  Officer
    in Manila.  For  ease  of  reference  I  shall  refer  herein  to  Miss
    Francisco as the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  in  October  1998.
    This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer of 17 May 2012 refusing the claimant entry clearance to  settle
    in the United Kingdom as the dependent daughter of a person present and
    settled here, that being her father Mr George Francisco.

 3. The reasons given by the Entry Clearance Officer for refusing to  grant
    the claimant entry clearance were as follows:

         ".   You have provided evidence that your father  regularly  remits
             money to your bank account the Philippines.  You have provided
             a letter from your mother in which she states that she  wishes
             to relinquish parental responsibility to your father.   It  is
             clear  therefore  that  your   mother   has   had   the   sole
             responsibility for your upbringing until now even though  your
             father has been providing some financial support.

           . Nothing has been provided in your application that  there  are
             any serious or compelling considerations to justify  issue  of
             this visa.  From the  information  provided  your  father  and
             mother have decided that  you  should  spend  time  with  your
             father in the UK.  However this is not a  consideration  which
             appears in the Rules.  I am not therefore satisfied  you  meet
             the requirements for this visa.  297

           . I have therefore refused your application  because  I  am  not
             satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you meet  all
             of the requirements of the relevant paragraph  of  the  United
             Kingdom Immigration Rules."

 4. The only relevant  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  for  the
    purposes of this appeal, are those to be found in paragraphs  297(i)(e)
    and (f); which state as follows:


           "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
           as the child of a parent, parents  or  a  relative  present  and
           settled or being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom


           297. The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted  for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:


           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany  or  join  a  parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           ...


            (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom  or
            being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has  had
            sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

             (f) one parent or a relative is  present  and  settled  in  the
             United Kingdom or being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
             settlement and there are serious and compelling family or other
             considerations which make exclusion of  the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's  care;
             ...

First-tier Tribunal's determination

 5. The claimant challenged the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  by  way
    of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   That  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid on 1 May 2013 and  allowed  both  under
    the Immigration Rules and in relation to Article  8  ECHR  [outside  of
    those Rules] in a determination promulgated on 21 May 2013.

 6.  Both  Mr  Francisco,  the  claimant's  father,  and  Ms  De-Vera,  the
    claimant's stepmother, gave oral evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In relation to the former the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set  out  Mr
    Francisco's witness statement of 19 April 2013 in full and  then  noted
    that he had also given oral evidence  before  the  tribunal  consistent
    with such statement.  Insofar as the claimant's stepmother is concerned
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out various passages from  her  short
    witness statement, also dated 19 April 2013, and concluded that she had
    "corroborated  the  evidence  of  her  husband"  and,  "validated   his
    assertions" as contained in his witness statement.

 7. I pause at this point to highlight that  (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not at any point  during  the  course  of  his  determination
    summarise the oral evidence before him and  (ii)  the  Tribunal's  file
    does  not  contain  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  record  of  the
    proceedings.

 8. After briefly summarising the closing submissions  the  judge  directed
    himself as follows [paragraph 18]:

         "18. In serious matters law requires a stronger  burden  of  proof.
             Where a civil court is considering  allegations  of  fraud  or
             other criminal  or  quasi  criminal  conduct,  or  of  conduct
             involving a high degree of moral turpitude,  the  court  still
             applies the standard of the  preponderance  of  probabilities,
             though in  such  cases  the  court  may  require  more  cogent
             evidence (often called 'clear and convincing  evidence'),  the
             cogency required increasing with the gravity of  the  charges,
             before finding that the scales have been tipped in  favour  of
             the asserting party.  (Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd [1957]
             1 QB 247; re Dellow's Will Trusts [1964]  1  WLR  451,  454-5;
             'fundamentals of evidence', evidence and advocacy.)"

 9. Immediately thereafter the Judge came  to  the  following  findings  of
    fact;

         "19. I do not  see  here  any  clear  and  convincing  evidence  of
             production of forgery or deception.  I cannot accept  a  datum
             against an claimant  which  is  not  supported  by  admissible
             evidence.   Over-suspicious  evaluation  of  evidence   cannot
             justify the serious allegation of mal-doing  against  a  human
             being.  I do  accept  Dr  Akin-Samuels'  submission  that  the
             sponsoring father's oral evidence and that  of  his  wife  was
             credible and no way justifying the label that it was a pack if
             lies.

         20.  In fact I observed that in their oral  evidence,  the  sponsor
             was all the time struggling to hold  his  tear  back  to  give
             evidence.  Both stepmother and father  of  the  claimant  were
             credible.  The stepmother in the UK  said,  'Definitely  I  am
             here to support the appeal of the appellant.  I  do  not  work
             for the NSPCC but it is very close to my heart that  she  will
             have the protection of caring people after  suffering  serious
             abuse at the  hands  of  the  new  man  in  the  life  of  her
             biological mother.  Actually, my two daughters, [C]  and  [L],
             are looking forward to the appellant coming to  join  them  as
             they are very close to her'."

10. Between paragraphs 21 and 28 of the determination the  judge  traverses
    through well-known authorities on Article 8 ECHR.  At paragraph  29  he
    concludes as follows:

         "29. There is no evidence whatsoever that anyone  else  has  helped
             this appellant financially.  In  this  context  the  sponsor's
             evidence has left me in  no  doubt  that  only  he  has  taken
             responsibility for the appellant..."

11.  The judge subsequently directs himself (i) that  persons  such  as  the
    claimant's mother's new  husband  cannot  be  relied  upon  "if  he  is
    'indifferent' to the  welfare  of  the  Dependent  Relative"  i.e.  the
    claimant in the instant appeal (ii) that "girls like the claimant  seem
    to be unwilling to  trouble  their  distant  parent  by  narrating  the
    particulars  of  real  abuse  by  persons  in  the  position   of   the
    [claimant's] new husband" [30], and (iii) that  it  would  be  "utterly
    unfair to be blind to the impact of [the tribunal's]  decision  on  the
    father of this claimant who is gravely distressed by this  separation",
    and thereafter concludes as follows [35];

         "35. In the circumstances, in  view  of  my  deliberations  in  the
             preceding paragraphs and having taken into account all of  the
             oral and documentary evidence as well  as  submissions  at  my
             disposal, cognisant of the fact the burden of proof is on  the
             appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
             probabilities, I am persuaded that the appellant comes  within
             the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended),  as  well  as  the
             provisions of the ECHR."

Error of Law

11. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  submit  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge unlawfully  placed  a  burden  on  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  to  substantiate  the  reasons  for  refusing   the
    application.  Additionally  the  grounds  set  out  extracts  from  the
    Presenting Officer's note of hearing in support of the submission  that
    a number of important issues raised by the  Presenting  Officer  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, relating to the credibility of the evidence of
    the sponsor and the claimant's stepmother, had not been referred to  or
    considered  within  the   First-tier   Tribunal's   determination.   In
    particular it was highlighted that;

      i) The claimant's brother had made an entry clearance  application  in
         2010, which had been successful  on  appeal;  however,  during  the
         course  of  that  application  it  had  been  alleged,  after   the
         application had been refused by the ECO (as was  the  case  in  the
         instant appeal), that the claimant's mother and stepfather had been
         cruel and abusive to the claimant's brother;

     ii) No explanation had been given as to why the claimant had been  left
         living with her mother and  stepfather  after  the  allegations  of
         abuse had been made by her brother;

    iii) The claimant's father initially stated in cross-examination that he
         had not moved the claimant to live with his mother; however, he had
         changed his account to state that she had in fact been living  with
         her  grandmother  at  weekends.   In   contrast,   the   claimant's
         stepmother gave evidence that claimant had not lived anywhere other
         than her current address for the past five years;

     iv) The claimant's father stated in evidence  that  he  had  found  out
         about the claimant's abuse in 2010 whereas  her  stepmother  stated
         that she had found out in 2012;

      v) The claimant's father and stepmother had done  nothing  to  address
         the alleged abuse, had made no contact with the authorities in  the
         claimant's home country in this regard, and had made no attempts to
         move the claimant to  a  safer  environment,  such  as  a  boarding
         school.  This was implausible;

     vi) No documentary evidence had been produced  from  a  doctor  or  the
         claimant's school to confirm the existence of the abuse;

    vii) The claimant's father, when asked how he had  taken  responsibility
         for the claimant, stated that he had sent her money. When asked  if
         he had done anything else, he responded in the negative.

12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    permission to appeal by way of a decision dated 24 June  2013  made  in
    the following material terms:

         "4.  At paragraph 35 of the determination the judge  said  'In  the
             circumstances, in view of my deliberations  in  the  preceding
             paragraphs and having  taken  account  of  all  the  oral  and
             documentary  evidence  as  well  as  the  submissions  at   my
             disposal, ... I am persuaded that the appellant  comes  within
             the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended)  as  well  as  the
             provisions of the ECHR.'  It is arguable that nowhere  in  the
             determination  did  the  judge  give  any  reasons  for   this
             conclusion; that in the preceding paragraphs he merely set out
             some legal principles but did not address the  facts  of  this
             appeal; that he made no findings to explain how the  appellant
             came within the Immigration Rules; and that he failed to carry
             out any  structured  analysis  of  the  issues  arising  under
             Article 8."

13. Thus the appeal came before me.

14. At the outset of the  hearing  I  observed  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had failed to provide either the Tribunal,  or  the  claimant's
    legal representative, with a copy of the Presenting Officer's  note  of
    proceedings, which had formed the basis of  grounds  of  appeal.   This
    failure  would  have  placed  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  grave
    difficulty in making out his case, however, Dr Samuels, quite properly,
    indicated at the outset of the hearing that his note of the proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal  accorded  with  the  extract  contained
    within the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of  appeal.  Consequently,
    he was content for that extract to be taken as an  accurate  reflection
    of that which had occurred before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Turning to the parties' submissions on the issue of whether the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law, Mr Avery relied upon the contents of the pleaded  grounds
    and reiterated that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to  engage
    with a number of significant points that had been  raised  before  him.
    Those matters, it was submitted, went directly to  the  credibility  of
    the assertions made by the claimant and her family  members.  Mr  Avery
    additionally submitted that, even on the accepted evidence, it was  not
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that the claimant's  father
    had had sole responsibility for the claimant's upbringing.

16. In response Dr Samuels submitted that the sponsor, and  his  wife,  had
    provided written and oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal and  that
    they had conclusively demonstrated that their evidence to be  truthful.
    He further observed that at paragraph 10 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination it indicated that it had taken into account  all  of  the
    documentary and oral evidence before it.  With that in mind Dr  Samuels
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had been not  required  to  give
    more extensive reasons than  those  which  were  contained  within  its
    determination. It was further submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion to allow the appeal was open to it. In  summary  Dr  Samuels
    submitted that the determination was clear, cogent and rational.

17. Despite the most capable efforts of Dr Samuels, I agree with Mr Avery's
    submissions and conclude  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal suffers from a lack of clear reasoning  and  fails  to  engage
    with important points raised by the ECO in relation to the  credibility
    of the evidence given before the tribunal.

18. In coming to my conclusion I have borne well in mind that whilst  there
    is a legal duty on the First-tier Tribunal to give an  explanation  for
    its the conclusions on  the  central  issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
    determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  as  a
    whole makes sense having regard to the material accepted by  the  judge
    (see Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085
    (IAC)).

19. In the instant case I find that not only does the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal lack cogent reasons for  the  conclusions  set  out
    therein, but more significantly the fact finding process by  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal came to its conclusions was flawed.

20. It is not in dispute that the claimant's  father  and  stepmother  gave
    inconsistent evidence as to when each purportedly found out  about  the
    physical and emotional abuse of the claimant.  The  Presenting  Officer
    also clearly raised issue, before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  the
    plausibility of  the  claimant's  father  and  stepmother  leaving  the
    claimant in what, on  their  evidence,  they  knew  to  be  an  abusive
    household, without having provided any adequate explanation as  to  why
    this was so.  Issue was further taken with the  lack  of  corroborative
    evidence  of  the  abuse.   Nowhere  in  the  determination  are   such
    submissions recorded and neither are they addressed, even in a  cursory
    fashion. The issues raised by the ECO go directly to the credibility of
    the assertion that the claimant has been, and continues to  be,  abused
    by her mother and 'step-father'.

21. In relation to the issue of sole responsibility, it  is  accepted  that
    the claimant's father gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal that  he
    did no more for the claimant than send her monies.  Had the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge directed himself in accordance with the decision  in  TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049,
    he may well have come to a different decision on this issue; however he
    did  not  do  so  and  there  is  no  other  explanation   within   the
    determination as to how the mere sending of money met,  in  this  case,
    the sole responsibility requirement of the relevant immigration rule.

22. For all of these reasons I conclude that the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of  law,  such
    that it is to be set aside.  I notified the parties  of  this  decision
    during the course  of  the  hearing.   Neither  party  objected  to  me
    thereafter proceeding directly to remake the decision on the appeal  on
    a de novo basis.

Remaking of Decision

Evidence

23. I have before me a bundle produced by the Entry Clearance Officer dated
    13 September 2012 as well as a bundle from the claimant, which was also
    produced to the First-tier Tribunal, running to 59 pages.  This  bundle
    contains a short witness statement  from  the  claimant,  plus  witness
    statements from Mr Francisco and Ms De-Vera, all dated 19  April  2013.
    It further materially includes the  determination  of  Judge  Callender
    Smith,  promulgated  on  31  December  2010,  allowing  the  claimant's
    brother's appeal under the Immigration Rules. There is  additionally  a
    death certificate relating to the claimant's grandmother, a copy of  Mr
    Francisco's passport, various  photographs,  money  transfer  receipts,
    payslips and bank statements relating to Mr Francisco as  well  as  the
    income and expenditure sheet  in  that  regard.   Both  the  claimant's
    father - Mr Francisco, and her  stepmother  -  Ms  De-Vera,  gave  oral
    evidence before me.

24. In his witness statement  Mr  Francisco  confirmed  that  he  left  the
    claimant with her mother  after  he  moved  out  of  the  marital  home
    following  the  annulment  of  his  marriage.   Prior  to  leaving  the
    Philippines  he  provided  his  daughter  with  whatever  she   wanted,
    including taking her out to the cinema etc.  He left the Philippines in
    2010 and he now resides in the United Kingdom with  his  wife,  Ms  De-
    Vera.  He visited the claimant in December 2012, she  having  travelled
    to the airport alone to meet him.  She looked unkempt  and  older  than
    her real age.  She said that her mother now lives with another  man  in
    the former marital home and that she, the claimant, sleeps in the front
    room.  She further stated that she was beaten regularly by  her  mother
    and her mother's partner.  She goes to school on her  own  and  without
    food. She had considered taking her own life because she felt neglected
    by her mother and by Mr Francisco.

25. The claimant stayed with her father in a hotel whilst  he  was  in  the
    Philippines. Mr Francisco confronted the claimant's  mother  about  the
    allegation of abuse. She told him that  he  should  keep  the  claimant
    because she, the claimant's mother, had her own life to live.  This, it
    is said, resulted in a physical fight at which time  Mr  Francisco  was
    pushed out of the house.  There was no one else in the Philippines  for
    the claimant to live with and thus he had to leave her with her  mother
    and her mother's partner.

26. In his oral evidence Mr Francisco adopted the contents of  his  witness
    statement as being true and accurate and indicated  that  he  had  last
    seen his daughter in December 2012.  He confirmed that he had made  the
    application for his daughter to come to the United Kingdom because  she
    had been suffering; he had found out that she  had  not  been  studying
    and, although he gave money for her clothing, she only had old clothes.
     He sends monies for the claimant's education.  When asked why  he  had
    not made arrangements for the claimant  move  away  from  her  mother's
    house, given the alleged abusive situation therein, Mr Francisco stated
    that he did not have the financial capacity to  do  so.   Mr  Francesco
    further confirmed that his mother had been living  in  the  Philippines
    until January 2013, when she had unfortunately passed  away.   He  also
    has a sister in the Philippines,  but  she  lives  far  away  from  the
    claimant, has three children of  her  own,  struggles  financially  and
    lives in one small room.  When asked  why  he  would  nevertheless  not
    relocate the claimant to live with his sister, even temporarily,  given
    that the claim that she is living in an abusive household, Mr Francesco
    asserted that the place in which his sister lives  is  very  dangerous,
    there being many rebels and bombs  continually  exploding  and  further
    that the distance between the claimant's current home and the  sister's
    home is approximately 300 miles.

27. When asked when he first found out about the abuse of the  claimant  Mr
    Francesco stated this to have been in the middle of 2011.

28. Under cross examination Mr Francisco stated that he found out about the
    abuse of the claimant via Skype, during a conversation  with  her.   He
    further confirmed that she had no difficulty accessing Skype  and  that
    his stepdaughters also have Facebook and MSN contact with the claimant.



29.  Mr  Avery  then  took  Mr  Francisco  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination of his son's appeal and in particular to  the  record  of
    the assertions made by Mr  Francisco  that  his  son  had  been  abused
    physically and emotionally by the claimant's  mother  and  partner  and
    that this had caused his education, upbringing and  welfare  to  suffer
    (paragraph 6 therein).  Mr Francisco  was  invited  to  comment  as  to
    whether this 'rung any alarm bells' about the  possible  abuse  of  the
    claimant.  In response Mr Francisco indicated  that  had  not  done  so
    because he had thought that 'they would just hit a boy'; he  had  asked
    his son whether the claimant was alright but  his  son's  answers  were
    unclear.

30. In relation to the claimant's schooling Mr Francisco confirmed that  he
    paid for this but he had not been sent receipts for  such  payments  or
    the claimant's school reports.  He  had  asked  the  claimant  how  her
    schooling was going.  Mr Francesco was then asked whether he  had  "any
    input in whether your daughter is allowed to go out and things of  that
    nature? " to which he stated in response, "no, everything that is going
    on is the mother's decision". He further  confirmed  that  he  had  not
    reported the claimant's abuse to the authorities  in  the  Philippines,
    because 'he did not trust the police'.

31. At the end of cross-examination I had  a  number  of  questions  of  Mr
    Francisco for clarification purposes.  I observed to Mr Francisco  that
    it had been accepted that he had stated to the First-tier Tribunal that
    he had first found out about his daughter's abuse in 2010,  however  he
    had stated before me that he had first found out about the abuse in the
    middle  2011.   I  invited  him   to   comment   upon   this   apparent
    inconsistency.  In doing so he stated that "I have a habit when I  hear
    something I do not listen and believe it until I see it for myself.   I
    am confused about times  and  dates,  I'm  under  pressure."   He  then
    confirmed that he had known about the abuse in 2010  "but  not  fully".
    He had delayed in making the entry clearance application because he had
    to save money.  He had first informed his wife of the abuse  after  the
    burial of his mother in 2013, he having been embarrassed to talk to her
    about it.

32. In her witness statement of 19 April  2013  Ms  De-Vera  confirmed  her
    awareness of the claimant's living conditions.  She  thought  that  the
    claimant  would  make  a  success  of  her  education  if   given   the
    opportunity. She had sent financial assistance to the claimant,  albeit
    through her mother whom she  has  been  informed  has  done  little  or
    nothing for  the  claimant.  Ms  De-Vera  further  confirmed  that  the
    claimant is not currently attending her studies.

33. In her oral evidence Ms De-Vera confirmed that she  had  last  met  the
    claimant in 2008 at the time of  her  wedding  to  Mr  Francisco.   She
    communicates with the claimant via Skype.  She had first been  informed
    of the claimant's problems at the beginning of 2012, at which  time  it
    was decided to submit the application for  entry  clearance.   At  this
    time it was drawn to Ms  De  Vera's  attention  that  her  husband  had
    indicated that he had first told her  of  the  claimant's  problems  in
    January 2013.  In response Ms De-Vera postulated that "maybe his  brain
    is mixed up".

34. Ms De-Vera continued her evidence by confirming  that  she  had  spoken
    with the claimant approximately once per week on Skype and that she had
    not got a sense from those conversations that the  claimant  was  being
    abused, although she did observe that she was sad.   The  claimant  had
    previously told her that everything was fine, although she  now  wishes
    to kill herself and everybody is worried about her.   Ms  De-Vera  then
    confirmed that Mr Francisco has a sister living in the Philippines  but
    that she lives far away from the claimant, is single, and lives in  one
    room with her three children.

35. Under cross-examination Ms De-Vera confirmed that her daughters had not
    received information from claimant about the problems she was having in
    the Philippines.  Her stepson, the  claimant's  brother,  had  made  no
    mention of such problems. She and Mr Francisco had not been aware  that
    the claimant was not attending school until Mr  Francisco  visited  the
    Philippines in December 2012.

36. When asked what  decisions  Mr  Francisco  takes  in  relation  to  the
    claimant's activities in  the  Philippines,  Ms  De-Vera  responded  by
    stating that the claimant asks permission if she can go  out.   It  was
    pointed out to her that the claimant asserts in her statement that  her
    mother and stepfather do not allow her to go out.  In response  Ms  De-
    Vera said that the claimant asks the permission of  her  father  to  go
    out, however it may be that her mother may says no, even if her  father
    says yes.

37. In clarification I observed that Mr Francisco had stated  that  he  had
    found out that the claimant had stopped attending school in 2011. Ms De-
    Vera responded by stating that she only knew what Mr Francisco had told
    her.

38. The claimant, for obvious reasons, did not give oral  evidence  to  the
    Tribunal.  She did  however  produce  a  witness  statement.   In  that
    statement she asserts that her mother leaves her at home on her own and
    returns home after the claimant has gone to bed.   From  the  time  her
    mother's partner started living in the family house  the  claimant  was
    forced to sleep on the floor in the front room of the house.   Whenever
    there is an argument between the claimant's mother and her partner, the
    claimant's mother would beat her up.  Her mother sends  her  to  school
    without food and when she returns home from school her food  is  either
    in the kitchen or in the front room, and nobody else is at  home.   She
    is not allowed to mix with anyone and if she is seen doing  so  she  is
    beaten up.  She informed her father of  this  abusive  situation.   She
    feels like taking her own life because she cannot  believe  her  mother
    would abandon her in such a way.  People at school laugh at her because
    her school uniform is torn.

Submissions

39. Mr Avery relied upon the Entry Clearance  Officer's  refusal  decision.
    He submitted that  the  witnesses  had  given  vague  and  inconsistent
    accounts and, consequently, that the credibility of the assertions made
    in relation to the living circumstances of the claimant, including  the
    abuse, ought not to be believed.  In relation  to  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility he directed my attention to the decision of the Tribunal
    in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e); sole  responsibility)  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049 and observed that in  his  evidence  the  claimant's  father  had
    stated that (i) his involvement with the claimant was  limited  to  the
    sending of monies and (i) that the claimant's mother had  the  ultimate
    decision in  all  matters  in  respect  of  the  claimant's  life.   He
    submitted that this did not amount to sole responsibility.

40. In relation to the issue of whether or not there are  any  serious  and
    compelling  circumstances  which  made  exclusion   of   the   claimant
    undesirable, Mr Avery referred back to the assertions made earlier made
    in relation to the claimant's living circumstances in the  Philippines.
    He submitted that looking at the circumstances as a whole they did  not
    meet the requirements of 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.

41. As to Article 8 Mr Avery relied upon his  submissions  in  relation  to
    297(i)(f) and submitted that if the claimant did not succeed under this
    provision then the circumstances of her case were such that  she  could
    not succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

42. In reply Dr Samuels submitted that although the claimant's  mother  had
    charge of the claimant on a day-to-day basis this was a consequence  of
    the need for her to have  practical  sole  responsibility  because  the
    claimant was living with her.  The theoretical sole responsibility was,
    he submitted, vested in the claimant's  father.   In  support  of  this
    submission Dr Samuels observed that the claimant's father  sent  monies
    to the claimant and gave instructions as to how such monies were to  be
    spent i.e. on  the  claimant's  education.   He  further  observed  the
    sponsor speaks to his daughter on Skype on a  regular  basis  that  she
    seeks his permission to go  out;  the  practical  side  of  this  being
    handled thereafter by the mother.   He  therefore  submitted  that  the
    claimant satisfied the  requirements  of  paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

43. In the alternative Dr Samuels submitted that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling circumstances which required  the  claimant  to  be  granted
    entry clearance.  He accepted that there had been a series  of  mix-ups
    in relation to the dates on which various family members had found  out
    about the abuse of the claimant, but asserted that this did not  go  to
    the heart of the matter given that the claimant is a child.  He invited
    the Tribunal to conclude that the claimant  has  been  the  subject  of
    abuse by her mother and her mother's partner to the extent that she has
    suffered actual bodily harm.

44. No submissions were made in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision and Reasons

45. The burden of proof is on the claimant and the standard of proof is  to
    the balance of probabilities.  By virtue of Sections 85 and 85A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, I  am  required  only  to
    take into account "the circumstances appertaining at the  time  of  the
    decision" i.e. 17 May 2012.

Paragraph 297(i)(e) - Sole Responsibility

46. The Tribunal gave guidance on the issue of sole responsibility  in  the
    decision of TD [cited above].  In that decision the Tribunal  state  as
    follows:


        "[52] Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration
        rules should be approached as follows:


        i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and whether
        that responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to be decided
        upon all the evidence.


        ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should not
        to be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation but rather as
        a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in fact is
        exercising responsibility for the child. That responsibility may
        have been for a short duration in that the present arrangements may
        have begun quite recently.


        iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
        individuals other than a child's parents and may be shared between
        different individuals: which may particularly arise where the child
        remains in its own country whilst the only parent involved in its
        life travels to and lives in the UK.


        iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in the
        upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that one of them
        will have sole responsibility.


        v. If it is said that both are not involved in the child's
        upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be that the other
        has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility. In such cases, it
        may well be justified to find that that parent no longer has
        responsibility for the child.


        vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
        between the parents. So even if there is only one parent involved
        in the child's upbringing, that parent may not have sole
        responsibility.


        vii. In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day
        responsibility (or decision-making) for the child's welfare may
        necessarily be shared with others (such as relatives or friends)
        because of the geographical separation between the parent and
        child.


        viii. That, however, does not prevent the parent having sole
        responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.



        ix.  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone   else   has   day-to-day
        responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control  and
        direction of  the  child's  upbringing  including  making  all  the
        important decisions in the child's life. If not, responsibility  is
        shared and so not "sole"."

47. Having considered all of the evidence  before  me  in  the  round,  and
    applying the guidance given by the Tribunal in TD, I am not prepared to
    accept that the claimant has proved, to the balance  of  probabilities,
    that her father has had sole responsibility for her upbringing.

48. I have taken into account the letter from the Claimant's mother  of  30
    April  2012  indicating  that  she  "have  (sic)  relinquish   parental
    responsibility...", but attach little weight  to  it.  It  provides  no
    indication as to when the claimant's  mother  purportedly  relinquished
    such responsibility,  or  indeed  whether  this  had  in  fact  already
    occurred or whether it was a proposed  future  act.  Neither  does  the
    letter detail what this means in practical terms.

49. Even if the evidence of the claimant's father is taken at  its  highest
    and he has financed her to  stay  in  the  Philippines,  including  her
    education, it is plain from his own evidence that he does not have, and
    has not had since at least the time of his move the UK in 2010, control
    and direction of the claimant's upbringing. He does not  make  all,  or
    indeed it appears any, of the important  decisions  in  the  claimant's
    life.   Whilst  I  accept  Dr  Samuels'  submission  that  there  is  a
    difference between someone having day-to-day  practical  responsibility
    for a child and someone having sole responsibility for that  child,  in
    this particular case I find that that difference is not material.

50. On the evidence given  by  the  claimant's  father  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which Dr Samuels accepted was correctly cited in the  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the claimant's father has done nothing
    else by way of taking the responsibility  for  the  claimant  save  for
    sending her money.  This  was  evidence  confirmed  by  the  claimant's
    father during the course of the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Although  the  claimant's  stepmother,  Ms  De-Vera,  stated  that  the
    claimant asked her father for permission to go out,  this,  of  itself,
    even  if  true  does  not  lead  me  to  conclude  that  he  has   sole
    responsibility.  Ms De-Vera quite candidly  accepted  in  her  evidence
    that it may be that the claimant's mother effectively has the last word
    on such matters because the claimant is living with her  and  the  fact
    that this is so is consistent with the  claimant's  father's  evidence.
    The appellant's witness statement is silent on this issue.   There  are
    no examples given, save for the fact that the claimant's father  wishes
    his daughter to have an education in the Philippines, of the claimant's
    father exercising the sort of control and direction that was  envisaged
    by the Tribunal in TD.  It is the claimant's mother who exercises  such
    control and direction, with limited  input from her father.

51. Looking at all of the evidence in the round I do not  accept  that  the
    claimant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  297(i)(e)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

Paragraph 297(i)(f) - Serious and Compelling Reasons etc

52. When coming to my conclusions on this issue I have fully considered and
    applied the decision of the Tribunal in  Mundeba  (s.55  and  paragraph
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  I observe that at paragraph 34  of
    Mundeba the Tribunal state as follows:

         "34. In our view, serious means that there needs to  be  more  than
             the parties simply desiring a  state  of  affairs  to  obtain.
             Compelling in the context  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates
             that considerations that are persuasive and powerful.  Serious
             read with compelling together  indicate  that  the  family  or
             other considerations render the exclusion of  the  child  from
             the United Kingdom undesirable.  The analysis is one of degree
             and kind.  Such an interpretation sets a high  threshold  that
             excludes cases where, without more, it is simply the  wish  of
             parties to be together however natural that ambition that  may
             be.

         35.  The terms of s.55(1) and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
             T (s.55 BCIA 2009  -  entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT
             00483, made it clear that s.55 only applies  to  children  who
             are in the United Kingdom.  The requirement therefore  in  the
             IDIs we have quoted above that officers must not apply actions
             set out in the  instruction  without  having  regard  to  s.55
             inaccurately states the legal position, although the  Tribunal
             noted at [18] that the statutory guidance asks

                  'Staff working overseas to adhere to  the  spirit  if  the
                  duty and make enquiries when they have reason  to  suspect
                  that a child may be in need of protection or  safeguarding
                  or present welfare needs that require attention'."

53. Mr Avery accepted, during the course of his submissions,  that  if  the
    account given by the claimant of abuse by her mother and  her  mother's
    partner is truthful then she would meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules; a concession  I  consider  to  have
    been properly made.

54. An analysis  of  the  various  accounts  given  by  the  claimant,  the
    claimant's father and the claimant's stepmother demonstrates that  they
    are punctuated by inconsistency.  The claimant's  father  informed  the
    First-tier Tribunal that he had first found out about the abuse of  the
    claimant in 2010, whereas he gave evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that  this  had  occurred  in  mid  2011.   His  explanation  for  this
    inconsistency was vague and unpersuasive.  There is also  inconsistency
    as to when the claimant's stepmother found out about  such  abuse,  she
    indicating in her evidence that this was  early  in  2012  whereas  the
    claimant's father indicated that he  did  not  tell  his  wife  of  the
    claimant's abuse until his return from the Philippines  in  2013.   The
    only explanation given for this inconsistency was that  the  claimant's
    father's "brain must be mixed  up".   There  is  further  inconsistency
    regarding the claimant's schooling.  The claimant's  witness  statement
    of 19 April 2013 uses the present tense, it asserting that her  friends
    at school 'continue to laugh' at her  because  her  school  uniform  is
    torn.  The claimant's father stated in his evidence that he  found  out
    that the claimant was not attending school in  2011  however  his  wife
    indicates that she  did  not  find  out  until  the  claimant's  father
    returned from the  Philippines  in  2013.   Again  there  has  been  no
    satisfactory explanation for these inconsistencies.

55. Additionally I observe that neither the claimant's application, nor the
    letters which covered it to the Entry Clearance Officer,  make  mention
    of the fact  that  she  had  suffered  abuse.  On  their  evidence  the
    claimant's United Kingdom based family were aware of the claimed  abuse
    at this time. They would also have been aware of  its  relevance  given
    that the claimant's father and stepmother had been through  the  appeal
    process on exactly the same issue with the claimant's brother, and  had
    raised within that process the fact that  he  had  been  living  in  an
    abusive home in the Philippines.  I pause at this stage to observe that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Callender Smith made no findings on the issue
    of whether the abuse of the claimant's brother had taken place.

56. Looking at all of the evidence before me I am not prepared  to  accept,
    to the balance of probabilities, that I have been told the truth  about
    the claimant's circumstances in the Philippines.  I do not accept  that
    she has been physically or emotionally abused  by  her  mother  or  her
    mother's partner.  Further, I do not accept that she is being prevented
    from attending at school by her mother or her mother's partner.

57. Given what I have found above I am  not  prepared  to  accept,  to  the
    balance of probabilities, that there are serious and compelling  family
    or other considerations  which  make  the  exclusion  of  the  claimant
    undesirable.  The claimant does not meet the requirements of  paragraph
    297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.

58. The claimant's appeal brought in relation to the Immigration  Rules  is
    therefore dismissed.

Article 8 ECHR

59. As to the Article 8 ECHR ground no additional submissions were made  in
    this regard by Dr Samuels at the hearing.  I am prepared to accept that
    the claimant has a family life with her father, stepmother  and  indeed
    her stepmother's daughters.  If the claimant were to come to the United
    Kingdom that of course would lead to an interference  with  the  family
    life she currently has with her mother and her mother's partner in  the
    Philippines. On the other hand it is also correct to say  that  denying
    entry clearance to the claimant would interfere with her opportunity to
    build up a fuller family life with the family  unit  which  is  in  the
    United Kingdom.  If, for the purposes of this determination, it were to
    be assumed that the interference with the claimant's family life caused
    by refusing her entry clearance would be of  such  severity  so  as  to
    engage Article 8, it is plain to me that the  decision  to  do  so  was
    nevertheless a proportionate one.  The  claimant  has  lived  with  her
    mother for the entirety of her life and remains living in her  mother's
    household.  Whilst I have no doubt that she would  be  living  in  more
    advantageous circumstances in the United Kingdom, this does not lead me
    to conclude that it is in her best interests to move here neither is it
    sufficient,  in  my  conclusion,   to   render   the   ECO's   decision
    disproportionate. Continuity of residence is important for a child. The
    appellant would be remaining with her close  family  in  a  country  in
    which she has lived for her entire life.

60. Even if it were in the claimant's best interests to come to the  United
    Kingdom, given the facts I have found above I would nevertheless  still
    conclude that the refusal of entry clearance  was  proportionate.   The
    public interest in a fair and firm system  of  immigration  control  is
    considerable (EB Kosovo).  The claimant does not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. She has not established that she is living in
    circumstances that would cause risk to her welfare; she  is  living  in
    adequate accommodation and, on my findings,  is  not  being  denied  an
    education.   Whilst I have no doubt that the claimant, her father,  her
    stepmother will be distressed by  the  decision  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance there is no evidence  before  me  to  demonstrate  that  such
    refusal is  likely  to  have  an  adverse  long-term  psychological  or
    physical impact on any of them.

61. Looking at all the evidence before me in the round including that which
    I have not specifically referred to above, I conclude that  a  decision
    to refuse entry clearance to the claimant is proportionate on the facts
    of the instant case.  I therefore dismiss the appeal brought on Article
    8 ECHR grounds.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  the  reasons
given above.

I remake the decision on the appeal and conclude that the appeal  is  to  be
dismissed on all grounds. The claimant does not  meet  the  requirements  of
the Immigration Rules and the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  does
not lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 12 August 2013



