
[pic]



Upper Tribunal                                                   Appeal
                                             Number: OA/10867/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 17 June 2014             On 5 August 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  Islamabad
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                              Hamida Amirullah
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the  Respondent:             Ms.  A.  Pease  of  Counsel  instructed  by
                       Lawrence & Co.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Metzer promulgated on 31 March 2014 allowing  Ms.  Amirullah's  appeal
      against the decision dated 8 April 2013 to refuse her entry  clearance
      as an adult dependent relative of her son Mr Gulyaar Jaseem, a British
      citizen ('the sponsor').


   2. Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant and Ms
      Amirullah the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Ms Amirullah as the Appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer  as  the
      Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 15 March  1940.  On
      15 February 2013 she applied for entry clearance to join  the  sponsor
      in the  UK.   The  application  was  made  at  the  same  time  as  an
      application by the sponsor's wife, Ms Rahima Jaseem. Ms Jaseem was, at
      the time  of  the  applications  living  with,  and  caring  for,  the
      Appellant. Ms Jaseem's application was successful and she consequently
      joined the sponsor in the UK.

   4. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      Notice of Immigration Decision dated 8 April 2013  with  reference  to
      paragraphs  EC-DR.1.1(d)  and  E-ECDR.2.4  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
      Immigration Rules.

   5. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.

   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 12 May 2014.

Consideration

   7. As noted above, at the time  of  her  application  the  Appellant  was
      living with her daughter-in-law - the sponsor's wife, Ms Rahim Jaseem.
      It is said that Ms Jaseem undertook  the  role  of  a  carer  for  the
      Appellant: see Ms Jaseem's witness  statement  dated  24  March  2014.
      Applications were made for entry clearance for both the Appellant  (as
      an adult dependent relative), and Ms Jaseem (as a spouse).  Ms  Jaseem
      was successful in her application, and subsequently made  arrangements
      to travel to the UK; however, prior to her departure, she  spent  time
      explaining to a neighbour the  day-to-day  care  requirements  of  the
      Appellant - see witness statement of Mr Naseem Shiragha at paragraph 6
      (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, page 18).

   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the  supporting  evidence,  both
      oral and documentary at paragraphs 3-13  of  the  determination.  This
      included references to  supporting  medical  evidence,  the  sponsor's
      written and oral testimony, further supporting witness statements from
      the sponsor's wife and  sponsor's  brother.  The  Judge  appropriately
      directed himself as to the burden and  standard  of  proof  (paragraph
      14), and made reference  to,  and  paraphrased,  the  requirements  of
      paragraphs E-ECDR.2 .4 and 2.5. The Judge then drew all these  matters
      together in a short summation and conclusion at paragraph 16.


   9. In particular the Judge found that the Appellant  "requires  long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks, including bathing, being fed,
      taking medication and general assistance with very basic tasks";  "She
      has a diagnosable serious long-term medical condition and the  medical
      evidence establishes she requires assistance"; and "I do not  consider
      it reasonable to assume that a neighbour should  continue  to  provide
      it, and that  there  is  no  person  in  Afghanistan  to  be  able  to
      reasonably provide it".

  10. The Respondent challenges the conclusions of the Judge. The grounds in
      support of the application for permission to appeal seek to  make  two
      similar points:

(i) In respect of personal care,  there  was  no  evidence  as  to  why  the
      Appellant could not continue to be  cared  for  by  a  neighbour  with
      financial support from the sponsor, beyond  an  unsupported  assertion
      that it was unreasonable to continue the arrangement.

(ii) The finding that it would be unreasonable to expect  the  neighbour  to
      continue caring for the Appellant was  a  speculative  one  contingent
      upon future events, and as such was  a  circumstance  post-dating  the
      Respondent's decision, which was inadmissible pursuant to section  85A
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  11. Further to the sequence of events outlined above, at the date  of  the
      Respondent's decision it was in fact the Appellant's  daughter-in-law,
      who was looking after her: the neighbour had only become  involved  in
      her care at the time the daughter-in-law was  preparing  to  leave  to
      join her husband, the sponsor, in the UK. Mr Duffy  acknowledged  that
      the second ground of challenge was erroneously premised.

  12. In any event,  in  my  judgement,  in  determining  that  it  was  not
      reasonable to assume a neighbour should provide care the Judge was not
      looking forward to a potential breakdown of such an  arrangement,  but
      was  characterising  the  arrangement  itself  as  one  that  was  not
      reasonable.

  13. Whilst in the ordinary course of events it may be reasonable to expect
      a degree of 'neighbourliness' from a neighbour, this is very different
      from expecting a neighbour to undertake  a  serious  care  commitment,
      even  with  the  provision  of  some  financial  support.   The   care
      requirements of  the  Appellant  were  described  as  demanding:  "The
      neighbour comes early in the morning to give her  medicine,  breakfast
      and to get her ready for prayer. She comes for one or two  hours  then
      returns at lunchtime and gives her dinner as well as her  medicine  on
      each occasion" (Determination at paragraph 9). It was pointed  out  in
      the witness statement of Mr Shiragha that the neighbour "has  her  own
      three daughters that she looks after too, which is difficult  for  her
      to balance, and naturally she places more priority on her own  family"
      (witness statement at paragraph 7).

  14. The undertaking of long-term care for an elderly person with a chronic
      underlying diagnosis, and with no specific prognosis  of  improvement,
      would not ordinarily be something  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
      expect  a  neighbour  to  undertake.  In  my  judgement  that  is  the
      conclusion  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  It  is  an
      eminently sustainable evaluation based on the facts.

  15. The fact that such a state of affairs might theoretically be continued
      does not render it reasonable.

  16. Thus, in my judgement, a proper reading and understanding of the basis
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision provides a complete answer
      to the bases of challenge in respect of both grounds  pleaded  in  the
      application for permission to appeal.

  17. Accordingly, I reject the  challenge  brought  by  the  Respondent  as
      pleaded in the grounds submitted in support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal.

  18. However, Mr Duffy raised a different point at the hearing  in  respect
      of the evidential requirements of Appendix FM-SE:  he  suggested  that
      these requirements had been  overlooked  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge, in particular paragraphs 34 and 35.

  19. Ms Pease observed that no such point had apparently been raised by the
      Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and further  no  such
      point had been raised in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal.  Mr  Duffy
      sought to argue that  the  evidential  requirements  were  essentially
      encompassed in the grounds as pleaded. I do not agree with him in this
      regard: the grounds of challenge are very specific and relate  to  the
      Judge's  evaluation  of  the  reasonableness  of   a   personal   care
      arrangement involving a neighbour and do not challenge the  underlying
      premise of the requirement for personal care, or seek to suggest  that
      such  personal  care  was  available  other  than  via   the   private
      arrangement with the neighbour.

  20. In the circumstances I explored with the representatives the  relevant
      Rules and the available evidence with a view to determining whether or
      not to permit the Respondent to raise this issue at this late stage.

  21. The following matters are particularly germane in my judgement:

(i) Ms Pease indicated that she was  instructed  that  documents  specifying
      the unavailability of care had been submitted  with  the  application,
      but had been returned as not  required.  In  circumstances  where  the
      issue had not been raised until the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal
      she was not in a position  to  provide  supporting  evidence  of  this
      claim, or copies of the documents said to have been submitted. It  was
      to be noted, however, that there was a letter in the appeal bundle  at
      page  7  from  a  medical  practitioner  confirming  a  diagnosis   of
      pancreatitis and indicating that  the  Appellant  required  continuous
      care and prolonged treatment. This, it was suggested went some way  to
      meeting the evidential requirements of paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE.

(ii) As regards the evidential requirements of Appendix FM-SE, it is  to  be
      noted that there is a distinction between different paragraphs  as  to
      evidence that "must" be provided in a certain form (e.g. see paragraph
      27), and evidence that "should" be provided in a particular  specified
      form (as is the case in respect of paragraphs 34 and 35). It seems  to
      me that this distinction denotes a degree  of  flexibility:  a  'must'
      requirement is  more  onerous  than  a  'should'  requirement;  whilst
      failure to comply with the former will lead inevitably to  a  refusal,
      the failure to comply with the latter will not  inevitably  result  in
      refusal.

(iii) The application herein was made in February 2013.  The  Appellant  was
      at that time, just shy of her 73rd birthday  and  unwell.  It  is  now
      almost a year and a half later, and there is no  suggestion  that  the
      Appellant's health will have improved.

  22. Were it the case that the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE  were  of  a
      more mandatory nature in this regard I might have  taken  a  different
      view.  However,  in  circumstances  where  there  was  a   degree   of
      flexibility as to the method of proving that the requirements  of  the
      Rules were met, and in circumstances  where  the  Respondent  had  not
      hitherto taken this point, and where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      clearly had little hesitation in concluding in the Appellant's favour,
      on balance, I considered that it was too late to permit the Respondent
      to raise this new ground of challenge.

  23. In all such circumstances I find no error of law in  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Accordingly,  the  decision  under  the
      Immigration Rules is to stand.

Decision

  24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  no  error  of
      law and stands.

  25. The appeal of Ms Amirullah remains allowed.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     31 July 2014
