
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10045/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2013                               |On 19 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                               VIKTORIYA ONEIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KYIV

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Gulbenkian
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born on  30  April  1994.  On  10
    February 2012 she applied for leave to enter the  UK  with  a  view  to
    settlement as the child of a person present and  settled  here,  namely
    her mother, Iryna O'neil.  On 7 May 2011 her  application  was  refused
    by the respondent. In a determination promulgated on 18  February  2013
    the appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rowlands under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant's mother, Iryna Oneil, was born  on  15  August  1974  in
    Kamenets-Podilsky, in the Ukraine.   She was previously married to  the
    appellant's father.  Their marriage was dissolved on 8 June 2001.

3.   On 29 October 2004 the appellant's mother entered the UK and  began  to
    work as a cleaner. She left her daughter, the appellant, in the care of
    her parents in the Ukraine.  In 2007 she met Mr Alan Oniel and they got
    married on 9 January 2010.  They have a daughter called Veronica  Sarah
    Oneil born on 6 September 2010.

4.   On 24 January 2010 the appellant's mother applied for leave  to  remain
    as the spouse of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   That
    application was refused without a right of appeal.  She applied to  the
    Administrative Court to judicially review the decision. It  was  agreed
    that the Secretary of State would reconsider her decision. However  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's  application  for  leave  to
    remain  in  the  UK.   Following  a  successful  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision, the appellant's mother was granted limited leave
    to remain in the UK in June 2011 until 2014.

5.   The only issue before the judge  therefore  was  whether  refusing  the
    appellant entry clearance would amount to a breach of her rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   The judge heard evidence from the  appellant's  mother,  Iryna  O'Neil,
    her stepfather Alan Oneil and her grandmother Liudmyla Borovska who was
    visiting the United Kingdom at the time.   All  the  witnesses  adopted
    their witness statements.

7.   The judge applied the  principles  set  out  in  Razgar  and  found  as
    follows:

         "19.     It seems clear  that  the  main  reason  for  wanting  the
             appellant to come to the United Kingdom  is  to  improve   her
             chances of a music career or even find her any  work  at  all.
             She has visited the United Kingdom on a  number  of  occasions
             and, on most if not all of them, has taken some kind of  music
             course.  She wants to further her music career and feels  that
             she cannot do that in Ukraine. That may be true that but  that
             is no reason in itself for her to  be  allowed  to  enter  the
             United Kingdom  on a permanent basis.


         20.  I accept that she is close to her mother and as close  as  she
             could be to her stepfather and half sister.  However  she  has
             been able  to  visit  them  regularly  and  according  to  the
             Respondent's representative, there is no reason why she cannot
             continue to do.


         21.  She is over 18 and has been living apart from  her mother  for
             some time.  It has been  suggested  on  her  behalf  that  the
             relationship between her and her daughter shows  a  dependency
             over and above that normally between mother and daughter. I do
             not agree. There is nothing at all in their relationship  that
             shows that. Although they communicate  on a regular basis that
             is no different to mothers and grown up   children  generally.
             Her mother left her in the Ukraine when she was 10  years  old
             leaving her safely with her grandparents. I accept  that  this
             was to try and improve her  situation  but  nevertheless  they
             were separated for such a long time that to a great extent the
             appellant has grown up rather independent.


         22.  For the purposes of the application the appellant's mother had
             stressed that she made all the major decisions in relation  to
             her but clearly that cannot have been  the  whole  story.  For
             some of the time the mother has been  in  the  United  Kingdom
             essentially in secret and  working  illegally.  She  certainly
             wasn't able to go back and visit her daughter or her  daughter
             visit her.


         23.  The appellant has her own life to live and is at an  age  when
             expectation would be for her to leave home and go  to  college
             anyway. She has successfully lived  alone  whilst  at  college
             already.  I accept that her younger sister will  want  to  see
             her regularly but there is no reason why they cannot  do  that
             by her continuing to visit regularly and vice versa.  I do not
             believe that preventing her from living in the United  Kingdom
             is disproportionate.  I do not accept that it  amounts  to  an
             unlawful interference with either her human rights or that  of
             her mother, stepfather or sister.


         24.  We can see no reason to make a direction for anonymity in this
             case. There is a public interest in the deportation of foreign
             criminals and the public has a right to know how this Tribunal
             reaches its decisions in that regard."

8.   The grant of permission stated that the lack of detail by the judge  at
    paragraphs 4 and 14 that  the  appellant  must  fail  under  the  Rules
    because the sponsoring mother only has leave  amounts  to  an  arguable
    error of law.  Mr. Bazini however did accept in light of the fact  that
    the appellant's mother has limited leave to remain in the UK  that  the
    appellant's appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.   The
    judge therefore did not err in law on this issue.

9.   I also accept as alluded to in the grant of permission  that  paragraph
    24 was a cut and paste exercise from a deportation case  in  which  the
    judge was sitting as a panel.

10.  Mr Bazini relied on the remaining grounds of appeal.   He  argued  that
    the judge's approach to whether the appellant was a minor or not was in
    error.  When the appellant made the application, she was 17 years and 9
    month old; three months short of her eighteenth birthday.  By the  date
    of decision she was 18 years old and ten days.  This was  analogous  to
    paragraph 27 of the Immigration Rules. Even though the appellant was 18
    years old at the date  of  decision  she  should  be  treated  for  the
    purposes of the appeal as if she were a minor.

11.  Mr Saunders said he was not making a great  deal  of  this  point.   He
    accepted that the appellant was a minor at the date of application  and
    there the clock stops in respect of the Immigration  Rules.   He  added
    that the judge's observation at paragraph 21 was made in the context of
    the strength of connections the appellant has with her mother.

12.  Mr Bazini submitted that if the Home  Office's  position  is  that  the
    appellant's age is frozen for the purposes of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the question is whether the judge had applied the right test.  Being  a
    minor there was no requirement to show dependency over and  above  what
    one would normally expect of an  adult.   In  any  event,  the  judge's
    reasons for concluding at paragraph 19 that the  main  reason  for  the
    appellant wanting to come to the UK was to improve her chances  of  her
    music career or find work  was  unsustainable.   The  judge  failed  to
    consider the appellant's witness statement in which the appellant  gave
    reasons for  wanting to  join her mother, stepfather and half sister in
    the UK.  The judge's failure to make any findings on the  evidence  set
    out in the appellant's witness statement amounts to a material error of
    law.  In any event, at no point in the  appellant's  witness  statement
    did she say her desire was to come and work  and  study  music.   These
    would be activities she would undertake once she  got  here  but  those
    were not her reasons for making the application for settlement.

13.  Mr Bazini  said  in  respect  of  paragraph  20  that  they  accept  in
    principle  that  the  appellant  can  continue  to  visit  her  mother,
    stepfather and half sister in the UK, but argued that was not the whole
    picture.  The appellant made numerous visits to the UK when her  mother
    was here unlawfully. Her mother made all the  major  decisions  in  her
    life, funded/maintained her and was responsible for her education. That
    was powerful evidence of sole responsibility and the strength  of  ties
    between mother and daughter. Friends of the mother acted as sponsor for
    the appellant's visits.   During  those  visits  she  stayed  with  her
    mother. She complied with the visa requirements  and  returned  to  the
    Ukraine after each visit. When her mother eventually  got  a  residence
    permit in June 2011 she went to the Ukraine for thee  months  to  visit
    and again in December 2012.  The appellant's  British  stepfather  flew
    out to Ukraine n 2009 on his own after the appellant's mother  accepted
    his proposal of marriage in order to meet the  appellant  and  get  her
    approval to their marriage.   In  light  of  this  evidence  Mr  Bazini
    submitted that the judge's finding at paragraph 22 was simply wrong.

14.  With regard to paragraph 21, Mr Bazini submitted that it is  true  that
    the appellant's mother left her in Ukraine when she was  10  years  old
    but in the context of the other evidence, such as the  visits,  regular
    communication between them, there is a  powerful  relationship  between
    them. The judge was only looking at the appellant as an adult  and  not
    the years up to when  she  turned  18.    Those  years  have  not  been
    considered.

15.   With  regard  to  paragraph  23,  Mr  Bazini  said  it  has  been  the
    expectation of this young adult that she would always go and live  with
    her mother in the UK and her half sister.  There was  no  consideration
    by the judge of how  the  appellant's  absence  will  affect  her  half
    sister.  The judge did not  consider  the  best  interests  element  of
    Article 8.  The younger sister can visit the appellant but  it  is  not
    the same as having family life together and the  appellant  growing  up
    with her half sister. He concluded by saying that the judge's  approach
    to the evidence was flawed.

16.  In response Mr Saunders first addressed the  applicability  of  Section
    55 to the appellant.  He relied on the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  T
    (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).  In
    that case the Upper Tribunal held  that  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply to children who are
    outside the United Kingdom.  By virtue of the Home Office policy (Every
    Child Matters, Change for Children) issued  by  the  UKBA  in  November
    2009, Section 55 considerations can apply to a child overseas but there
    is a trigger [18] and that is "when there is reason to suspect  that  a
    child may be in need of protection or safeguarding or  present  welfare
    needs that require attention." Mr Saunders submitted that there are  no
    such concerns  here  although  he  was  not  saying  that  the  factors
    identified in T are exhaustive or definitive.

17.  As regards the minor half sister of the appellant who is now 18  months
    old, Mr Saunders said that he had not  seen  any  evidence  as  to  her
    particular needs but of course he accepted that siblings might  benefit
    from living together. If that  were  the  assumption  then  every  case
    bearing on this argument  would  succeed.  He  submitted  however  that
    section 55 does not bear on this case.

18.  As to the judge's approach to the evidence, Mr Saunders submitted  that
    the judge prefaced his Article 8 assessment by reference to the  Razgar
    questions. He found that there was family life between   the  appellant
    and her mother.  The criticisms of the judge's finding at paragraph  21
    where he talks of dependency  over  and  above  that  normally  between
    mother and daughter is neither here or there because  the  judge  finds
    that the appellant has got family life.  The judge has  to  go  on  and
    look at the extent of the family life. His findings are to  the  effect
    that mother and daughter have lived apart for a considerable time since
    the mother chose to come to the UK and leave her with her own  parents.
    The child has obtained some independence since she is living in a  flat
    close to where she studies.  The judge found  that  the  appellant  has
    been able to make visits to the  UK.   The  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's mother has been   in  the  UK  essentially  in  secret  and
    working illegally was referring to the earlier  part  of  her  mother's
    stay in the UK.

19.  Mr Saunders submitted that as to the  conclusions  regarding  the  real
    purpose of the appellant's application, the  judge  does  not  have  to
    reach the conclusions on the basis of what the appellant said.  He  can
    reach his own conclusions. His conclusions at paragraph 19 were open to
    him because of the probable economic prospects in Ukraine.  The judge's
    findings were not perverse or irrational. They were open to  him.
20   I accept that the judge prefaced his Article 8 assessment by  reference
    to the Razgar questions.  The judge had accepted that there was  family
    life between the appellant  and  her  mother.   The  challenge  to  his
    decision was  his  approach  to  the  evidence  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality.

21.  I agree with Mr Saunders' submission that Section 55 has no bearing  on
    this case in light of the triggers identified by the Upper Tribunal  in
    the case of T (Jamaica). Whilst the concerns identified in  T  are  not
    exhaustive or definitive, in this case no particular  welfare  concerns
    have been identified either by the appellant or her mother. Indeed  her
    grandmother said in evidence that she had been providing the  appellant
    with the necessary care since her mother  left  for  the  UK  in  2004.
    Uppermost in her mind has always been that  the  appellant  should  not
    miss out on parental care.  The appellant herself said in  her  witness
    statement that her grandmother is a gentle, loving  and  caring  woman.
    She has been cooking, keeping her safe and ensuring that  she  did  not
    fall sick.  Her grandmother has been kind enough to  provide  her  with
    shelter.  In light of this evidence I reject  Mr.  Bazini's  submission
    that Section 55 applies simply because it has been found that there  is
    family life between the appellant and her mother, stepfather  and  half
    sister.

22.  I find that the judge erred in law at paragraph 19 when he  found  that
    the main reason for wanting the appellant to come  to  the  UK  was  to
    improve her chances of a music career or even find her any work at all.
     In reaching this finding the judge failed to consider the  appellant's
    own reasons for wanting to come to the UK which were  set  out  in  her
    witness statement.

23.  I accept that the judge's finding in paragraph 22  was  with  reference
    to the appellant's mother's earlier life in the UK.  However, the judge
    seemed to have based his other findings at paragraph 22 on his  finding
    that because she was here secretly and working  illegally,  the  mother
    could not have  made  all  the  major  decisions  in  relation  to  the
    appellant; neither was she able to go back and visit her  daughter  nor
    her daughter visit her.  These findings were made without regard to the
    evidence of visits the appellant had made to her mother in the  UK  and
    the remittances her mother had sent to Ukraine for her maintenance.

24.  For these reasons I find that the judge's approach to the evidence  was
    flawed.  I did not however consider it appropriate to  remit  the  case
    for rehearing by a First-tier Tribunal because the facts  were  not  in
    dispute.  Having considered all the evidence I found that  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal was not  materially  flawed.
    I give my reasons below.

25.  When the appellant made her application for settlement on  10  February
    2012, she was 17 years and 10 months old and therefore  a  minor.   She
    was just over 18 years old when her application was refused on  10  May
    2012. Mr Saunders accepted that  the  clock  stopped  at  the  date  of
    application.  Her mother had left her in the Ukraine  in  October  2004
    with her grandparents at a time when the appellant was 10 years old.

26.  The judge found that there was a family life between the appellant  and
    her mother. That finding has not been challenged and therefore  stands.
    In finding the relationship between her and her mother does not show  a
    dependency over and above that normally between mother and daughter,  I
    do not find that the judge was considering the  nature  of  the  family
    life in terms of the Kugathas test.  The  judge,  in  my  opinion,  was
    entitled to consider the extent of the  family  life  at  the  date  of
    decision.  On the evidence I agree with the judge  that  the  appellant
    and her mother have lived apart for many years from  when  she  was  10
    years old when her mother left her in the  care  of  her  grandparents.
    When her mother left her in the Ukraine the appellant was a  child  but
    now she was almost an adult  leading  an  independent  life.   She  was
    living in a flat close to where she studied.  The judge  accepted  that
    they communicated on a  regular  basis  but  found  that  that  was  no
    different to mothers and grown up children generally.   These  findings
    were open to the judge.

27.  The evidence suggests that from 2006 to 2011, when her mother was  here
    illegally, the appellant was able to visit her mother on five occasions
    using various sponsors organised by  her  mother.   The  appellant  met
    Alan, hr stepfather, three times in the Ukraine. The first time was  in
    September 2009; second occasion was in January  2010  just  before  her
    mother and Alan got married, and the third time was when Alan  went  to
    the Ukraine to be the godfather to her sister's younger son. Her mother
    has also been to the Ukraine twice since she was granted limited  leave
    to remain in the UK.

28.  There is also evidence that her mother  on  her  own  and  subsequently
    with Alan has sent regular remittances to the appellant for her  upkeep
    and her education in the Ukraine.

29.  I accept  that  the  evidence  of  regular  visits,  communication  and
    remittances  shows  that  there  is  strong  family  bond  between  the
    appellant and her mother.  However, I find that this evidence does  not
    overcome the judge's finding that to a great extent the  appellant  has
    grown up rather independent as a result of the long separation.

30.  Mr. Bazini argued that this case raises an issue as  to  the  potential
    impact of satisfying the sole responsibility rule  and  its  effect  on
    proportionality. Sole responsibility is an  issue  that  is  considered
    under the Immigration Rule in relation to an application by a child  to
    join a parent for settlement in the UK.  Mr Bazini  accepted  that  the
    appellant's appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    because the appellant's mother does not have settled status in the  UK.
    In the circumstances I find that the Tribunal  is  not  duty  bound  to
    consider sole responsibility as an issue but in  my  opinion  it  is  a
    factor that can be taken into account in the proportionality  exercise.
    In TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, the Tribunal found that where one parent is not involved in  the
    child's upbringing (as in  this),  the  issue  may  arise  between  the
    remaining parent and others who  have  day-to0day  care  of  the  child
    abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has  continuing  control  and
    direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the
    important decisions in the child's  life.   I  accept  that  while  her
    mother made the major decisions, the evidence suggests that the day  to
    day care of the appellant when she was younger was shared  between  her
    and grandparents.  Since September 2009 when she started  College,  the
    appellant has lived in a different town away from her grandparents.  At
    17 years 10 months at the date of decision I find it is not  reasonably
    likely that her mother was still making major decisions for her and had
    continuing control and direction over the appellant.

31.  The appellant's reasons for wanting to join her mother, stepfather  and
    half sister in the UK are set out  at  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  her
    witness statement.  She said she felt she had been treated unfairly  by
    the  ECO  having  provided  sufficient  documents  in  support  of  the
    application.  She has been punished enough  being  separated  from  her
    mother and coming from a broken home, it means more than ever  to  join
    her in the UK.  It has  been  very  hard  for  all  of  them  having  a
    relationship at "arms length".  She really longs to be with her mother,
    stepfather and baby sister in the UK.  She  wants  to  feel  loved  and
    cared for by  her  mother.   It  is  perfectly  understandable  in  the
    circumstances that the appellant would want  to  join  her  mother  and
    family in the UK.  Indeed I accept that the appellant did  not  mention
    her studies and employment in the UK as reasons  for  wanting  to  come
    her.  I find that it is not the ECO's decision that has kept her  apart
    from her mother, and has led to a relationship at "arms length".  Their
    separation was as a result of a decision made by her mother to come  to
    the UK in 2004 and leave her in the care of  her  grandparents.   Until
    her mother sought to regularise her stay in the UK the appellant  could
    not make an application to join her for settlement.  I do not find that
    she has in any way been treated unfairly by the ECO.

32.  I do not doubt as argued by Mr. Bazini that  it  has  always  been  the
    expectation that the appellant would go and live with  her  mother  and
    half sister in the UK.  He argued that the best interests of  the  half
    sister should be taken into account and the effect it would have on her
    were the appellant not granted entry clearance.  I accept that the half
    sister might benefit from living with the appellant.  She was born on 6
    September 2010 and at the date of decision was only 8 months  old.   Up
    until the date of decision, the appellant's only contact with her  half
    sister had been the visits she had made to the UK.  There is no  reason
    why these visits cannot continue.

33.  I find on the evidence before me  that  the  ECO's  decision  does  not
    disproportionately interfere with the appellant's rights under  Article
    8 of the ECHR.

34.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

