
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11605/2013
                                                               OA/11606/2013
                                                               OA/11607/2013
                                                               OA/11608/2013
                                                               OA/11610/2013
                                                               OA/11611/2013
                                                               OA/11612/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2015                    |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                     FM
                                     AM
                                     NM
                                     MM
                                     SM
                                     MAM
                                     MNM
                            (ANONYMITY RETAINED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Singh
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 20th December 1997,  20th  December  1997,  10th
    November 1999, 20th June 2006, 1st December 2001, 6th May 2004 and 16th
    December 2010 are all citizens of Kuwait and are all  children  of  the
    Sponsor father, ANM.  The Appellants were represented by Mr Singh.  The
    Respondent was represented by Mr McVeety, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2.  The  Appellants  claim  to  be  stateless  Kuwaiti  Bidoons  and  made
    application to join their Sponsor father in the  UK  who  had  obtained
    refugee  status.   The   Respondent   had   refused   the   Appellants'
    applications and the Appellants  had  appealed  that  decision.   Their
    appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devlin  sitting  in
    Manchester on 22nd May 2014.  At  the  time  of  both  application  and
    appeal hearing there were a further five Appellants  namely  the  first
    wife of the Sponsor together with the four children born of  the  first
    wife and Sponsor.  The judge allowed the appeals  of  those  Appellants
    but dismissed the appeals of the above named seven Appellants who  were
    all the children of the Sponsor's second wife.

 3. The Appellants appealed that decision by application and permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  on  13th  January
    2015.  He provided brief reasons for such permission  stating  that  it
    was arguable that there was a lack of evidence relating to  the  claims
    as to whether these Appellants were part of the  pre-flight  family  of
    the Sponsor, that matter having not  been  raised  in  the  Notices  of
    Refusal.  However he allowed all Grounds of Appeal.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellants

 4. I am grateful to both  Mr  Singh  and  Mr  McVeety  for  their  helpful
    submissions in a case which is complex  by  the  number  of  Appellants
    involved.  In summary Mr Singh firstly has stated that there had been a
    procedural irregularity in this case.  He noted that at the time of the
    appeal hearing South Manchester Law Centre was in difficulties and that
    additionally the Sponsor had instructed another who could not be found.
     Mr Singh said that he did not have a Respondent's bundle and there was
    little information available and that at the time  of  the  hearing  he
    only had some refusal letters but not all of the  refusal  letters  and
    the Appellants' bundle consisted merely of DNA evidence  to  prove  the
    link between the Appellants and their father.  He  said  there  was  no
    witness statement from the Sponsor within the  Appellants'  bundle  and
    the judge had not allowed in the interview record of the Sponsor  taken
    by the Respondent because it had not been served timely.  It  was  said
    that the lack of information and  evidence  available  pre-hearing  was
    such that there was a material procedural irregularity  in  the  matter
    proceeding at that stage.

 5. In terms of error of law Mr  Singh  pointed  to  what  he  said  was  a
    contradiction between the judge's findings at paragraph  170  and  209.
    It was further said that the youngest  Appellant  must  have  moved  to
    Jordan with the first wife, namely his  stepmother,  and  it  was  that
    individual being referred to by the judge  at  paragraph  208.   I  was
    further referred to paragraphs 210 to 215 where it was  said  that  the
    judge had made an error and finally it was said that there was a breach
    of Article 8 in this case and there was an  error  of  law  in  not  so
    finding.  Essentially Mr Singh said that these Appellants  were  living
    in Jordan with their stepmother, the Sponsor's first wife, and her four
    children whose appeals had been allowed.   Therefore  to  refuse  these
    Appellants' appeals under Article 8 would essentially prevent the first
    wife and her children coming to the UK as that would leave the children
    alone or conversely would cause a split in the families.

Respondent's Submissions

 6. Mr McVeety said that there were two potential scenarios in the  judge's
    mind in that either firstly the Appellants of the second  marriage  may
    have been part of the pre-flight household of the Sponsor in  the  past
    but not in the period immediately before he left for the UK.   Secondly
    and potentially in the alternative the children of the second marriage,
    namely the Appellants, had never been a  part  of  the  Sponsor's  pre-
    flight household.

 7. Mr McVeety referred me to the judge's findings on the evidence  of  the
    Sponsor and the vagueness and inconsistency of that evidence.   It  was
    further submitted that the judge was entirely right not to  allow  this
    case under Article 8 in circumstances where it could not be  said  that
    removal of the Appellants from Jordan would in fact  be  removing  them
    from their own natural mother and in circumstances where so little  was
    known it could not be said to be in the best interests of the  children
    to be uprooted.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing I  thanked  both  representatives  for
    their helpful and concise submissions and I  now  provide  my  decision
    with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The background to this case is that the Sponsor, ANM, had come  to  the
    UK in June 2012.  He claimed asylum and that was granted  by  the  Home
    Office without the need for an appeal  hearing.   The  basis  of  ANM's
    claim and the basis for the Home Office granting him refugee status was
    that he was an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait.

10. ANM had been  married  twice.   His  first  wife  had  borne  him  four
    children.  His second wife had borne him seven children.  The  children
    range in age from dates of birth in 1997  to  2012.   The  applications
    before the Home Office and on appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge consisted of appeals from the first wife and all eleven children.
     There was no application or appeal at any stage from the second  wife.



11. The judge had allowed the appeal in respect of the wife  and  her  four
    children but refused the appeal in respect of the seven  children  from
    the other (absent) wife.

12. Mr Singh submitted there was procedural irregularity as the  Respondent
    had failed to comply with  Rule  13  by  not  serving  bundles  on  the
    Appellants.  This was an application advanced by Mr Singh at the outset
    of the appeal hearing and considered by the judge at paragraphs  15  to
    25.  Mr Singh submitted that he was only in  receipt  of  some  of  the
    children's refusal letters but not the  adult  Appellant  and  he  only
    received that refusal letter on the day of the appeal hearing.  He  had
    none of the applications and there was no witness  statement  from  the
    Sponsor.

13. The judge had noted that in reality there was very little  evidence  in
    this case.  He established that Mr Singh had  been  instructed  by  the
    Sponsor for some considerable time and there does not appear to be  any
    coherent reason why in those circumstances he had not taken steps to be
    aware of the notice of decision or indeed obtain  a  witness  statement
    from the Sponsor.  The judge had further noted at paragraph 20 that the
    thrust of Mr Singh's  submissions  that  he  would  be  prejudiced  was
    essentially because he only learned at the date  of  hearing  that  the
    wife's refusal had in part been based on paragraphs 320(3) and (10)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

14. The judge dealt properly with this particular adjournment  request  and
    for proper reasons refused an adjournment.  The following points can be
    made upon this matter and in response to submissions raised:

      i) It is difficult to see how given the accepted length of  time  that
         Mr Singh had been instructed that he had not sought documents  from
         the Respondent that he was missing or indeed in any event  produced
         the Sponsor's witness statement.

     ii) On behalf of the minor Appellants he had obtained DNA  evidence  to
         demonstrate all eleven children were  related  to  the  Sponsor  as
         claimed indicating an ability to obtain evidence from the  Sponsor.



    iii) The absence of the refusal letter relating to the  adult  Appellant
         (Appellant's  wife)  did  not  prevent  Mr  Singh  making  detailed
         submissions upon the refusal under paragraphs 320(3) and (10)  that
         he was unaware about until the day of the hearing.   In  any  event
         given the judge allowed her appeal the matter is academic.

     iv) The judge properly did not allow service of, or take account of the
         interview record of that adult Appellant as it had not been  served
         by the Respondent.  That was a fair approach to take.

      v) In respect of the refusal letters relating  to  the  children  they
         were all identical in manner (as may be expected) and not  to  have
         all did not therefore cause any prejudice.

     vi) The judge in the absence of any written evidence from  the  Sponsor
         taken either by the Respondent or representatives  in  terms  of  a
         witness statement, heard at length oral evidence from that Sponsor.
          He also  had  available  documentary  evidence  from  the  Sponsor
         relating to his asylum claim and referred to that within  paragraph
         89 of the decision.

    vii) Although it is said that in relation to the children the only issue
         raised was under paragraph 352D(i) (relationship) that is  not  the
         case.  The  ECO  refusal  letters  all  clearly  state  "I  am  not
         satisfied that you are the child of a person granted refugee status
         in the UK or that you were part of the family unit of your  Sponsor
         at the time that your Sponsor left your home.  352D(i)(iv)."

15. The judge had heard submissions from both the Respondent and  Mr  Singh
    on the issue of pre-flight family unit  (paragraphs  31  to  43).   The
    judge did incorrectly note at paragraph 143 that the Respondent did not
    refuse the application under paragraph  352D(iv).   It  is  plain  that
    refusal had been  on  that  basis  in  respect  of  all  the  Appellant
    children.  However that error at paragraph 143 was immaterial given the
    judge had heard evidence  upon  that  matter,  submissions  upon  those
    issues and reached conclusions upon that feature of the case  based  on
    the evidence he had heard.

16. The judge had allowed the appeal of the adult wife.  He had allowed the
    appeals of her four children.  He had also accepted  the  DNA  evidence
    and answered the issue under  paragraph  352D(i)  in  relation  to  the
    remaining seven children.  The live issue therefore was  whether  those
    children had formed part of the pre-flight family unit of the  Sponsor.
    He considered the documentary and oral evidence of the Sponsor in  this
    respect with care.  In reality there was, and there was unlikely to  be
    any other evidence that would have  touched  upon  this  subject.   The
    judge considered that issue at paragraphs 143 to 184.  It is a detailed
    and clear set of findings based upon the evidence  and  submissions  he
    had  already  heard.   He  gave  clear  and  cogent   reasons   for   a
    differentiation  between  the  four  children  he  found  came   within
    paragraph 352D(iv) and those he found did not.  There is  a  logic  and
    clarity and care in those findings that  were  both  open  to  him  and
    entirely reasonable based on the evidence.  There was no  inconsistency
    or ambiguity in those findings.  He  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Sponsor's evidence was vague, inconsistent and lacked credibility  when
    he attempted to describe the situation  of  the  wife  of  those  seven
    children and their circumstances which was  the  evidence  underpinning
    the whole issue of whether they formed part of  the  pre-flight  family
    unit.

17. The judge considered his decision  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  at
    paragraphs 185 to 218 within the ambit of  Razgar.   Again  he  gave  a
    detailed and thoughtful appraisal of Article 8 of the ECHR.   He  noted
    that there was no evidence that those seven Appellants  were  not  with
    their natural mother who had been of signal importance throughout their
    life.  He noted the absence of evidence from her, any  of  the  teenage
    children and reached a conclusion that was clearly open to him.  Indeed
    a contrary decision may well, given the absence of evidence,  have  led
    to a somewhat concerning situation  of  an  attempted  removal  of  the
    children from their mother or their circumstances where  she  may  well
    have formed clearly a potential central figure in their lives.  On  the
    evidence available his decision was both reasonable and balanced.

Notice of Decision

18. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Anonymity retained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

