
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11063/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2014                                |On 5 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                              MOHAMED CHOUIKHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of France and his date of birth is 1  August
    1983.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Davey who in a determination promulgated on 26 March 2014  refused  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision dated 20 may  2013  to  refuse
    entry  following Regulations 11 and 19  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 3. The background to  this  matter  is  that  on  11  September  2012  the
    appellant was in a car driving from  France  to  the  UK.  One  of  his
    passengers was found to have  a  false  identify  document  and  on  12
    September 2012 the appellant was served with a notice refusing entry on
    the basis that he had attempted to facilitate  an  illegal  entry.  The
    appellant does not dispute that matter.

 4. It seems that the appellant continued to travel back and forth  between
    France and the UK but what is certain is  that  when  he  attempted  to
    enter the UK on 20 May 2013 he was again refused entry  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, the respondent maintaining that at the same  time  as  the
    refusal of 12 September 2012  he  had  been  made  subject  to  a  non-
    conducive ban of 12 months which remained in force until  11  September
    2013.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision and it has always  been  his  case
    that the ban had not been put in place and even if it was he was  never
    informed of it.

 6. Judge Davey found against the appellant at [12], stating  that  because
    "the Appellant accepts he did pursue to appeal the  12  September  2012
    decision, it seems unarguable that the ban was in place."

 7. In fact, the appellant's evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal   was
    that he had filled in the appeal forms  in  2012  but  decided  not  to
    pursue the appeal and there is certainly no other evidence before me to
    suggest that a substantive appeal was  actually  lodged.  In  addition,
    even had there been a valid  appeal  made  at  that  time,  the  appeal
    grounds, as accepted by Judge  Davey  at  [4]  and  [12]  did  not  say
    anything about challenging a ban but merely questioned the  refusal  of
    leave to enter.

 8. Mr Saunders also readily conceded for the respondent that  was  nothing
    in the documents before me as to the ban ever having been in place  and
    that he had been unable to find anything reliable to  suggest  that  it
    had.

 9. Where those matters were so, it was my view that the appellant's ground
    of appeal, that Judge Davey erred in finding that the ban had  been  in
    force and that the refusal of 20 May 2013 was  lawful  because  of  the
    ban, had merit and showed an error on a point  of  law  such  that  the
    decision of Judge Davey had to be set aside and re-made.

10. I proceeded to re-make the appeal. Mr Saunders did  not  argue  against
    the obvious conclusion that where there is no evidence at all from  the
    respondent other than the assertion in the refusal of 20 May 2013  that
    the ban was ever properly made against the appellant,  the  refusal  of
    leave to enter was not lawful and that the appeal should be allowed.

11. When I announced this decision  Mr  Chouikhi  asked  whether  it  would
    prevent him being taken aside for questioning when he  travels  between
    the UK and France as he often does. I indicated that I did not have any
    jurisdiction in that regard but that it was open to  him  to  raise  my
    settled conclusion that it has not been shown that  a ban was  ever  in
    force against him with immigration officers who may  seek  to  question
    him as they are entitled to by law.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside.

13. I re-make the appeal by allowing it under the EEA Regulations.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 4 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

