

                                                       [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal number:
OA/11634/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                           |
|On December 14, 2015              |              On January 4, 2016      |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MRS KARAM BIBI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mrs Price, Counsel, instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                                                  DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Pakistan, applied for a family  permit  as  a
    family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  The  respondent   refused   her
    application on September 5, 2014 on the grounds she was  not  satisfied
    the EEA national was responsible for her essential needs as required by
    Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006. The appellant appealed this decision on September 22, 2014  under
    section Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Siddiqi on  May
    6, 2015 and she dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  May
    27, 2015.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  on  June  19,
    2015 on the ground the Tribunal had erred in its approach to dependency
    and the threshold test to be applied. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on August 28, 2015  on  the
    basis it was arguable there was an error in law.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  date  I  heard
    submissions from both Mrs Price and Ms Johnstone.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 6. Mrs Price submitted the Tribunal had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    application form and written evidence in which it  was  clearly  stated
    that the appellant was and had been maintained for  a  long  time.  She
    submitted  that  evidence  of  support  had  been  enclosed  with   the
    application and the Tribunal had failed to consider these  issues  when
    assessing  whether  the  sponsor  had  provided  for  the   appellant's
    essential  needs.  She  argued  it  was  possible  the   Tribunal   had
    misunderstood the sponsor's evidence because he had been talking  about
    support over a twenty-year period as against the period leading  up  to
    the application. The appellant was seventy years of  age  and  all  her
    immediate family in Pakistan were  of  a  similar  age  and  unable  to
    support her hence her reliance  on  the  appellant  for  her  essential
    needs. She submitted there was an error in law and the decision  should
    be reversed.


 7. Ms Johnstone relied on the Rule 24 response dated September 8, 2015 and
    submitted the Tribunal had given clear  reasons  for  why  it  was  not
    satisfied she was dependant on the sponsor or that the sponsor provided
    for the appellant's essential needs. She submitted there was  no  error
    in law.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

 8. In a detailed decision the Tribunal refused  the  application.  Between
    paragraphs [25] and [32] the Tribunal set out its findings and the  law
    that applied on such applications.


 9. Mrs  Price  submitted  the  Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    application form itself and in particular the  answer  given  to  Q136.
    However, at paragraph [14] of its decision the Tribunal noted that  she
    "fully" relied on the sponsor to meet her maintenance  costs  and  that
    she lived alone and had no close relatives to whom she could  turn  to.
    The Tribunal also had regard to  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  in
    which he stated that he had provided his mother with financial  support
    since his father's death in April 1987 and that his sister did not take
    any financial responsibility for the appellant.

10. I therefore reject Mrs Price's submission that the Tribunal  failed  to
    have regard to this evidence as this was  something  the  Tribunal  had
    regard to when assessing the evidence.

11. The respondent was not satisfied with the following matters:

     a. Whether the appellant was financially dependent on the sponsor.
     b. Whether the appellant's daughter  financially  contributed  to  the
        appellant's financial circumstances.
     c. The sponsor's means  were  modest  and  the  respondent  questioned
        whether he was the only source of her income.
     d. The appellant appeared to live in a  property  owned  by  relatives
        other than the sponsor.

12. The Tribunal considered the written and oral evidence and placed weight
    on inconsistencies that arose during cross-examination of the  sponsor.
    The  Tribunal  reminded  itself  it  was  concerned  with  whether  the
    appellant was dependent on the sponsor. It then set  out  the  relevant
    case law  and  in  particular  what  was  meant  by  dependency  an  in
    particular that financial dependency meant support to meet  a  person's
    essential needs and as long as that person was  providing  support  for
    the person's  essential  needs  it  mattered  not  that  the  appellant
    received support from others.


13. The Tribunal's assessment of  the  evidence  effectively  commenced  at
    paragraph [28] of its decision. The Tribunal made  an  adverse  finding
    against the appellant because she had failed to state  how  much  money
    she received from the appellant in her application form or how much her
    expenses were. The Tribunal  noted  inconsistencies  in  the  sponsor's
    evidence surrounding the level of support and whilst  Mrs  Price  today
    submitted that the sponsor misunderstood what was being  asked  of  him
    there is nothing within the notes of hearing or the Tribunal's decision
    that there was  an  issue.  The  appellant's  former  counsel  had  not
    highlighted any issues in closing submissions and the findings made  in
    paragraph [29] were findings  on  the  facts  that  were  open  to  the
    Tribunal.

14. Mrs Price rightly pointed out that as long as the sponsor was providing
    financial support for the appellant's essential needs then  the  period
    of that support was not important. However, the Tribunal made a finding
    in paragraph [30] that although evidence of support was submitted  this
    did not mean the appellant needed this for  her  essential  needs.  The
    findings made in paragraph [30] were open to the Tribunal as it had the
    advantage of hearing the oral evidence.

15. The final inconsistency arose over the property itself. Inconsistencies
    arose with the evidence of who lived in the property and by implication
    who may provide support. Further inconsistencies  were  identified  and
    again I find the Tribunal was entitled to make the findings it did.

16. At paragraph [32] the Tribunal assessed the evidence in the  round  and
    although she accepted the submission that the appellant does  not  need
    to demonstrate she had been dependent on the sponsor for  sometime  she
    nevertheless concluded that the appellant was tasked with demonstrating
    she was financially dependent on the sponsor for  her  essential  needs
    and for reasons given throughout the decision the  Tribunal  found  she
    was not.

17. Mrs Price's submission that at seventy years of age the  appellant  was
    clearly reliant on her son as is the custom in Pakistan but that was an
    argument placed before the Tribunal  and  due  to  inconsistencies  the
    Tribunal rejected it.

18. Today's hearing is not a findings of fact hearing but it is  a  hearing
    to consider whether the Tribunal erred for the reasons set out  in  the
    grounds.

19. Mrs Price has failed to demonstrate the Tribunal applied  an  incorrect
    standard of proof and she further failed to persuade  me  the  findings
    made by the Tribunal were perverse or simply not open to it.

20. In the circumstances there is no error in law.

    DECISION


21. There  was  no  material  error  and  I  uphold  the  earlier  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.

Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
