
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11302/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|Delivered Orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     L C
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Krisnan, Trainee Solicitor of D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, born on 18 July 2005, a citizen  of
    the Philippines, against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Britton, who following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 May 2015 and in a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 2 June  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated 20
    August 2014 refusing her application for an entry clearance  to  settle
    in the United Kingdom with her mother, the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    being under paragraph 297.

2.   When the appeal came before me on 7 January 2016 my first task  was  to
    decide whether the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed
    an error or errors on a point  of  law  such  as  may  have  materially
    affected the outcome of the appeal.

3.   At the outset of  the  hearing  Mr  Walker  for  the  Respondent,  most
    helpfully and in my view most realistically and fairly  conceded,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred in law.

4.   That concession did not come as a surprise to me having read with  care
    the Judge's determination.  It would be  as  well  notwithstanding  the
    Respondent's concession to set out below what the Judge had to  say  in
    terms of the Appellant's immigration appeal in which at paragraph 22 he
    was clear that he had taken into  consideration  all  of  the  evidence
    before him and the guidance of the Tribunal in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 that stated in the head
    note:

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing   because   he/she   had    abandoned    or    abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'."

5.   Over paragraphs 23 and 24  the  Judge  made  the  following  clear  and
    unequivocal findings:

         "I found the Sponsor to be a credible witness.  I accept  that  she
         came to this country and visited the Philippines on  the  dates  in
         the schedule.  She is making frequent visits.  She originally  came
         to this country in 2001 and she fell pregnant  during  one  of  her
         visits to the Philippines.  The Appellant was born in 2005.  It  is
         understandable that the Appellant's mother did not find it possible
         to return to the United Kingdom to continue to work  full-time  and
         look after the Appellant.  The Appellant has been living  with  her
         maternal grandparents since birth and it would seem  that  she  has
         been  well  looked  after  during  that  period.   I   accept   the
         Appellant's mother's evidence that she has sent money on a  regular
         basis to her parents for  the  Appellant.   I  further  accept  the
         evidence  of  how  the  Appellant's  mother  and  father  gradually
         separated because she was in the United Kingdom and he was  in  the
         navy.  It was obvious that he did not want to come and live in  the
         United Kingdom as he enjoyed his work in the navy.   Now  he  is  a
         colonel.   He  has  written  letters  giving  his  consent  to  the
         Appellant coming to live with her mother in the United Kingdom.   I
         find  that  it  was  a  genuine  consent  by  the  father.   He  is
         considering the best interests of the Appellant.  I hope  that  the
         Appellant will remain in contact with her father and that would  be
         in her best interest, even though she would be joining  her  mother
         in this country."

6.   I pause there because the last sentence  "I  hope  that  the  Appellant
    will remain in contact with her father and that would be  in  her  best
    interest, even though she would be joining her mother in this  country"
    could but only mean that for the reasons he had given thus far, he  had
    concluded that the appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

7.   However, to reinforce that conclusion the Judge continued at  paragraph
    24 as follows:

         "24. I find that the Appellant's mother has had continuing  control
             and direction over the Appellant's upbringing,  and  has  been
             consulted on the major issues in relation  to  her  upbringing
             although the grandparents have had the day-to-day  control  of
             the Appellant.  Further I accept that  the  Sponsor's  parents
             are not elderly but are getting older and are  having  medical
             problems.  Although at this point in time it is not such  that
             they would not be able to look after the Appellant,  within  a
             short period of time that may well be the position.   Further,
             the Appellant's mother states that she would like her  to  get
             into school in this country as soon as possible  so  that  she
             can get used to the British system of education  and  I  think
             that is a valid reason for her coming as  soon  as  possible."
             (Emphasis added).

8.   Indeed in conceding the appeal, Mr Walker stated  that  the  Judge  had
    made clear findings that the Appellant would be joining her mother  and
    as  indeed  the  opening  sentence  of  paragraph  24  by  any  reading
    demonstrated,  the  Judge  had  found  that   the   mother   had   sole
    responsibility for the  child  and  met  the  relevant  criteria  under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

9.   Mr Walker agreed that it followed that there was no need for the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to then proceed to consider the Appellant's  appeal
    in the alternative under Article 8 of the ECHR, having for all  intents
    and purposes, found that the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rule.

10.  Indeed in deciding that he did have to "consider what is  in  the  best
    interests of the Appellant" the Judge expressed concern as to who would
    look after the Appellant  when  her  mother  was  at  work  and  whilst
    appreciating that the Appellant's  mother  was  "anxious  to  have  her
    daughter living with her", he continued that there had to be  "a  clear
    foundation for the care of the Appellant and I am not  satisfied  there
    is at present".  Indeed in consequence, he concluded that the Appellant
    failed under Article 8 and dismissed the appeal.

11.  I find that it was not for the Judge to determine whether the  mother's
    own arrangements to look after the child were adequate.  That  was  not
    his function.   He  had  clearly  found  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule and Article 8 has nothing
    to do with the personal arrangements that the  Sponsor  makes  to  look
    after her child, although one  would  expect  that  a  mother  in  such
    circumstances, would of course make appropriate arrangements  in  terms
    of her present working lifestyle in order to ensure that her child upon
    joining her would be looked after properly.

12.  In view of Mr  Walker's  sensible  concession  I  did  not  trouble  Mr
    Krisnan to address me.

13.  For the reasons I have given above, I have concluded that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be set aside and that  a  fresh
    decision should be made for like reason allowing this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be  set
aside.

I make a fresh decision to allow this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

