
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/11427/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2014                      |On 8 September 2014       |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr KULDEEP SINGH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Hayre, Counsel
      (instructed by Bespoke Solicitors)







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Molloy  on  15  July  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Britton
           who had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Entry
           Clearance  Officer,  New  Delhi's   decision   to   refuse   his
           application for entry clearance as a post  flight  spouse  under
           paragraph 319L of the Immigration Rules. The  determination  was
           promulgated on 6 May 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan, born on  1  January
           1984.  His sponsor  is  also  of  Afghan  nationality.  She  has
           humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  His  application
           was refused in summary because his adverse  immigration  history
           indicated that the marriage was simply being used as a means  to
           gain re-entry to the United Kingdom,  from  which  he  had  been
           recently removed at public expense.  It was  not  accepted  that
           the Respondent intended to live with  his  sponsor  permanently.
           Nor was it accepted that the Respondent and  the  sponsor  would
           able to maintain and accommodate themselves  adequately  without
           recourse to public funds.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had not attached  sufficient  weight  to
           the Respondent's adverse immigration history.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Tufan for the  Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  on  which
           permission to appeal had been granted.  The real issue  was  the
           reasoning of the judge's ultimate decision in his determination.
            Most of the determination consisted merely of a summary of  the
           evidence.  There was  no  real  analysis  in  the  three  or  so
           paragraphs in which the judge's findings were set  out,  at  the
           end of the determination.  Even those findings were inadequately
           explained, in that the judge had stated that he had doubts as to
           the Respondent's intentions, but did not say what they were  and
           how those doubts had been resolved in  the  judge's  mind.   The
           determination should be set aside and the decision remade.


      6.    Mrs Hayre for the  Respondent  submitted  in  summary  that  the
           findings which the judge had made were open to him.   There  had
           been some commentary on  the  evidence  in  the  course  of  the
           determination.  Although less than ideal, the determination  was
           adequate  and  should  stand  unchanged.    There  had  been  an
           abundance of evidence to show that the  marriage  was  genuinely
           arranged for its own sake and not simply as a means of  enabling
           the Respondent to return to the United Kingdom.




      Material error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal stated at the conclusion  of  submissions  that  it
           found material errors of law in the determination, such that  it
           had to be set aside and remade.  The  tribunal  agreed  with  Mr
           Tufan that the reasoning was wholly inadequate.   The  Appellant
           was not in a position to say why the appeal  had  been  allowed,
           nor what weight had  been  given  to  the  Respondent's  adverse
           immigration history.


      8.    The appeal was reheard immediately, by way of submissions.




      The rehearing


      9.    For this section of the determination, as this is the  rehearing
           of the Appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's
           decision, the tribunal  will  refer  to  the  parties  by  their
           original  designations  in  the  interests  of   clarity.    The
           Appellant's bundle of documents was available and reference will
           be made to it as necessary.  The burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
           Appellant to the  ordinary  civil  standard.   The  tribunal  is
           confined to examining the evidence as it stood at  the  date  of
           the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, subject to DR  (Morocco)
           [2005] UKAIT 00038.


      10.   Mr Tufan for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) was content
           to  accept  that  the  judge  had  made  findings   which   were
           sustainable in respect of maintenance and accommodation.   Those
           findings did not require to be  reopened.   Otherwise  Mr  Tufan
           relied  on  the  notice  of  refusal  and  the  Entry  Clearance
           Manager's review.  The issue  was  the  Appellant's  immigration
           history and  how  that  sat  with  his  intentions  towards  his
           marriage to the sponsor. The evidence pointed one  way,  however
           devoted to her husband the sponsor might feel and  however  much
           her own intention was to live with him.  The  appeal  should  be
           dismissed.


      11.   Mrs Hayre for the Appellant accordingly confined her submissions
           to the live issue of  intention.   Mrs  Hayre  referred  to  the
           Appellant's  bundle,  which  contained  his  witness   statement
           declaring his intention. This was not a love match,  but  rather
           an arranged, traditional marriage in which the families of  both
           bride and groom had been closely involved.  That could  be  seen
           from the letter in the Appellant's  bundle  from  the  sponsor's
           grandmother, who supported the match and  had  later  given  her
           blessing to the Appellant, as a  photograph  produced  from  the
           wedding recorded.  The album of wedding photographs showed  that
           both families had been present in  significant  numbers  at  the
           wedding.  This was not an event which had  been  staged,  but  a
           genuine marriage.


      12.   The Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  illegally  but  he
           had been removed.  He might have faced  a  ban  under  paragraph
           320(11) of the Immigration Rules but that would not apply  under
           paragraph 320(7C).  He had no criminal record and there were  no
           "aggravating factors" as explained in Chapter 26.1.8 of the IDS,
           e.g., absconding.  The Appellant had set out his adverse history
           at the time of his entry clearance  application.   The  evidence
           before the tribunal proved that both parties had  the  requisite
           intention and that paragraph 319L of the Immigration  Rules  was
           satisfied.  The appeal should be allowed.


      13.   Both advocates had helpfully narrowed the issues, to the  extent
           that only the Appellant's intention to live permanently with his
           sponsor remained live for  determination.   Although  Mrs  Hayre
           raised  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  her
           submissions, that discretionary ground of refusal had  not  been
           raised by either  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  or  the  Entry
           Clearance Manager.  While the  Appellant's  adverse  immigration
           history might  well  be  thought  to  have  justified  paragraph
           320(11) as aground of refusal, that was not done.  It would have
           to have been raised  in  express  terms.   It  is  not  for  the
           tribunal to take such discretionary points of its own motion, as
           (to state the obvious) the tribunal is not the primary  decision
           maker.  Applying RM (Kwok On  Tong:   HC  395  para  320)  India
           [2006] UKAIT 00039,  the  tribunal  is  only  concerned  to  see
           whether all parts of the relevant substantive  immigration  rule
           is met.


      14.   Intention is never easy to establish.  There  are  a  number  of
           relevant factors which arise in the  present  appeal.   For  the
           moment, the tribunal will disregard the Appellant's  immigration
           history.  The Appellant and sponsor are of  the  same  religion,
           which is a minority religion in global terms.  They are  of  the
           same nationality, and are  very  close  in  age.   They  may  be
           inferred to have a similar background, which relevantly includes
           the well  known  history  of  discrimination  against  Sikhs  in
           Afghanistan under  the  Taliban  regime  in  particular.   Their
           marriage  was  arranged  in  accordance  with   their   cultural
           traditions, as the Appellant explained at  paragraph  6  of  his
           witness statement.  Their wedding was celebrated  in  accordance
           with custom, elaborately, with family members from both sides as
           guests.  The Appellant therefore  went  through  a  very  public
           ceremony of commitment to the sponsor. He would be  expected  by
           both families to honour his commitment, and encouraged to do so.
            Absent the Appellant's adverse immigration history, there could
           only be one rational conclusion drawn from that evidence,  i.e.,
           that the Appellant intends to live with his sponsor  permanently
           as her spouse.


      15.   What then is the  proper  weight  to  give  to  the  Appellant's
           adverse immigration history?  Paragraph 320(11) was not  raised,
           as noted above.  The Appellant's adverse history shows a  strong
           wish  to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That  is  in  itself
           reasonable,  as  some  parts  of  the  dwindling   Afghan   Sikh
           population have made their way to the United Kingdom in the past
           decade.  Some have been granted asylum, while  others  like  the
           sponsor have been granted humanitarian  protection.    There  is
           thus a genuine United Kingdom connection.  There is no reason in
           principle why the Appellant's wish to  marry  a  co  religionist
           approved  by  his  family  should  not  coincide  with  his  own
           preference to live in the United Kingdom, given that  there  are
           serious doubts  as  to  the  viability  of  his  homeland.   The
           tribunal finds that  evidence  of  the  genuine  nature  of  the
           marriage and the circumstances in  which  it  was  arranged  are
           sufficient to overcome the adverse history.  It is important  to
           underline that this finding in no way condones nor  excuses  the
           Appellant's past misconduct and the waste  of  public  time  and
           resources which he has caused.


      16.   The tribunal accordingly finds that the  Appellant's  intentions
           are  genuine.   He  satisfies   paragraph   319L(iii)   of   the
           Immigration Rules.  His appeal is allowed.






      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of a  material
      error on a point of law.  It is set aside and remade as follows:

      The original Appellant's appeal is allowed

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








      TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was allowed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell



















































































































































































































































































































