
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA114522014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 May 2016                               |On 20 June 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                       Ms THANKAMMA JOHN CHITALAPULLY
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE, CHENNAI



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Taylor-Gee, Counsel instructed by Inayat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth dated 12  April
    2016.  The appeal relates to a decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Peter-John White promulgated  on  28  September  2015.  The  Judge  had
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    refusing entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal seeking  permission  to  appeal  had
    contended that the Judge's decision was flawed because:

   1) The Judge failed to make any findings as to whether an elderly  person
      with medical complications would be refused admission to a care home.
   2) A strong hostility to being admitted to a care home is highly relevant
      in considering whether the Appellant should succeed under  the  Rules.
      No elderly person can be required to be admitted to a care home.  This
      would amount to detention or false imprisonment;
   3) Sections 5 and 9 of the Equality Act  2010  are  cited  and  that  the
      Immigration Rules are inconsistent with primary legislation by failing
      to provide autonomy, dignity, freedom of choice or respect for private
      life of the elderly;
   4) At paragraph 29 the Judge was  equivocal  about  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant can lead an independent life; and
   5) The Judge failed to consider whether the refusal or admission  of  the
      Appellant to the United Kingdom breached Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.

3.    At the hearing before me Ms Taylor-Gee made  oral  submissions  before
    me and also relied on written submissions dated 25 May 2016. In summary
    she  submitted  that  in  respect  of  Ground  One  which  related  the
    availability of care in India the letter from the  care  home  made  it
    clear that as the Appellant had no relatives in India  they  would  not
    admit the Appellant.


4.    In relation to ground two, it was submitted  that  the  Appellant  was
    hostile to going to a care home. The  Judge  did  comment  on  this  in
    respect of her Article 8 rights. It was a merits consideration.  If  it
    was a child and whether considering putting the child into an orphanage
    there would be very difficult considerations. The wishes  and  feelings
    of the Appellant need to be taken into  account.  Therefore  there  are
    very different considerations in this case. The Appellant is  of  sound
    mind. You could not force a person into a care home. There is  a  right
    to liberty. There was no consideration of this and therefore it was  an
    error of law. There was reliance on an  unreported  case  of  Osman.  A
    decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb promulgated on 15 November 2013.



5.    In respect of Ground 3 which related to arguments in  respect  of  the
    Equality Act, Ms Taylor-Gee said she would not make no submissions.

6.    The submissions in respect of Ground 4 was that the  Judge  needed  to
    have made adequate findings in  respect  of  the  long  term  care.  Dr
    Kumar's report was to be noted. The Judge said he accepted all  of  the
    evidence but then said that he did not have the evidence.

7.    Finally it was submitted that there needed to be adequate  reasons  in
    respect of Article 8. The conclusion was not a rational conclusion. The
    issue was proportionality and not interference. It was  submitted  what
    about the Article 8 rights of the sponsor who has lived here for some 8
    years and the Appellant has a grandchild? The error  was  material  and
    therefore the decision was unsafe.

8.    Mr Duffy submitted that the Judge's decision cannot  be  in  error  in
    respect of the Rules, but even it is, it cannot be material because  of
    the requirements of Appendix FM.  There needed to independent  evidence
    that everyday tasks could not be performed. Even if that is wrong,  why
    can there not be practical help from the UK? A  letter  from  a  single
    care home does not meet  that  requirement.  There  was  no  sufficient
    evidence before the Judge.

9.    The fact that the Appellant does not want to go to a  care  home  does
    not mean that there is a flagrant denial of Article 8 rights in  an  EM
    (Lebanon) sense.

10.    In terms of Article 8, once the Immigration Rules aspect  fails  then
    it weighs against the Appellant.  Why  can  the  evidence  not  be  put
    together it was submitted. It is not disproportionate to make the right
    application.

11.   In reply Ms Taylor-Gee said that at page 109 the letter did  say  that
    the Appellant cannot perform everyday tasks. The  evidence  was  there.
    There was power for the Entry Clearance Manager to refer the  Appellant
    for a medical examiner. The  care  for  the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    available. Paragraph 2.33 of the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    was referred to.  Submissions were also made in respect of Article 8.

12.   I had reserved my decision.

13.    Appendix FM in respect of the adult dependent relative route  is  not
    simply a matter of whether the British sponsor would prefer her  mother
    to be living with her here in the United  Kingdom.  Of  course  from  a
    human point of view the Sponsor is to be commended for wishing to  look
    after  her  mother,  but  the  Rules  require  much  more  than   that.
    Similarly, some of the grounds relating to the Equality Act  and  other
    aspects which seek to apply English statutes to what ought to happen in
    India are far off the mark in my judgment. I do not wish it to be  seen
    that the Sponsor is being punished for wishing to work  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to have her mother join her here. However choices have been
    made and have to be made. There is  little  evidence  why  the  Sponsor
    cannot return to India to live with her mother. I note of  course  that
    the Sponsor is British, but that is a relatively recent event  compared
    with how long she was not British and not living in the United Kingdom.
    I accept and know well the cultural aspect of such care. That  cultural
    aspect does not mean that the care has to be provided  by  the  Sponsor
    here in the UK. It can be in India.

14.   Similarly, as I indicated during the hearing, I simply  cannot  accept
    that there are no suitable care homes in India for older persons unless
    they have relatives living nearby who can assist them.  Indeed  such  a
    state of affairs does not make sense to me.  As  I  rhetorically  asked
    during the hearing, what of the many elderly people in  India  who  can
    afford care homes but who have no surviving relatives? Is there  really
    no care home for them? There obviously must be.

15.    The care home which had provided the letter at page 48 of the  bundle
    stating that they had a policy requiring a relative to be available  is
    one thing, but before Appendix FM E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5 could be  met  the
    letter had to go much further and there had to be good evidence to show
    that there was 'no' care home which could provide the required level of
    care for the Appellant in India. In my judgment  the  Judge  was  quite
    right to conclude that the single, short letter from the care home  was
    not sufficient.

16.   In the end what concerns me about the case is the Judge's decision  at
    paragraph 30 when he said that he was not satisfied about  whether  the
    Appellant requires long term care to perform  everyday  tasks.  It  was
    submitted that this was contradictory to other parts of the decision.

17.   At paragraph 22 the Judge stated he noted  that  the  medical  reports
    (at pages 109 to 111 of the bundle) refer to  long-term  personal  care
    being required for everyday tasks, this report was not  entirely  clear
    about the extent, duration or causation of the condition.

18.    The  medical  report  is  not  particularly  detailed.  The   shorter
    handwritten medical notes emphasise that the Appellant is on her own in
    India. On the other hand the report does say that the  Appellant  needs
    help with her day-to-day activities and that she has taken overdoes  of
    her medication.

19.    The  Judge  was  appropriately  sympathetic  to  the  plight  of  the
    Appellant and her daughter. I can see how some of  the  more  elaborate
    submissions and grounds put before the Judge probably side-tracked  him
    from the core assessment he was undertaking.  Overall  however,  in  my
    judgement there is a material error of law in respect of the assessment
    of the evidence. The medical evidence,  albeit  limited,  did  indicate
    that the Appellant required assistance with everyday tasks.

20.   There is also the Appellant's reluctance to  agree  to  going  into  a
    care home. For the reasons I have referred to above,  it  may  well  be
    that more work needed to be done by the Sponsor to see if  there  is  a
    suitable care home which  would  accept  the  Appellant  without  close
    relatives living close by and indeed a suitable  care  home  which  the
    Appellant might have been happy to live in.

21    With some hesitation, I have concluded that there is an error  of  law
    in  the  Judge's  decision  because  of  the  apparently  contradictory
    findings and because of the application of those findings.

22.   The matter will therefore require further consideration. That is  best
    performed at the First-tier Tribunal. None of  the  findings  from  the
    current decision shall stand.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside.

The matter is remitted for hearing to the First-tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 1 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


