
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11991/2013
     OA/11990/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th October 2014                            |On 20th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                om jyu gurung
                               dichhya gurung
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Jesurum of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A J Parker promulgated  on  14th  July
    2014.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3.  The  Claimants,  born  29th  December  1990  and  12th  October   1989
    respectively, are citizens of Nepal and are brother and  sister.   They
    applied for entry clearance to enable them  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom with their parents and younger brother.  The Claimants'  father
    had served in the brigade of Ghurkhas.

 4. The applications were made outside the Immigration Rules and refused on
    1st May 2013.  The ECO considered the applications under Appendix FM of
    the  Immigration  Rules,  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  for
    dependants over the age of 18 of foreign and commonwealth and other  HM
    Forces' members, and with reference to Article 8 of the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The Claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, accepting that their
    applications could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, but relying
    upon Article 8.

 6. Judge Parker heard evidence from the Claimants' parents and sibling and
    took  into  account  the  historic  injustice  in  Ghurkha  cases,  and
    dismissed the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  them
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 7. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    brief summary it was contended that Judge Parker had  made  a  material
    misdirection of law and had failed to give adequate reasons as  to  why
    the appeals should be allowed under Article 8 outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Reliance was placed upon MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC).   It  was
    contended that Judge Parker had failed to provide adequate reasons  why
    the Claimants' circumstances were either compelling or  exceptional  so
    as to mean that the appeal should be allowed  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under Article 8.

 8. It was also contended that Judge Parker had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding family life existed between the adult Claimants and
    their adult parents, and reliance was placed upon Kugathas [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31.  It was also submitted that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Claimants had suffered  an  "historical  injustice"  as  there  was  no
    evidence that their father had intended to settle in the United Kingdom
    prior to them attaining their majority.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  T
    R P Hollingworth in the following terms:

    1.   The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Parker)  who,  in  a  determination
         promulgated on 25th August 2014, allowed  the  Appellants'  appeals
         against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant leave to enter
         the UK as dependant relatives.

    2.   The appeal was allowed purely on Article 8 grounds.

    3.   Some of the paragraphs from 3 onwards  are  more  compelling  than
         others, but it is arguable the 'historic injustice' test  may  have
         been inappropriately applied.

    4.   All the grounds are arguable.

10. Following the grant of permission directions  were  issued  that  there
    should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that the decision
    should be set aside.  The Appellants lodged a response pursuant to rule
    24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  contending
    that the First-tier Tribunal determination disclosed no material  error
    of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

11. I made the parties aware that I did not have on the Tribunal file,  the
    Appellants' complete bundle of documents.  I only had pages  1-17,  25-
    27, and 70-112.  In addition  the  rule  24  response  referred  to  an
    Authorities bundle which was not on file, and there was also  reference
    to a supplementary bundle which was not on file.

12. I  was  provided  with  the  Authorities  bundle  and  a  copy  of  the
    supplementary  bundle.   I  was  also  provided  with  a  copy  of  the
    Claimants' skeleton argument that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr  Jesurum  indicated  he  was  satisfied  that  I  now  had  all  the
    documentation necessary to consider the error of law issue.

Submissions

13. Both representatives addressed me at some length.  I have recorded  all
    the oral submissions in my Record of Proceedings and will not reiterate
    them in full here.

14. In summary Mr Parkinson relied upon the grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal and argued that the  determination
    lacked adequate reasoning as to why family  life  existed  between  the
    Claimants and their parents, taking into account  that  in  the  second
    Claimant's case there had been a previous determination  by  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wilson,  promulgated  on  16th  August
    2010, in which Judge Wilson found that family life did not  exist.   Mr
    Parkinson submitted that Judge Parker had not properly  considered  the
    principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and had not given  adequate
    reasons as to why family life existed.

15. In relation to the point that the judge had not given adequate  reasons
    for finding the appeal should be allowed under Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, Mr  Parkinson  relied  upon  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.

16. Mr Jesurum relied upon the  rule  24  response  and  in  brief  summary
    contended that Judge Parker had correctly  considered  Devaseelan,  and
    was entitled to depart from the  finding  made  by  Judge  Wilson  that
    family life did not exist.  I was asked to note the evidence  given  by
    the  Claimants'  parents  and  sibling  before  Judge  Parker  was  not
    contested and paragraph 11 of  the  determination  confirmed  that  the
    witnesses were not cross-examined "as the factual aspects of  the  case
    were not in dispute."  I was asked to note that case  law  had  evolved
    since the previous determination, and the decision in  Ghising  (family
    life - adults - Ghurka policy) Nepal [2012]  UKUT  160  indicated  that
    Kugathas had previously been too restrictively interpreted.

17. Mr Jesurum argued that the judge had been entitled on  the  uncontested
    evidence to find that  family  life  existed,  and  was  bound  by  the
    authority  of  higher  courts,  to  consider  Article  8  outside   the
    Immigration Rules and the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should stand.

18. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I firstly consider Devaseelan which was not specifically referred to in
    the Grounds of Appeal but which was referred to by Mr Parkinson without
    objection from Mr Jesurum.  It is, in my view,  relevant  the  findings
    made by Judge Parker in relation to family life.

20. Judge Parker did  not  err  in  his  consideration  of  Devaseelan  and
    correctly identified in paragraph 39 that there  had  been  a  previous
    appeal in relation to  the  second  Claimant,  and  that  the  previous
    determination, in relation to the second Claimant was a starting point.
     The judge recorded that he had heard  uncontested  evidence  from  the
    Claimants' brother Birjyo which was not before Judge Wilson,  and  that
    he had the benefit of more recent authorities  which  were  not  before
    Judge Wilson.

21. One of those authorities is Ghising [2012]  which  considered  Kugathas
    and accepted in paragraph 56 that the judgment  in  Kugathas  had  been
    interpreted too restrictively in the past, and ought to be read in  the
    light of subsequent decisions of the domestic  and  Strasbourg  courts.
    The  Tribunal  referred  to  authorities  in  paragraphs  57-59   which
    indicated that family life may continue between a parent and child even
    after the child had attained his or her majority.  Reference  was  also
    made in paragraph 61 to AA v United Kingdom (application  No  8000/08),
    in which it was found the significant factor will be whether or not the
    adult child had founded a family of his own.

22. I therefore do not accept that Judge Parker erred in his  consideration
    of the Devaseelan principles.

23. In relation to the finding that family life existed I have to  consider
    whether adequate reasons have  been  given.   There  are  three  recent
    decisions made by the Upper Tribunal on this point, the first  in  time
    being Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)
    and I set out below the first paragraph of the head note;

    (1)  Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

24. The second decision in time is  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) the head note of which is set out below;

    (1)  It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the reasons
         for a Tribunal's decision.
    (2)  If a Tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons.  A bare statement that a witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

25. The third decision is on Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014]  UKUT
    341 (IAC) the head note of which is set out below;

    It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.   This
    leads to judgments becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It  is,  however,  necessary
    for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost.

26. It is important  to  note  that  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this appeal was unchallenged and therefore accepted.  Judge
    Parker considered the relevant case law and made reference to  this  in
    paragraph 31 of his determination, making specific reference to Ghising
    [2012] at paragraphs 48-60 noting that  these  paragraphs  contained  a
    review of how adult children should be treated for Article 8  purposes,
    and noting that the approach of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising had  been
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 46 of R  (Gurung)  v  SSHD
    [2013] 1  WLR.   The  judge  went  on  in  paragraph  32  to  refer  to
    [Netherlands 2003], which is a reference to Sen  v  Netherlands  [2003]
    EHRR 7 and AA v The United  Kingdom,  both  of  which  authorities  are
    relevant in considering family life involving adult children.

27.  In  paragraph  33  Judge  Parker  briefly  summarised  the  undisputed
    evidence, and in my view that undisputed evidence  which  is  contained
    within  witness  statements  and  oral  evidence,  was  sufficient   to
    establish  that  family  life  was  established   between   the   adult
    Appellants, and their parents and brother in the  United  Kingdom.   As
    was stated in Ghising [2012] a review of  the  jurisprudence  discloses
    that there is no general proposition that  Article  8  would  never  be
    engaged when the family it is sought  to  establish  is  between  adult
    siblings living together.  Rather than applying  a  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children, each case  should  be  analysed  on  its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists within  the  meaning
    of Article 8(1) and each case is fact sensitive.

28. Applying the authorities in relation to adequacy of  reasons,  and  the
    authorities in relation to family life, and taking  into  account  that
    evidence before Judge Parker was unchallenged, I conclude that although
    the reasoning given is not comprehensive, it is adequate and a  reading
    of the determination discloses why the judge  found  that  family  life
    existed between the Claimants and their  parents  and  sibling  in  the
    United Kingdom.

29. Turning to the consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules
    my view is that where the provisions in the  Immigration  Rules  permit
    consideration of exceptional circumstances and other factors, then  the
    Immigration Rules can be regarded as being a complete  code  and  there
    will usually be no need  to  consider  Article  8  directly.   This  is
    because the same outcome would  derive  from  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules as under Article  8.   Where  the  Immigration  Rules
    contain no such provisions, then they  are  not  a  complete  code  and
    Article 8 will need to be considered directly.

30. The Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 considered  the  decision
    in Nagre.  It stated in paragraph 129;

    Nagre does not add anything to the debate, save for the statement  that
    if a particular person is outside the rules then he has to demonstrate,
    as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has  an
    arguable case that there may be good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the rules.  I cannot see much utility in  imposing  this
    further, intermediary, test.  If the applicant cannot satisfy the rule,
    then there either is or there is not a further Article 8  claim.   That
    will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker.

31. I set out below paragraph 135 of MM which gives further guidance;

    135. Where the relevant group of IRs (Immigration  Rules),  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the  case  of  "foreign  criminals"
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law.

32. Judge Parker had to take into account the historic  injustice  and  did
    so, finding in paragraph 37 of  his  determination  that  the  historic
    injustice is causative.  This was not considered under the  Immigration
    Rules.  In my view, applying the guidance given in MM, I conclude  that
    the judge did not err in law  in  considering  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and in paragraphs 40 and 41 of the  determination  is
    referring to paragraph 60 of Ghising and Others  [2013]  UKUT  567  and
    correctly noted that in this case the Respondent  could  not  point  to
    matters over and above  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
    immigration policy such as a bad immigration  history  and/or  criminal
    behaviour.  The final sentence in paragraph 60 reads as follows;

    But, if the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
    described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41 of  Gurung,  then  the
    weight to be given to the historic injustice will  normally  require  a
    decision in the Appellant's favour.

33. Therefore, although the decision of Judge Parker may  be  described  as
    generous, as pointed out in Mr Jesurum's skeleton argument at paragraph
    11 Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 is authority  stating  that  an
    unusually generous view of  the  facts  of  a  case  in  an  Article  8
    determination is not grounds for finding an error of law.

34. I am satisfied that although the reasons given in  the  findings  could
    have been more  comprehensive,  they  are  adequate,  and  reading  the
    determination as a whole discloses why findings were made.  I  conclude
    that the determination discloses no material error of law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.
The appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 13th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal in  favour  of  the  Claimants
stands.






Signed                              Date 13th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


