
IAC-fH-ar-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/11238/2013
     oa/11254/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10 April 2015                              |On 13 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                 kiran limbu
                               shreejana limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C M Fielden, Counsel, instructed by Sam,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the  appellants,  citizens  of  Nepal,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 3  May  2013  refusing  to  grant  them  entry
    clearance as adult dependent relatives of their father,  an  ex-Ghurkha
    soldier, now settled in the UK.   Permission to appeal was  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal but granted by the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.   The appellants are brother and sister born on  4  October  1990  and  7
    September 1987 respectively.  Their father, who it  was  accepted  gave
    exemplary service when in the Brigade of Ghurkhas, was  issued  with  a
    settlement visa in New Delhi on 17 March 2008.  He arrived in the UK on
    9 March 2010 and was  joined  by  his  wife,  the  mother  of  the  two
    appellants, on 14 August 2011.

3.   The appellants  subsequently  applied  for  settlement  but  they  were
    unable to meet the requirements of the Rules  and  were  refused  under
    paragraph  EC-DR1.1(d)  of  Appendix  FM.   They  also  relied  on  the
    respondent's policy for dependants over the age of 18  of  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth and other HM Forces Members as set out in IDI Chapter  15,
    Section 28.13.2 but the respondent was not satisfied  that  there  were
    any exceptional circumstances for either appellant. The application was
    then considered under article 8 but  the  respondent's  view  was  that
    article 8 was not engaged.  Both appellants were adults and it was  not
    shown that there were more than the normal emotional  ties  with  their
    parents.   Even  if  the  article  was   engaged,   the   refusal   was
    proportionate in the exercise of immigration  control.   Following  the
    service of the notice of appeal the applications were reviewed but  the
    decision was maintained.

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellants'  father
    gave evidence, confirming that he had retired from the Ghurkhas in 1994
    and had then lived in Malaysia  and  in  his  home  village  after  his
    discharge, subsequently serving in Iraq in 2007 and 2008.   He  had  no
    other family in Nepal apart from his two children.  His  wife's  family
    lived in Nepal near the Himalayas.  They had sold the  family  home  in
    2003.  The appellants had been living independently since December 2012
    but he paid everything for their upkeep.  His daughter was working in a
    pharmacy and  his son was studying IT.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge set out his findings in [34] -  [40]  of  his  decision.   He
    commented that one appellant was aged 25 at the date of refusal and her
    brother 22.  They were both adults, not just over the  age  of  18  but
    significantly so.  They were both in good health and neither complained
    of  any  disability  or  mental  condition.   They  lived  together  in
    accommodation in Nepal which both stated lacked hot  water,  but  there
    was no other evidence of hardship in their living conditions.  He found
    that the applications had been properly considered under the policy for
    dependants over the age of 18 which required exceptional  circumstances
    to be demonstrated.  The judge found that it was difficult to find  any
    such exceptional circumstances in relation to the appellants.   It  was
    accepted that the sponsor had  given  exemplary  service  when  in  the
    Brigade of Ghurkhas but the real issue was whether there existed in the
    narrative  of  the  appellants'  cases  any  circumstances  which  were
    considered exceptional to bring them within the relevant IDI.

6.   He commented that the appellants had not been  able  to  show  anything
    beyond a normal relationship between themselves and their parents.   It
    was accepted that the sponsor may have provided for the two  appellants
    and sent money  to  enable  them  to  handle  their  day-to-day  living
    expenses but this was neither unexpected  nor  unusual  for  a  student
    until such time as the children were able to  obtain  paid  employment.
    He found that the appeals had been properly refused under the  relevant
    provisions of Appendix FM  and then went on to consider Article 8.   He
    set out his findings as follows in [40]:

         "In reaching my conclusion that it would be proportionate to refuse
         entry I have borne in mind that there is  no  evidence  to  suggest
         that at the conclusion of their respective studies in Nepal  either
         of the children will be unable to obtain employment.  Life,  it  is
         accepted, it harder in Nepal than in UK but no  evidence  has  been
         presented to suggest that securing jobs in their  chosen  fields  -
         pharmacy and IT - is not possible. Even if there is family life  it
         has continued since the parents came to the  UK  and  it  is  quite
         reasonable to expect such family life to  continue  through  modern
         means of communication. I bear in mind SG (Nepal)  UKUT  00265  and
         note that in this case the parents chose to live in the UK  instead
         of remaining with their family in Nepal. It is also the  case  that
         when the sponsor and his wife came to the UK they were  aware  that
         neither of the children automatically qualified for settlement.   I
         find that the decision to refuse  entry  is  proportionate  to  the
         legitimate end of pursuing a fair immigration policy."

Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued  that  the  judge  did  not  deal
    adequately with the family life existing between the appellants and the
    members of the family residing in the UK.  The judge had failed, so  it
    is argued, to engage with the evidence of  continued  family  life  and
    erred in  his  conclusion  that  the  appellants  had  been  living  an
    independent life.   The  judge's  assessment  failed  to  consider  the
    family as a whole or make a lawful article 8(1) assessment.   Secondly,
    it is argued that the judge erred by failing to refer to Gurung  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8 and failed to take  into  account  the  up-to-date  approach
    concerning the historical wrong set out in that appeal. Thirdly, it  is
    argued that the judge appeared to conflate the  assessment  of  article
    8(1)  and  the  proportionality  exercise  involved  pursuant  to   the
    historical wrong by distinguishing the facts of the case that fell  for
    consideration under article 8(1) and those elements under article 8(2),
    notwithstanding  the  fact  that  SG  (Nepal)  referred  to  polygamous
    marriages.

8.   Ms Fielden  crystallised her submissions  into  an  argument  that  the
    judge had failed to take proper account  of  the  emotional  dependency
    between the appellants and their parents which, she argued, should have
    been more fully explored.  She accepted that an  article  8  assessment
    was very fact sensitive and needed to  be  applied  to  the  individual
    circumstances of each appellant.   The fact that they  could   keep  in
    contact depended on the extent and quality  of  the  communication  and
    that was not in itself determinative.  She  submitted  that  the  judge
    appeared to have been  considering the policy in force in  2009  rather
    than the later policy in 2010.  She did not wish to  make  any  further
    submissions under ground 3, accepting that it was  not  entirely  clear
    what that ground was aimed at.

9.   Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no  material  error  of  law  and
    that the grounds were in substance  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    findings of fact.  The judge had carried out the individual  assessment
    of the facts as required and there is no reason to believe that she had
    not properly taken into account the historic injustice referred  to  in
    Gurung.  Although the judge referred to some specific matters  set  out
    in the 2009 policy, she was clearly aware that the relevant policy  was
    that of 2010: see [25].

Assessment of the Issues

10.  The issue in this appeal is whether the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of article 8.   It was common  ground  that  the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules in Appendix FM, nor  could
    they demonstrate exceptional circumstances to  bring  them  within  the
    respondent's policy.  In these  circumstances  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider the position under Article 8.  We are not satisfied  that  the
    judge failed to deal adequately with the issue  of  family  life.   The
    judge, having summarised the details of the application and the reasons
    for refusal set out in the original decision and in the Entry Clearance
    Manager's review, was clearly aware of the family circumstances and  in
    particular those in which their father and mother came to live  in  the
    UK while the appellants remained in Nepal.  The judge took into account
    their ages at the date of decision and the fact that their  father  was
    paying everything for their upkeep.   He  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the appellants had failed to show anything  behind  the
    normal relationship between adult  children  and  their  parents.   The
    judge's findings about the appellants living independently must be read
    in the context of the evidence as a whole and  does  not  indicate  any
    misdirection  or  misunderstanding  of  the  family  position.   It  is
    therefore not the case as the grounds allege that the judge  failed  to
    consider  the  family  as  a  whole  or  make  a  lawful  article  8(1)
    assessment.

11.  The judge went on to consider in  the  alternative  article  8(2).   He
    commented in [40] that even if there was family life it  had  continued
    since the parents had come to the UK and  went  on  to  find  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance was proportionate to the legitimate  end  of
    pursuing a fair immigration policy.

12.  The second ground argues that the judge failed  in  his  assessment  to
    refer to Gurung, referring only to SG  (Nepal)  which  had  dealt  with
    polygamous marriages. The substance of this ground is  that  there  had
    been a failure to consider the historical wrong assessment as  set  out
    in Gurung.  However, there is no reason to believe the  judge  was  not
    aware of and did not take this factor into account.  He had recorded in
    [26] the comments of the Entry Clearance  Manager  on  that  issue  and
    there is no reason to believe that he did not have it in  mind  in  his
    assessment.  Finally, the grounds argue that there was a conflation  of
    the assessment of Article  8(1)  and  Article  8(2)  but  there  is  no
    substance in this ground.  There is a reference to SG (Nepal)  relating
    to polygamous marriages but the point the judge made in respect of that
    case was that the parents in the present case had chosen to live in the
    UK instead of remaining with their family in Nepal.  That matter was by
    no means determinative but was a factor which could properly  be  taken
    into account.

13.  In summary, we are satisfied that the judge took all  relevant  matters
    into account and reached  a  decision  properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.   When  refusing  permission  to  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney said that a full  and  proper  reading  of  the
    determination showed that the judge had properly set out the  law,  his
    findings of fact and reasoning and that in  essence  the  grounds  were
    simply a disagreement with the findings of  the  judge  and  a  further
    attempt to re-argue the appeal.  We agree with that comment.   For  the
    reasons we have given we are not satisfied that the judge erred in  law
    in any way capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

Decision

14.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  and  this  appeal  is
    accordingly dismissed.



Signed        Date: 07 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

