
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11645/2013
                                                               OA/11648/2013
                                                               OA/11651/2013
                                                               OA/11656/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 October 2014                    |On 21 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                          MRS FADUMO HUSSEIN HIRSI
                       MISS FARHIA ABDI MOHAMED AWALE
                        MISS FALIS ABDI MOHAMED AWALE
                       MISS FAHIMA ABDI MOHAMED AWALE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Bexson of Counsel instructed by Hersi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Kamara  dismissing  these   appeals   under   the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

 2) The appellants are all nationals of Somalia.  They  are  the  wife  and
    three daughters of the sponsor, Mr Abdi Mohamed Awale, who is a British
    citizen.  The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    refusals of entry clearance by the  respondent.   Entry  clearance  was
    refused  because  the  respondent  was  satisfied  neither   that   the
    appellants were related to the sponsor as claimed nor that the relevant
    financial requirements were met.

 3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the first  appellant
    and sponsor were validly  married.   The  judge  found  also  that  the
    sponsor was employed as he had claimed to  be  and  that  his  previous
    employers were also as he had claimed.   The judge  nevertheless  found
    that the documents submitted with the application for  the  purpose  of
    proving earnings did not comply with Appendix FM-SE.

 4) Although the question of accommodation was not raised  in  the  refusal
    decision the judge was not satisfied that accommodation  was  available
    for the appellants and found that the sponsor had dishonestly concealed
    the lack of available accommodation.

 5) In relation to  Article  8,  the  judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor's
    earnings exceeded the amount required under the Immigration  Rules  but
    found  that  the  sponsor  had   given   false   evidence   about   his
    accommodation, as well as failing to submit the specified  evidence  in
    support of his employment.  The judge did not accept  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances which justified consideration  of  the  appeal
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 6) The grounds of appeal attached to the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal were lengthy and Ms Bexson helpfully  summarised  them  for  me,
    noting that permission to appeal had been granted on all  issues.   The
    first issue was presented under the heading of  procedural  unfairness.
    It was submitted that the issue of the adequacy  of  accommodation  was
    not raised in the respondent's refusal decision.  The judge  was  wrong
    to raise an alleged anomaly in relation to  the  evidence  relating  to
    accommodation at the start of the hearing.  As a  result  of  this  the
    sponsor perceived that the judge was against the appellants.   Reliance
    was placed on the  case  of  Oyono  [2002]  UKIT  02034.   The  judge's
    approach to accommodation at the start of the hearing and  the  adverse
    finding made in respect of this coloured the rest of the  determination
    and the judge did not believe anything further from the sponsor.

 7) Ms Bexson further submitted that the alleged anomaly in respect of  the
    evidence of accommodation raised by the judge had been rectified  by  a
    letter from the landlord.  This showed that the  arrangements  made  by
    the sponsor to accommodate the  appellants  were  legitimate.   It  was
    permissible for the judge to pursue issues arising from  the  evidence,
    even though these were not in the refusal decision, but the judge could
    not do so in a manner which was unfair.

 8) The second issue raised in the application for permission to appeal was
    whether the judge had taken  into  account  post-decision  evidence  in
    relation to accommodation.  The refusal decisions were dated  15  April
    2013.  In June 2013 the sponsor entered into an  arrangement  with  the
    landlord for the sub-letting of the accommodation  for  the  appellants
    until such time as the appeal  was  concluded.   The  judge  took  into
    account this evidence, which post-dated  the  decision,  and  this  was
    unfair.

 9) The third main issue arose in relation to the proportionality  exercise
    in respect of the sponsor's children.   The  judge  did  not  make  any
    finding to the effect  that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    children and the sponsor.  There  was  a  presumption  of  family  life
    between children and their parents and an assessment of proportionality
    was required.  There was an obligation  on  the  Tribunal  to  consider
    whether family life could reasonably be continued in  another  country,
    which in this case would be either  Ethiopia  or  Somalia.   The  judge
    failed to consider the  reasonableness  of  the  sponsor  returning  to
    Ethiopia where his family reside.

10) Continuing from this the fourth issue was  the  question  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  The judge failed to have regard to this  as
    a relevant issue and this was a material error.

11) Ms Bexson concluded that on each of these issues the determination  was
    flawed and should be set aside.  She asked for a remittal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

12) On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker acknowledged that  the  adequacy
    of accommodation had not been challenged in the refusal decision.   One
    of the main  issues  was  the  inadequate  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    employment and earnings.  The judge found that the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were validly married, although the Entry Clearance Officer  had
    no evidence of a valid marriage.

13) Mr Walker further acknowledged that there was a  covering  letter  with
    the application form in relation to accommodation that was not  in  the
    respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  This was a  letter
    of 5 February 2013, which was referred to  at  paragraph  7.13  of  the
    application form for the first appellant.

14) I had before me a rule 24 notice, dated 29 August  2014,  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent.  This takes issue with the extension of  time
    for  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   This  point   was
    addressed, however, by the judge in granting permission to  appeal  and
    there is no reason not to accept the judge's  decision.   The  rule  24
    notice further states  that  in  terms  of  RM  (Kwok  On  Tong:  HC395
    paragraph 320) India [2006] UKAIT  00039  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    dismiss the appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules unless  satisfied  that  all  the
    requirements of the Rules were met.  In terms of this decision  it  was
    open to the judge to raise issues of concern and to put  the  appellant
    on notice of this at the start of the hearing.

Discussion

15) I accept that in terms of the decision referred to  by  the  respondent
    the judge was entitled to raise an additional matter of concern at  the
    start of the hearing.  If  the  judge  did  this,  however,  procedural
    fairness  required  that  the  parties  had  adequate  notice  of   the
    additional case to be answered.

16) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal records  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    determination that counsel for the appellant, who was not  the  counsel
    who  appeared  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  indicated  after   taking
    instructions that she was willing to proceed and that she would address
    the judge's concerns by way of additional questions  addressed  to  the
    sponsor.  The judge however did not record these questions and  answers
    in the determination before proceeding to make a  finding  against  the
    sponsor  alleging  that  he  had  dishonestly  concealed  the  lack  of
    available accommodation at the time of  the  application.   It  is  now
    submitted on behalf of the appellants that this finding ran contrary to
    documentary evidence which was submitted with the application  form  in
    relation to accommodation but which was not forwarded by the respondent
    to the Tribunal with the respondent's  bundle  because  the  respondent
    regarded the accommodation issue as satisfied.

17) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal cannot have known, of course, what
    was in the additional documentation submitted to the respondent if that
    documentation was not included in the respondent's bundle.  I note that
    at paragraphs 7.13-7.14 of the first appellant's application form there
    is a reference to a covering letter in relation to accommodation.   The
    judge ought therefore  to  have  been  aware  that  there  was  further
    evidence on this matter before the respondent.

18) I do not consider  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    necessarily wrong to raise at the start of the hearing  concerns  about
    accommodation which appeared to the judge to arise from the documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal.  Similarly, the Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in principle entitled to rely on a submission  by  counsel
    for the appellant that she was willing to proceed, notwithstanding that
    this new issue had been raised.   The  question  of  fairness  depends,
    however, not just on observing the  initial  formalities  but  also  on
    giving a party an adequate opportunity in practical  terms  to  present
    his or her case.  This would include taking account of whether there is
    already available relevant evidence relating to the new issue which  is
    not before the judge,  or  whether  there  is  evidence  likely  to  be
    available which the parties would have adduced had they known the issue
    would arise.  Notwithstanding that counsel had agreed  to  proceed,  if
    the judge observed, or should have observed, as the  evidence  unfolded
    that the appellants had not had an adequate opportunity to  prepare  in
    respect of the new issue then it was unfair for the  judge  to  proceed
    further.

19) Where the judge went wrong was in making an adverse credibility finding
    against the sponsor in relation to  accommodation  without  giving  the
    appellants an adequate opportunity to address the  issue,  particularly
    when documentary evidence which had been provided to the respondent was
    not before the Tribunal.  The judge's adverse finding appears  to  have
    been based largely on the fact that the sponsor was not living  in  the
    proposed accommodation for the family but was living in one room  in  a
    shared house.  The sponsor made no secret of this at the  hearing.   He
    claimed that he had sub-let the  accommodation  for  the  family.   The
    judge did not accept the sponsor's evidence in relation to  this.   The
    judge pointed out that in his witness statement (which was  not  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal)  the  sponsor  stated  that  he  resided  in  the
    accommodation arranged for the family.  This may or may not  have  been
    correct at the time the witness statement was signed but  it  does  not
    follow from this that the sponsor "dishonestly concealed the fact  that
    the only accommodation available at the time of the application was one
    room in a shared house at a different address", as found by the  judge.
    This is particularly so when there was known to be documentary evidence
    relating to accommodation which was before the respondent but  was  not
    before the Tribunal.  In these circumstances I do not consider that the
    appellants were afforded a fair hearing in relation, in particular,  to
    the issue of accommodation.  Accordingly the  judge's  findings  cannot
    stand.

20) Given the significance of this adverse credibility finding to the other
    findings made by the judge, this matter will  in  itself  lead  to  the
    decision being set aside.   I am satisfied,  however,  that  the  judge
    made further errors in relation to Article 8 on the  following  issues,
    in  particular.   The  judge  found  that  there  were  no   compelling
    circumstances which required consideration of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules, having regard to the decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640.  The judge went  on  to  refer  in
    passing to the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM  (Lebanon)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 but made no reference to the further  light  cast  on  the
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules by that decision.

21) In relation to Article 8 the judge's reasoning  was  weak.   The  judge
    concluded that there were no compelling circumstances  for  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules but one of the principal reasons  for  this
    was that the sponsor had, in the view of  the  judge,  given  "a  false
    account of his accommodation".  As already stated, this finding  cannot
    stand.  Furthermore, the judge failed to have any regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children, although apparently accepting that they  are
    the children of the first appellant and the  sponsor.   In  conclusion,
    the judge's reasoning in relation to Article 8 is  inadequate  and  the
    judge failed to have regard to a  relevant  consideration,  namely  the
    best interests of the children.

22) Having decided that the judge's  decision  should  be  set  aside,  the
    question arose as to whether the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal and, if so, whether any findings should be preserved.  It
    was pointed out that the judge made a positive finding  in  respect  of
    the marriage between the  sponsor  and  first  appellant.   Mr  Walker,
    however, drew attention to an apparent lack of reasoning to support his
    finding.   Yet again, it appears the judge's reasoning seems inadequate
    to the point of error, although this issue was not included in the rule
    24 notice submitted on behalf of the respondent.  Nevertheless, my view
    is that the findings of fact which require to be made are such that  it
    is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, in terms
    of Practice Statement 7.2(b) and that no findings made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be preserved.

23) It should be further noted that the documentary  evidence  provided  on
    behalf of the appellant for the purpose of the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal is no  longer  with  the  appeal  files.   Accordingly  a
    duplicate copy of this evidence will have to be lodged no later than  7
    days prior to the remitted  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    According to Mr Walker  the  appellant's  bundle  was  still  with  the
    respondent's file and this evidence does not require to be served again
    on the respondent.  Additional evidence may  be  lodged  provided  such
    evidence appertains to  circumstances  at  the  time  of  the  decision
    appealed against, in terms of section 85A of the 2002 Act.

Conclusions

24) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses errors on  points  of
    law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be remade.

Anonymity

25) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    addressed on this and no order is made at this stage.



Signed      Date 2 October 2014

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
