
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11093/2013
     OA/11095/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th November 2014                         |On 5th December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                    ENTRY CLEARNANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TAKSHER RAI
                                 YUBARAJ RAI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Christian Howells, Counsel instructed by NC
Brothers & Co

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In this document I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellants are brothers and nationals of Nepal.  They were born 24
      September 1984 and 12 August 1989 respectively, and are the sons of  a
      former Gurkha who is now settled in the United Kingdom.

   3. Both appellants applied for entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  adult
      dependent sons of the sponsor.   The  applications  were  refused  the
      reasons set out  in  decisions  dated  1  May  2013.   The  appellants
      appealed those decisions.

   4. The linked appeals  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Lawrence sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  30  June  2014.   The  sponsor
      attended  the  hearing  and  gave   evidence.    Both   parties   were
      represented.

   5. In a  determination  promulgated  on  15  July  2014,  Judge  Lawrence
      considered the appellant's appeal under  the  rules,  under  a  stated
      Policy and in respect of Article 8.

   6. Paragraph 12 of the determination found that the  sponsor  was  not  a
      "credible person".  At paragraph 13 the judge  found  details  of  the
      first appellant's medical condition to be "manufactured"  and  it  was
      conceded that  the  second  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
      Immigration Rules.  At paragraphs 15 and 16 the judge found that there
      had been no misapplication of the policy.  However the  judge  allowed
      the appeal of both appellants under Article 8  ECHR.   The  respondent
      sought leave to appeal.  There was one ground alleging the making of a
      material misdirection of law.  In support of  that  allegation  it  is
      suggested that the judge  erred  in  taking  into  account  immaterial
      matters in the assessment of the  Article  8  claim,  the  failure  to
      consider the guidance in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  and  that
      the judge had failed to explain why the "Kugathas test" could be  met,
      and that there was no evidence that  the  appellants  had  suffered  a
      "historical injustice".

   7. In granting leave to appeal  a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal gave the following as his reasons:

         "1.  By a determination promulgated  on  15  July  2014  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence allowed the  appellant's  appeals  against
      the decision of the respondent to refuse each of them entry  clearance
      to the UK as the adult  dependent  children  of  persons  present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom.  The judge found  that  the  appellants
      did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules and  could  not
      succeed under policy guidance.  However the judge went on to find that
      Article 8 of the ECHR was engaged and that the appellant succeeded  by
      reason thereof.

      2. The grounds of the application seeking permission assert that:


         a)   The judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the
             conclusions that he did.
         b)   The appellants are adult offspring of persons settled  in  the
             United Kingdom.  The judge failed  to  consider  the  guidance
             given in the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  31  and
             failed to apply the principles therein set out.
         c)   The judge failed to make findings  as  to  whether  there  was
             sufficient dependency or other factors as to engage Article  8
             in the circumstances alleged.
         d)   The judge found that consistent with the case  of  UG  (Nepal)
             [2012] EWCA Civ 58 that there had  been  historical  injustice
             and that in part was a reason for allowing the appeal.  It  is
             submitted that there  had  been  no  historical  injustice  in
             respect of these appellants.

     3.  It is clearly arguable that the judge failed to apply the  guidance
      within the case law cited and by reason thereof has  made  a  material
      error of law.  The grounds maybe argued".

   8. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   9. At the hearing it was acknowledge that the appellants had not produced
      a Rule 24 response, but Mr Howells submitted a  skeleton  argument  to
      which I will refer later.

  10. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds.  The  key  to  the  situation  is
      contained in paragraph 12 of  the  determination,  wherein  the  judge
      found the sponsor not to be credible and that the  judge  had  allowed
      the appeal under Article 8 by reason of the "historic injustice" point
      before  taking  a  step-by-step  approach  via  Razgar.   Mr  Richards
      referred to paragraph 27 of the determination as "extraordinary".   In
      that paragraph the judge had considered whether any interference  (via
      Razgar) was necessary.  In effect the judge  had  sought  to  apply  a
      blanket policy for any family of a former Gurkha  to  be  entitled  to
      entry.  No examples had been given as to how the decision had affected
      the family.  There is evidence that parental responsibility  had  been
      abandoned by the sponsor.  Accordingly the findings are  material  and
      the decision is in error and should be set aside.

  11. Mr Howells adopted his skeleton argument.   That  document  summarizes
      the  respondent's  challenge,  but  then  submits   that   there   are
      exceptional and/or compelling circumstances  allowing  a  freestanding
      Article 8 claim, and it submits that  the  judge  had  identified  the
      historical injustice as an exceptional factor.  The  correct  approach
      should have been adopted and the case of Ghising (family life - adults
      - Gurkha policy) (Nepal) [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC)  had  accepted  that
      Kugathas had been interpreted too  restrictively  in  the  past.   The
      critical question is has the adult child formed their own  independent
      life or remained part of  the  parent's  family  unit.   The  skeleton
      argument referred to paragraph 22 of  the  determination  and  to  the
      findings made therein, and that such findings were open to  the  judge
      and he had not placed undue weight on financial dependency.   Finally,
      reference was made to Ghising (Gurkhas/BOC's: historic wrong;  weight)
      [2013] UKUT 567 which held that the  historic  wrong  will  ordinarily
      determine the proportionality assessment where the  respondent  relies
      on fair immigration policy as the legitimate aim.

  12. In his verbal submission Mr Howells argued that the respondent's first
      challenge  must  fail  because  paragraph  19  of  the   determination
      explained adequately why the appellant's circumstances were compelling
      or exceptional.

  13. As to the second point, paragraph 22 explains the judge's findings and
      Mr Howells refers me to various parts of the witness  statements  that
      were before the judge, who  obviously  found  such  statements  to  be
      credible.  The two appellants had always lived together and  this  had
      not been the first application, and Mr Howells emphasised paragraph  5
      of the skeleton  argument  with  regard  to  the  out  dated  view  on
      Kugathas.  Mr Howells referred in detail to the head note contained in
      the 2013 case involving Ghising.

  14. Mr Richards made no response.

  15. At this stage I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.

  16. I find that Judge Lawrence made no error of law that was  material  to
      the outcome of the decision.

  17. The grounds seeking leave emphasised the findings made  by  the  judge
      with regard to certain credibility issues.  The  judge  certainly  did
      not find the sponsor credible with regard to  his  evidence  and  with
      regard to the suggested medical  problems  experienced  by  the  first
      appellant.  The determination shows why the judge considered that  the
      Immigration Rules had not been met, although in respect of the  second
      appellant this was by way of a  concession  made  by  the  appellant's
      representative at the hearing.  The  determination  then  goes  on  to
      properly explain why the judge found against the appellants in respect
      of the respondents Policy.  The judge allowed the appeal under Article
      8 and paragraphs 17 to  29  deal  with  that  aspect  of  the  appeal,
      including the findings made by Judge Lawrence.

  18. Mr Howells correctly directs me to the case  of  MM  (Lebanon)  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 985 and to the Court of Appeal case of  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192.  As a result  I  consider  the  judge  was  correct  in
      embarking upon a stand alone Article 8  examination  of  the  case  of
      these two appellants.  The judge properly explains this in  the  final
      part of paragraph 19, where he says this:

         "In the  instant  appeal  I  find  that  the  'historic  injustice'
      committed, in not permitted (sic) the sponsor in the UK at a time when
      the appellants were minors and therefore could have settled here  long
      time ago (sic), allows me  to  find  'exceptional  circumstances'  and
      therefore  I  could  assess  these  appeal  under  article  8  of  the
      Convention (sic)".

  19. Paragraph 22  of  the  determination  then  goes  on  to  explain  the
      financial evidence that the judge took into account, and accepted,  to
      show family life between the appellants and the family in  the  United
      Kingdom.  The 2012 decision of  Ghising  gives  guidance  which  maybe
      taken  as  suggesting  that  Kugathas  had   been   to   restrictively
      interpreted in the past.  For the reasons set  out  in  paragraph  22,
      Judge Lawrence concluded in the final sentence of  paragraph  22  that
      family life existed.   I  consider  he  was  entitled  to  reach  that
      conclusion.
  20. Having quite properly reached this point the judge  then  went  on  to
      consider Razgar and at  paragraph  27  he  reached  the  controversial
      conclusion that the respondent's decision was not in the interests  of
      any legitimate aim.  In the  circumstances  of  this  case  I  do  not
      consider that conclusion to be extraordinary.

  21. I have considered paragraph 27 (and indeed paragraph 28) in the  light
      of the reported case of Ghising v SSHD (Gurkhas/BOC's: historic wrong;
      weight) [2013] UKUT 00567.  I quote from paragraphs 4  and  5  of  the
      head note to that case, which say as follows:

         "(4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
      but for the historic wrong, the appellant would have been  settled  in
      the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine  the  outcome  of  the
      Article 8 proportionality assessment in an appellant's  favour,  where
      the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/Entry  Clearance
      Officer consist solely of the public interest in  maintaining  a  firm
      immigration policy.

     (5) It can therefore be seen that appellants in Gurkha and (BOC)  cases
      will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their  family  life
      engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows they would have come
      to the United Kingdom with their father, but for  the  injustice  that
      prevented the latter from settling here earlier.   If  the  respondent
      can point to matters and above the public interest  in  maintaining  a
      firm immigration policy, which argue  in  favour  of  removal  or  the
      refusal of leave to enter, these matters  must  be  given  appropriate
      weight in the  balance  in  the  respondent's  favour.   Thus,  a  bad
      immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may still be  sufficient
      to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the  appellant's  side  of
      the balance".

  22. I therefore  conclude  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
      conclusions that he did.  Despite credibility issues in respect of the
      sponsor and  with  regard  to  the  medical  condition  of  the  first
      appellant, the  judge  had  before  him  the  statements  of  the  two
      appellants with  regard  to  financial  matters  and  the  immigration
      history of the appellants and the sponsor.  He  reached  a  conclusion
      that there was historic injustice which enabled him to  proceed  to  a
      stand alone examination of  Article  8.   He  accepted  the  financial
      evidence to show that family life existed, could  be  extended  beyond
      Kugathas and that then applying Razgar he reached the conclusion  that
      the appellants were entitled  to  win  their  appeals  in  respect  of
      Article 8.  He certainly was not giving a blanket  acceptance  of  any
      family member of a former Gurkha.

  23. For these reasons I find no  material  error  of  law  and  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date




Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

