
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11653/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2014                                |On 12 August 2014          |
|(ex tempore determination)                      |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Anida Suli
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TIRANA


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Subbarayon, Legal Representative of Sivaramen
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mrs Anida Suli in respect of  a  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birk) which was promulgated  on  22  May
    2014.  The application was made by the appellant to the Entry Clearance
    Officer in Albania, of which country she is a  citizen.  She  seeks  to
    come to this country for settlement as the partner of the  sponsor,  Mr
    Fran Suli, who is a British citizen.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision is dated 7 May 2013.

 2. The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal but  in  dismissing
    it, the Tribunal made an error of law.  That error is contained in  the
    section of the determination at paragraphs 12 to  17.   The  judge  was
    concerned that there was not sufficient evidence to show that a genuine
    and subsisting relationship continued to exist between the  sponsor  Mr
    Suli and the appellant.  He noticed gaps in  the  record  of  telephone
    bills but most importantly he did two things which were incorrect.

 3. First, he found that since the marriage of the couple  in  August  2011
    there had been two visits by  the  sponsor  to  Albania  to  visit  the
    appellant whereas it is clear that the evidence before him in the  form
    of a passport or copies of it showed that Mr Suli had visited  in  2012
    indeed in March of that year.

 4. Secondly, the judge excluded Skype record evidence from  February  2004
    onwards, (this is at paragraph 12 of the determination), which he  said
    was not to be considered because it was not available at  the  date  of
    the immigration decision.

 5. At paragraph 17 the judge stated that:

         Overall the evidence amounts to eight months of phone calls and two
         or maybe three visits to Albania and possibly some  photographs  of
         the couple together.

 6. The judge should not have excluded the postdecision  evidence  relating
    to a matter at  issue,  namely  the  subsistence  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor, and in that regard  he  should  have
    followed the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Naz  (subsisting  marriage  -
    standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00040 (IAC).  That  case  dealt
    with post-decision visits made by a sponsor to his  spouse  abroad  but
    the principle enunciated in the case  should  have  led  the  judge  to
    include the Skype evidence which he wrongly excluded.

 7. In the light of what the  judge  has  said  at  paragraph  17,  he  has
    assessed this case on the basis of an incorrect  quantity  of  evidence
    and quality of that evidence.  He should have looked at  more  evidence
    including that which existed post-decision.

 8. As a consequence, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  such  that  his
    determination falls to be set aside, and I set aside that determination
    and have remade the decision.

 9. I heard evidence from the sponsor, who  spoke  to  me  in  English  and
    adopted his written witness statement.  He  was  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Tufan for the Entry Clearance Officer.

10. The sponsor has explained to me why he finds it difficult now  that  he
    works for Northants Cricket Club to get time off work to visit Albania.
     He has explained to me how difficult  it  has  been  to  maintain  his
    relationship since his marriage in 2011 but he  told  me  that  he  has
    maintained that relationship, which,  despite  the  separation  of  the
    appellant and her husband, has not suffered any form of breakdown.

11. The sponsor explained to me the problems he had in  obtaining  accounts
    to send with the application and why the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    before him or her only, on the  basis  of  which  it  was  perhaps  not
    surprising that the application was refused.  However, referring  again
    to Naz, I have considered post-decision evidence  and  I  am  satisfied
    that this is a genuine and subsisting marriage.

12. The sponsor has been able to answer questions  put  to  him  in  cross-
    examination,  for  example,  as  to  why  there  was   no   application
    immediately after the marriage  for  the  appellant  to  come  to  this
    country, and I am satisfied  that  his  explanation,  namely  that  the
    appellant needed  to  get  ready  for  and  take  an  English  language
    proficiency  test,  is   entirely   valid   and   reasonable   in   the
    circumstances.  I am  satisfied  also  that  the  sponsor  has  visited
    Albania in each of  the  years  since  the  marriage  as  the  passport
    demonstrates.

13. Looking at the documentary evidence, which again is quite  considerable
    in this case, and having regard to the evidence of the sponsor which  I
    found to be wholly truthful, I am satisfied that there is a genuine and
    subsisting relationship and  on  that  basis  the  appeal  against  the
    immigration decision of the Entry Clearance Officer should be allowed.






Signed                              Date 8 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

