







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11507/2013
                                                               OA/11508/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 October 2014                            |On 16 October 2014           |
|Prepared: 10 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Master hUzaif Ahmed
                            Master Shuraim Ahmed
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer:
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr E Akohene, solicitor (Afrifa and Partners)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Ghana and are brothers. They were born
      on 28th October 1997 and 1st March 2007 respectively.


   2. They appealed against the decisions of the respondent  refusing  their
      applications made on 6th February 2013 for entry clearance  to  settle
      in the UK as the dependent children of their mother. The  applications
      were refused pursuant to paragraph 297 of the  rules.  The  respondent
      was not satisfied that the relationship  between  the  appellants  and
      their sponsor had been established. Nor was it accepted that  she  has
      had sole responsibility. Their appeals to the First-tier Tribunal were
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge in a determination  promulgated
      on 7th July 2014.


   3. He was not satisfied that the sponsor was the biological mother of the
      appellants from the evidence submitted [43].


   4. Further, he  found  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  "exercising  sole
      responsibility over the appellants" to be scant [44]. He  was  however
      satisfied  that  the  requirements   relating   to   maintenance   and
      accommodation had been met.


   5. Their appeals were dismissed under the Immigration Rules as well as on
      human rights grounds.


   6. On 20th August 2014, Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MacDonald
      granted the appellants permission to appeal, noting  that  the  appeal
      had  been  dismissed  because  of  the  apparent  inadequacy  of   the
      documents, but it is arguable  that  further  reasoning  was  required
      before rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  who  supported  the
      application  and  against  whom  there  were  no  adverse  credibility
      findings.


   7. Nor, as noted in the grounds, had the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  the
      Entry Clearance Manager or the Home Office Presenting Officer,  raised
      any issue concerning the death certificate of the  children's  father,
      who was said to have died of heart failure in 2004.


   8. Mr Akohene  submitted  that  although  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
      production of DNA evidence was not a mandatory requirement  under  the
      rules, he nevertheless went on to state that this is one way in  which
      the sponsor could have "conclusively  established"  that  she  is  the
      biological mother of the appellants.


   9. He submitted that the Judge implicitly raised the requisite burden  of
      proof to exceed the balance of probabilities. In so doing, he attached
      little weight to the birth certificate produced. He failed to consider
      cross cultural differences sufficiently. He had  regard  to  the  fact
      that the appellants' births were registered over a decade  after  they
      were born. He submitted that in failing to have  regard  to  practices
      applicable in Ghana the  Judge  had  accordingly  failed  to  consider
      relevant  cross  cultural  differences  by  implicitly   applying   UK
      standards to Ghana.


  10. He submitted that there  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      proper evidence relating to the civil  registration  system  in  Ghana
      from the  principal  Assistant  Registrar  there.  In  the  assessment
      relating to the 2000 census, there was a population in  excess  of  18
      million.  The  statistics  in  relation   to   the   completeness   of
      registration between 2000 and 2008 revealed that in  2000  there  were
      only 31% completed registrations of births. In 2002 it dropped to 17%.
      Although it increased to 67% in 2005, it subsequently dropped  to  51%
      in 2008.


  11. There were recommendations in the report that registration  facilities
      should be made  accessible  to  rural  populations  by  expanding  the
      community  population  register  programme   to   cover   more   rural
      communities in  Ghana.  Further,  there  should  be  sustained  public
      education on the importance and benefits of "vital registration."


  12. The Judge furthermore "echoed the concerns raised by  the  respondent"
      in respect of the birth certificates produced [41].  The  sponsor  had
      accepted that the appellants' births had been registered on 26th April
      2011 and not 2012 as alleged in the reasons for refusal [25].


  13. There was accordingly no obligation imposed by  law  or  any  duty  in
      Ghana to register the children shortly after their births.


  14. Further, he submitted that the respondent had given  short  shrift  to
      the documentation relied on by the sponsor  in  this  regard.  He  was
      aware that documents of  this  kind  could  be  obtained  easily  from
      sources other than the competent authorities in Ghana. The  respondent
      was thus not satisfied that the documents offered a true reflection of
      the appellants' ages, identity or circumstances in Ghana. Accordingly,
      he was not satisfied that their birth  certificates  offered  accurate
      representation of their births, ages or family  circumstances  showing
      that they were related as claimed.


  15. That, Mr Akohene contended, is an  unwarranted  generalisation.  There
      was no evidence by way of any document verification report relating to
      the validity and authenticity of the actual documents produced.


  16. Further, the Judge failed properly to have regard  to  the  sponsor's'
      own evidence relating to her assertions regarding  the  relationships.
      In particular, she had stated that from her personal knowledge, it was
      not the practice that births are registered. People in villages,  even
      the  more  enlightened  town  people,  do  not  see   the   need   for
      registration. That is in contrast to the "culture in the UK" [15].


  17. The evidence was that she spoke to the appellants at least three times
      a week. She claims that she gave birth to  the  appellants  and  lived
      with them for the first 11 and 8 years respectively  of  their  lives.
      Their father died in 2004 of heart failure. She did not  abandon  them
      when  she  came  here.  Her  then  husband  did  not  have  sufficient
      accommodation for them all.


  18. She continued to  exert  her  "parental  values"  in  respect  of  the
      appellants. She chose schools and their extra  curricular  activities.
      In addition, she had produced two photographs which she said had  been
      taken of her and the appellants on her last trip to Ghana.


  19. When the registrar attending to the registration  was  told  that  the
      necessary "weighing cards" were not available, the registrar  actually
      rang her up to confirm the date of the births  of  the  two  children.
      Accordingly, the dates recorded in their birth certificates are  based
      on information which she herself provided to the registrar.


  20. Mr Akohene submitted that the Judge furthermore erred  in  failing  to
      apply the correct provisions of paragraph 297. Sub  paragraphs  (i)(a)
      to (f) are alternatives to each other.


  21. The First-tier Judge recorded  evidence  from  the  sponsor  that  the
      children's father died in 2004.  Furthermore,  a  copy  of  his  death
      certificate  was  submitted  as  part  of  the  applications  and  was
      contained in the respondent's bundle. However, neither the respondent,
      the Entry Clearance Manager or the Home Office Presenting  Officer  at
      the time raised any issue concerning the death certificate.


  22. However, he made no finding  relating  to  that  certificate.  If  one
      parent is shown  to  be  "deceased"  then  the  requirements  of  sole
      responsibility and serious and compelling circumstances "fall  by  the
      wayside."


  23. Mr Whitwell accepted that the  respondent  had  never  challenged  the
      certificate. He submitted however that the Judge had directed  himself
      appropriately. He did not believe that the sponsor was the  biological
      mother of the appellants based  on  shortcomings  in  the  documentary
      evidence. He found the sponsor's evidence to  have  been  vague  [46].
      Accordingly, the Judge would not have come to a different view even if
      he had found the sponsor's evidence to be credible.


  24. Insofar as the death  certificate  of  the  father  is  concerned,  he
      asserted that as evident in the Rule 24 response,  the  children  have
      lived with their stepfather since 2004 and  it  cannot  be  said  that
      there is no other person to care for them.


  25. Mr Whitwell submitted that when regard is had to paragraph 40  of  the
      determination, the Judge was not excluding other evidence when  making
      comments about the lack of DNA. This had been  a  live  issue.  It  is
      evidently so when regard is had  to  paragraphs  40,  43  and  46.  He
      submitted that the Judge in fact took into account the totality of the
      evidence.


  26. He submitted that the failure to refer  to  or  to  make  any  finding
      relating to the death of the appellants' father would only be relevant
      where the relationship between the appellants and the sponsor had been
      properly established.


  27. Notwithstanding the asserted cultural differences, it  is  clear  that
      there was a system of registration  in  place  in  Ghana.  Accordingly
      there was no  adequate  evidence  suggesting  that  Ghanaians  do  not
      register the births of their children in accordance with Ghanaian law.
      Accordingly, there  was  a  'mere  disagreement'  as  to  the  Judge's
      findings which are sustainable on the evidence produced.


     Assessment


  28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated that he  took  into  account  the
      sponsor's testimony  relating  to  the  birth  certificates.  He  also
      accepted and took into account that in some cultures, there may  be  a
      practice of delaying the registering of a birth or not  registering  a
      birth at all [41]. However, he went on to state that  the  appellants'
      births were registered over a decade after they were born. The sponsor
      accepted that the information in  the  documents  came  from  her.  He
      accordingly applied little weight to the birth certificate [41].


  29. Having appreciated that there was no mandatory requirement within  the
      rules for the appellants to produce DNA evidence,  the  production  of
      such evidence would have been one way in which the sponsor could  have
      conclusively established that she is  the  biological  mother  of  the
      appellants.


  30. However, having accepted that DNA evidence is not a  requirement,  the
      Judge found  that  there  was  a  lack  of  satisfactory  evidence  to
      establish the relationship.


  31. I find that the Judge  has not given any proper reasons as to why  the
      sponsor's own  evidence  regarding  the  relationship,  including  her
      evidence of contact, support and decisions made on their  behalf  from
      time to time did not result in the burden of  proof  in  that  respect
      being satisfied on the balance of probabilities.


  32. As pointed out by Designated Judge MacDonald, there  were  no  adverse
      credibility  findings.  Despite  the  apparent   inadequacy   of   the
      documents,  further  reasoning  was  required  before  rejecting   her
      evidence, particularly when there were no adverse credibility findings
      made.


  33. Further, it is accepted that the Judge failed to make any finding with
      regard to the death of the appellants' father  in  2004,  but  instead
      proceeded to consider their appeals pursuant to the need to find  that
      their sponsor was "solely responsible for their upbringing."


  34. Mr Whitwell accepted that  that  was  an  incorrect  approach  in  the
      circumstances.


  35. For these reasons, I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made
      material errors  of  law.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set  aside  the
      determination.


  36. The parties accepted that in those circumstances, there would have  to
      be a re-hearing. Mr  Whitwell  in  particular  gave  notice  that  the
      respondent persists in  the  challenge  to  the  claimed  relationship
      between the sponsor and the appellants.


     Directions

1.   The Appellant's solicitors shall file and serve on the Tribunal and
      the Respondent a fully consolidated bundle, duly paginated and
      indexed, at least 7 days prior to the resumed hearing.

2.   List for hearing on the first available date after  the  30th  November
2014, with        a time estimate of 3 hours.




                               Signed                     Dated  10/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


