
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD AKMAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Hussain, Equity Law Solicitors
For the SSHD:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and is married  to  a  British
       citizen ('the sponsor').  His appeal against a decision  made  by  an
       entry clearance officer on behalf of the SSHD  to  refuse  him  entry
       clearance as a spouse dated 20 August 2014 was  dismissed  by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Davies in a decision promulgated on  11  February
       2015.

    2. The issues of concern to the SSHD and Judge Davies focused  upon  the
       appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules and the sponsor's employment.

Background

    3. The hearing before Judge Davies took place over two days.  The  first
       hearing took place on 21 January 2015.   The  judge  raised  concerns
       regarding some of the evidence relied upon by the appellant regarding
       the sponsor's employment and the appeal was adjourned  part-heard  to
       enable the appellant to comply with  directions  to  file  and  serve
       further evidence.  The judge directed the appellant's representatives
       to submit a witness statement from the sponsor's employer setting out
       the nature of the company (Avant Guard), how many people  it  employs
       and the exact nature  of  the  sponsor's  employment  as  a  business
       development manager, together with the most recent  audited  accounts
       for the company, within 14 days.

    4. A paginated and indexed supplementary  bundle  was  received  by  the
       Tribunal on  2  February  2015.   This  contained  detailed  evidence
       regarding the sponsor's claimed employer including a detailed  letter
       from the managing director of the Avant Guard, Mr  Parkinson,  a  job
       description for the sponsor, the company's annual accounts and  other
       documentation confirming the existence of the company.

    5. The hearing was relisted for 6  February  2015.   The  judge's  typed
       record of proceedings makes it clear that at 12.10 he  commenced  the
       hearing  in  the  full   knowledge   that   the   appellant's   legal
       representative was in another court room completing an asylum  appeal
       before another judge.  Judge Davies regarded this as unacceptable and
       conducted the entire  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant's
       representative.  Although this was the subject of part of the grounds
       of appeal against Judge Davies' decision,  permission  to  appeal  on
       this basis was refused by Judge Pirotta in a decision dated 24  April
       2015.  Although this seems a surprising decision, the application  to
       appeal on this basis was not renewed and Mr Hussain accepted that the
       issue could be argued before me.

    6. I therefore turn to the ground of appeal that has been the subject of
       the grant of permission - Judge Davies failed to  take  into  account
       documentary evidence directly relevant to the issues arising  in  the
       appeal.  After hearing from Mr Hussain, Mr  Harrison  quite  properly
       conceded that there had been a material error of law in this respect.
        I therefore did not need to hear from Mr  Hussain  further  save  to
       clarify whether or not to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
       to make findings of fact afresh.  I address this issue below.

Error of law

    7. Judge Davies did not accept that the sponsor was  genuinely  employed
       as claimed and concluded that false  representations  had  been  made
       regarding her claimed employment [32 and  33].   In  so  finding  the
       judge regarded it as significant that his  directions  had  not  been
       complied with [34].  Whilst it is correct that Mr Parkinson  did  not
       provide a witness statement, he provided detailed evidence addressing
       each of the issues set out in the directions.   This  information  is
       contained in a supplementary 21 page bundle which I found very easily
       within the Tribunal file.  It  is  also  absolutely  clear  that  the
       Tribunal received this bundle (on 2  Feb)  well  in  advance  of  the
       second hearing before Judge Davies (on 6 Feb).  At that  hearing  the
       sponsor referred to the evidence from Mr Parkinson / Avant Guard  but
       Judge Davies said this regarding the letter [19]: "Such a letter  was
       not in the  possession  of  myself  or  the  Home  Office  Presenting
       Officer".

    8. This is  a  mistake  of  fact  that  has  caused  unfairness  to  the
       appellant.  Whatever happened and whatever the reasons for it  (which
       may not be unconnected to the judge's decision to proceed without the
       appellant's  legal  representative)  Judge  Davies  failed  to   take
       relevant, apparently cogent and material evidence into  account.   As
       Mr Harrison conceded this alone is sufficient to amount to a material
       error of law that requires the decision to be set  aside  and  remade
       afresh.

Remittal

    9. Mr Hussain invited me to remake the  decision  myself.   I  indicated
       sympathy with that option bearing in mind the  unfortunate  delay  in
       this matter.  On the  other  hand,  this  is  a  case  in  which  the
       appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and in which there has been procedural  irregularities.   In
       addition fact-finding shall  need  to  commence  afresh  with  cross-
       examination. The decision needs to be remade completely and given the
       nature and extent of those findings, this should be done in the First-
       tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior
       President's Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
       factual findings required  in  remaking  the  decision,  and  I  have
       decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

Decision

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

   11. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions
        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting in Manchester (TE: 2 hrs) on the first date available.
        2) Within 28 days the appellant's representatives  shall  file  and
           serve a comprehensive indexed and paginated bundle  (to  replace
           all previous  bundles)  containing  all  relevant  documents  in
           chronological order.

Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 December 2015

