
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11632/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th May 2016 & 4th July 2016              |On 2nd August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Nicholas Roger Josephs
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker
For the Respondent:    Miss C H Bexson


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of comprehension the parties are referred to by  their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Coaster  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 27th  August  2014
    notifying the Appellant of the refusal of his application for leave  to
    enter as the spouse of a settled partner under Appendix FM.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  on  8th  October
    2015.

 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer.  The  grounds
    upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

      i) The judge has arguably materially erred  in  his  consideration  of
         Article 8.

     ii) The judge has arguably erred in finding that the Appellant and  his
         spouse could not enjoy family life in Jamaica.

    iii) The judge failed to apply Section 117 of the 2002 Act  in  reaching
         his conclusions.

     iv) The judge's assessment of his exceptional circumstances was flawed.



      v) The judge makes his own assessment of the  Appellant's  criminality
         and has failed to give  appropriate  consideration  to  the  public
         interest views of the Secretary of State.

Error of Law

 5. At the hearing on 11th May 2016 I canvassed  with  the  representatives
    the difficulty that I envisaged in dealing  with  the  application  for
    permission, namely that there was a lack of evidence as to whether  the
    sentence imposed  by  the  Magistrates'  Court  in  Jamaica  accurately
    reflected what precise sentence was imposed by Her Honour Mrs G.  Henry
    McKenzie, Resident Magistrate, on 19th February 2014 in the matter of R
    v  Nicholas  Josephs.   Consequently  with  the  parties'  agreement  a
    direction was made  by  me  on  the  same  date  that  the  Appellant's
    representatives use their best endeavours to obtain further information
    confirming the sentence passed or imposed by the court  in  Jamaica  so
    that the error of law at the forefront  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    complaint, namely whether the Appellant truly fell foul of  Immigration
    Rule S-EC.1.4.(c) or not.

 6. The Appellant's representatives submitted a fax to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 27th June enclosing a letter from the Parish Court in Kingston &  St
    Andrew Criminal Division in Jamaica dated 21st June 2016 from the court
    clerk which stated as follows in relation to the same  matter  of  R  v
    Nicholas Josephs, reference 3600/14  Assault  O.B.  Harm.   The  letter
    stated as follows:

         "I refer to the matter at caption and my letter dated September 23,
         2015.

         Please be advised that the above mentioned accused was sentenced to
         pay a fine of $15,000.00 or thirty (30) days  imprisonment  in  the
         alternative.

         The accused paid the fine of  $15,000.00  and  was,  therefore  not
         required to serve the alternative thirty (30) days prison term.

         Please see attached copy of letter for ease of reference."

 7. On the 11th May hearing before me Mr Walker for the  Respondent  stated
    that in light of that letter and its contents he accepted on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State that the Appellant  was  not  sentenced  to  any
    imprisonment and was sentenced to  paying  a  fine.   Consequently  the
    complaint that the judge  had  wrongly  assessed  S-EC.1.4.(c)  was  no
    longer pursued.  In  response  to  my  query  regarding  the  remaining
    grounds of complaint, Mr Walker made clear that  he  did  not  wish  to
    pursue any of the remaining grounds either given that the complaint  at
    the forefront of the Secretary of  State's  mind  when  drafting  those
    grounds was that the criminality of  the  Appellant  had  been  wrongly
    assessed.

 8. At the end of the hearing, I indicated my decision that  there  was  no
    error of law in the First-tier Judge's determination.  My  reasons  for
    so finding are as follows.  Immigration Rule S-EC.1.4.(c)  makes  clear
    that it penalises applicants who seek to enter the United  Kingdom  who
    have served custodial sentences of less than twelve months however  the
    rule does not penalise applicants who have had other sentences imposed,
    such as a fine.  In light of the clarification within the letters  from
    the same court clerk whom wrote the recent letter of 21 June  2016  and
    the previous letter dated 23 September 2015 from the Magistrates' Court
    in Jamaica, and in light of Mr  Walker's  acceptance  that  the  letter
    settles the dispute in question, the matter  may  be  beyond  question;
    however I also add my own view which is that the letter disposes of the
    issue which was raised before me which was whether the sentence imposed
    by the Magistrates' Court in Jamaica was one of a custodial  nature  or
    of a financial sanction.  I do find that the Appellant had paid a  fine
    of $15,000.00 and therefore there was no custodial sentence imposed  or
    passed upon him.  Had the Appellant not paid the fine, it would only be
    in that situation  that  the  Court  would  have  imposed  a  custodial
    sentence, however  it  is  clear  that  that  did  not  come  to  pass.
    Consequently Immigration Rule S-EC.1.4.(c) does not apply.

 9. In light of Mr Walker's stance on behalf of  the  Respondent  that  the
    other grounds of complaint are no  longer  pursued,  there  is  nothing
    further for me to determine upon the Respondent's appeal.  Consequently
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is free from material error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier shall stand and is hereby affirmed.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


