
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12746/2013
                                                               OA/12753/2013
                                                               OA/12756/2013
                                                               OA/12760/2013
                                                               OA/12765/2013
                                                               OA/12766/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th August 2014                              |On 12th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                           m b k (first appellant)
                          c k S (second appellant)
                            j n (third appellant)
                          d l m (fourth appellant)
                           d d K (fifth appellant)
                           d E l (sixth appellant)
                         (Anonymity directIon made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Doerfel, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    International Care Network
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of Uganda.  They appeal, with  permission,
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Britton) who, in
    a determination promulgated on 25th April 2014 dismissed their  appeals
    against the decisions of the Respondent to  refuse  their  applications
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  under  paragraphs  352A  and
    352D of the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).


 2. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.   Reference
    to the claimant may be by use of his initials but not by name.  Failure
    by any person, body or institution  whether  corporate  or  incorporate
    (for the avoidance of doubt to include either party to this appeal)  to
    comply with this direction may lead to  a  contempt  of  Court.    This
    direction shall continue in force until the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or  an
    appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

 3. The first Appellant, M B K, applied for entry  clearance  in  order  to
    join her spouse,   who was also a citizen of Uganda.  The Sponsor is  a
    recognised refugee having left Uganda  on  16th  August  2006  and  was
    subsequently granted refugee  status  at  the  end  of  2006.   He  had
    indefinite leave to remain granted to him on 18th November  2011.   The
    first Appellant married the Sponsor in March 1996.   At  the  time  the
    Sponsor left Uganda, he was in a customary marriage to two  women;  the
    first Appellant whom he had married on 24th  March  1996  and  F.   The
    Sponsor, in his original  asylum  interview  made  reference  to  being
    married with two wives and having five children (see paragraph  4,  SEF
    statement page 111 of the Respondent's bundle).  Thus it  was  asserted
    that at the time he left Uganda his family consisted of his  two  wives
    and five children which included J N born on 12th January 1996 who  was
    the first Appellant's child from a  premarital  relationship.   At  the
    time of the marriage she was 2 months old and it is said was brought up
    by the Sponsor as his child.  Subsequently the Sponsor  and  the  first
    Appellant had two children together, DDK born in 1997 and DEL  born  in
    2004.  Whilst  the  Sponsor  is  named  as  the  father  on  his  birth
    certificate, subsequent DNA testing for the  purposes  of  applications
    demonstrated that the Sponsor was not his biological father however  it
    was asserted that he had been brought up as a  child  of  the  Sponsor.
    The Sponsor also had two other children by F whom  he  had  never  been
    married to.  They are CS born on 1st May 1991 before  his  marriage  to
    the first Appellant and DLM, born in 2002, after his  marriage  to  the
    first  Appellant.   It  is  said  that  the  DNA  tests   confirm   the
    relationship save for the paternity of DEL.

 4. The Appellants made applications to enter the United Kingdom under  the
    family refugee reunion provisions under paragraph  352A  and  paragraph
    352D of the Immigration Rules.  In 2007, the first Appellant  had  made
    an application for entry clearance.  It is not clear whether any of the
    children  applied  at  the  same  time.   For  the  purposes  of   that
    application she was interviewed  at  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Kampala and it is acknowledged by the first Appellant that the  answers
    given in this interview were not correct.  For reasons that will become
    clear in due course,  the  first  Appellant  did  not  provide  correct
    answers to questions asked as a result of fear on her part and that  of
    the Sponsor that any information given concerning  his  experiences  in
    Uganda (including detention, torture and escape) would be  communicated
    to the Ugandan authorities.  The application was refused on  the  basis
    that the first Appellant had demonstrated a lack of  knowledge  of  the
    Sponsor and it appears that  the  appeal  that  was  made  against  the
    decision was withdrawn.

 5. The current application was made in 2013 by  the  first  Appellant  and
    this time was accompanied by similar applications made by the  children
    of the relationship.  Those applications were subsequently  refused  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer under paragraphs 352A and 352D (in relation
    to the children).  The first Appellant's  application  was  refused  on
    13th May 2013.  The substance of the refusal related to  the  interview
    that had taken place on the  previous  application  in  2007.   It  was
    stated that when she had previously applied it was refused  because  of
    her lack of knowledge of the Sponsor on the basis that she had not been
    aware of significant incidents in the Sponsor's  life  and  that  there
    were serious discrepancies between the information the Sponsor provided
    to the UK authorities and the answers given at interview about him.  It
    was recorded that the Entry Clearance  Officer  (in  relation  to  that
    application) was not satisfied that the Appellant and the Sponsor had a
    subsisting marriage and they intended to  live  permanently  with  each
    other.   The  refusal  went  on  to  consider  the  solicitor's  letter
    submitted with the current application providing an explanation  as  to
    why the Appellant gave those answers at interview.  The Entry Clearance
    Officer, did not accept that locally  employed  High  Commission  staff
    would report any matters back to the government agencies but even if it
    did occur, it was  considered  that  no  attempt  was  made  after  the
    interview or before the decision to raise any concerns.   Therefore  he
    was not satisfied that she was part of the family unit at the time  the
    Sponsor left Uganda under paragraph 325A(ii).  Earlier in  the  refusal
    it referred  to  the  Appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's view that there was no subsisting marriage or  that
    they intended to live permanently with each other.

 6.   In relation to the children, they were each the subject of individual
    immigration decisions.  In respect of DDK, it was refused on the  basis
    that as his mother's application had been refused as she was  not  part
    of the Sponsor's household at the time he left Uganda it followed  that
    he also was not part of the Sponsor's family unit at the  time  of  his
    departure from Uganda and it was refused under  paragraph  352D(iv)  on
    13th May 2013.

 7.   In relation to DLM it was noted that  he  had  applied  to  join  his
    father in the UK but that there was no evidence in support of the claim
    that he lived with his stepmother thus it was not provided who  he  was
    living with at the time of the Sponsor's departure from Uganda nor  was
    it clear  the  level  of  relationship  with  his  mother  or  who  was
    responsible for the important decisions with regard to his life.   Thus
    the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that he was part  of  the
    Sponsor's family unit at the time of his departure from the country  of
    habitual residence  and  thus  it  was  also  refused  under  paragraph
    352D(iv) on 30th April 2013.

 8.   In relation to JN, that application was refused on the same basis  as
    DDK under paragraph 352D(iv) on 13th May 2013.  In respect of  CKS,  it
    was noted that he  had  applied  in  a  different  category  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent  relative  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Thus the application was considered under paragraph
    EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM.   The  decision  set  out  that  he  had  not
    provided evidence that he could not care  for  himself;  there  was  no
    evidence of any medical conditions nor was the Entry Clearance  Officer
    satisfied that he required due to either age,  illness  or  disability,
    long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday   tasks.    Thus   the
    application was refused under paragraph EC-DR1.1(d) of Appendix FM.  It
    is further noted that his mother was not applying to travel to  the  UK
    and therefore he had family to turn to  in  Uganda  if  necessary.   In
    relation to DEL it was refused on 13th May 2013 on the  basis  that  it
    was  noted  that  the  Sponsor  was  not  his  biological  father.   It
    considered the submission that the Sponsor's  name  was  on  the  birth
    certificate and that he had been brought up as his son  but  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer considered there was no evidence to demonstrate  that
    he had been adopted by the Sponsor; no  adoption  had  taken  place  in
    Uganda and it had not been demonstrated that there was  any  "de  facto
    adoption".  Thus the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the
    Appellant was a child of a person settled and  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom or was  being  admitted  for  settlement  at  this  time  under
    paragraph 352D(i).

 9. The Appellants exercised their right to appeal those decisions and as a
    result the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Britton)
    on 10th April 2014 at Newport.  In a determination promulgated on  25th
    April 2014 he dismissed all the  appeals.   In  that  determination  he
    considered the replies given by the first Appellant in her interview in
    2007 which had been relied upon  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    refuse her application in 2013.  At paragraph [22] of the  decision  he
    rejected the first Appellant and Sponsor's explanation for the  answers
    that had been given and at [24] did not accept the Sponsor  was  in  "a
    permanent relationship with M but that he was in a relationship with  F
    and others".  At [29] he did not  accept  the  Sponsor  and  the  first
    Appellant were in a permanent subsisting relationship  and  found  that
    she lived in a "very big  communal  place  where  they  all  treat  the
    children as if they are their own".  At  [30]  the  judge  was  unclear
    about the position of F as to whether she was the  Sponsor's  brother's
    widow or not but found that both CS and DLM live with their mother  and
    not with the Appellant and found that the Appellants were stating  they
    lived with her for the purpose of making the application.  In  relation
    to D he was not satisfied that he was in  a  permanent  and  subsisting
    relationship with the Sponsor and found that it is in the best interest
    of all the Appellants to remain with their mothers in  Uganda  as  they
    had lived in Uganda "all their life in a very close community".

10. The Appellants sought permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and permission was granted on 3rd June 2014 by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin.  The reasons given are as follows:-

         "The grounds are extremely long but in essence they  maintain  that
         the judge's fact-finding was  materially  flawed,  that  the  judge
         failed to assess the  first  Appellant's  case  with  reference  to
         paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules, that he failed  to  assess
         the cases of the remaining Appellants with reference  to  paragraph
         352D of the Rules, and that his assessment of the Appellants' cases
         under Article 8 was also materially flawed as he  failed  to  carry
         out any detailed assessment thereof and that he failed to undertake
         any  proportionality  balancing  exercise  when   considering   the
         Appellants' case under Article 8.

         Whilst the judge set out what he  considered  to  be  the  relevant
         evidence in his determination and he also set out  paragraphs  352A
         and 352D of the Immigration Rules, the judge failed to make any key
         findings of fact and he also failed to carry out any assessment  or
         make any findings under either paragraph 352A or paragraph 352D  in
         respect of any of the Appellants.  The judge also  failed  to  make
         any clear findings as to whether Article 8 was engaged in the  case
         of each individual Appellant, and if so upon the proportionality of
         the  Respondent's  decisions  in  the  individual  cases   of   the
         Appellants.   For  those  reasons  both   the   grounds   and   the
         determination disclose arguable errors of law."

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Doerfel,  Counsel
    instructed on behalf of the  International  Care  Network  appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellants and Ms Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer on
    behalf of the Respondent.  I heard oral submissions by Mr  Doerfel  who
    had also settled the Grounds of Appeal pages 1-13 of  the  core  bundle
    and also provided a skeleton argument on the day of hearing.  He relied
    upon those grounds and supplemented them by way of his oral submissions
    and by reference to the large volume of documentary evidence  contained
    in the Respondent's bundle and also the Appellants' bundle.

12.   The submissions, in essence related to the judge's  consideration  of
    what were the core issues  in  the  appeal  under  the  family  reunion
    provisions.  It was submitted that whilst there was some  reference  to
    the family refugee reunion Rules under 352A and D,  they  were  not  in
    fact considered during the body of the  determination  nor  were  there
    findings of fact made in relation  to  the  salient  issues  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  In particular, he  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the
    position of the first Appellant under paragraph 352A and submitted that
    no consideration was given to  the  provisions  of  that  Rule  and  no
    findings of fact were made relevant  to  the  refusal.   This  being  a
    refusal under paragraph 352A(ii) although there was  earlier  reference
    to the subsistence of the marriage and therefore relevant to  352A(iv).
    He  further  submitted  that  there  were  factual  inconsistencies  in
    relation to the findings made as to the subsistence of the relationship
    when relying upon the interview that took place in 2007 and highlighted
    each of those.  He further submitted that the judge  did  not  consider
    the interview answers in the light of the Sponsor's experiences and  no
    reference was made to that when reaching an assessment of the questions
    and answers that were given in that interview.  This was  material,  he
    submits, because in effect the reasons for dismissing the appeals  were
    based primarily on the answers given in that 2007 interview.

13. In relation to whether or not the relationship was subsisting,  further
    material evidence was not considered  by  the  judge  although  it  had
    formed a great deal of the  Respondent's  bundle  which  numbered  over
    1,000 pages.  The bundle  consisted  of  documentation  that  had  been
    produced on behalf of the Appellants  but  had  been  appended  to  the
    Respondent's bundle.  Helpfully Mr Doerfel's solicitor had  provided  a
    schedule of contents of the Respondent's bundle and in that there  were
    a number of documents relevant to the issue of the subsistence  of  the
    marriage including copies of money transfers, personal letters,  school
    reports and  other  documentation  which  went  to  the  issue  of  the
    subsistence of the marriage.  None of  that  documentary  evidence  had
    been taken into account when reaching an assessment as a whole.

14. In relation to the children, their applications had  all  been  refused
    under specific paragraphs of paragraph  352D  and  the  judge  did  not
    consider each of the Appellants' cases separately.  This was  important
    because of the reasons given for refusal and thus it was  necessary  to
    engage with those issues.  There was particular importance in  reaching
    conclusions on findings of fact relating to the nature  of  the  family
    unit prior to the Sponsor leaving Uganda as this  was  central  to  the
    issue.  Mr Doerfel proceeded to go through the applications of each  of
    the Appellants during  his  submissions.   Thus  he  concluded  in  his
    submissions that in view of the grounds and the skeleton argument taken
    together and his oral submissions it demonstrated that  the  judge  had
    made material errors of law and that the decision should be set aside.

15. Ms Johnstone relied upon the Rule 24 response that had  been  filed  on
    behalf of the Respondent on 19th June 2014.  In that Rule 24  response,
    it noted that whilst the judge  may  not  have  specifically  addressed
    paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules,  the  judge  did  not  believe
    there to be a subsisting relationship between the Sponsor and the first
    Appellant and thus she could not satisfy the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    response went on to state that the  judge  having  concluded  as  such,
    found that the dependants on the appeal could  not  meet  the  specific
    requirements.  He did not  accept  that  the  Sponsor's  children  were
    living with her as  claimed  nor  that  he  had  been  told  the  truth
    regarding  their  domestic  circumstances  and  that  it  was  in   the
    children's best  interests  to  remain  living  with  their  respective
    mothers in Uganda.  Thus it was submitted the judge having found  there
    was no subsisting relationship between mother and father, the Sponsor's
    children with the Appellant could not succeed under the Rules  thus  it
    was not a material error for failing to address their applications.

16.   In her oral submissions  she  submitted  in  relation  to  the  first
    Appellant her evidence was considered exhaustively by the judge and  in
    the context of the interview in 2007.  As to her claim he rejected that
    she had been instructed to give those answers and it was open to him at
    paragraph 22 to reach that conclusion on the evidence before  him.   He
    considered everything in the round and he had the  benefit  of  hearing
    the evidence.  At paragraph 29, the judge set out that he was asked  to
    consider the Appellants as a whole.  Whilst he did  not  refer  to  the
    Immigration Rules the findings make it clear that the judge found  that
    they were not living in the circumstances as claimed and therefore they
    could not meet the Rules.  The judge needed  evidence  that  they  were
    part of the family unit that he  found  that  they  were  living  as  a
    commune.  Furthermore, he reached the conclusion that  she  had  had  a
    child with somebody else namely DEL in 2004 and therefore she was in  a
    relationship with someone else before the Sponsor left Uganda.  In this
    respect she also made reference to the birth certificate  that  he  was
    only registered as the Appellant's father in 2008 and thus the  finding
    at [24] was right that she had had a child with another man.  There was
    no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to deal with the issue as to
    why his name was on the birth certificate when he was not  the  father.
    In any event none of the Appellants can meet the Immigration Rules  and
    it would not be an unjustifiably  harsh  result  for  them  not  to  be
    granted entry clearance.  Thus the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    was not wrong in law.

17. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my determination  which
    I now give.

18.   I have had the opportunity of hearing detailed submissions from  each
    of the advocates before me.  I have also had the opportunity of reading
    a large amount of documentary evidence that had been provided on behalf
    of the Appellants in furtherance of their applications before the Entry
    Clearance Officer and the skeleton argument produced.  Having done  so,
    I have reached the conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside as I find that it has erred in law in  its
    consideration of material issues in these conjoined appeals.   I  shall
    set out the reasons why I have reached that view.

19. The relevant provisions that the  judge  was  required  to  apply  were
    firstly, those under the Immigration Rules namely  paragraph  352A  (in
    relation to the principle Appellant) and paragraph 352D (in relation to
    the remaining Appellants save for CK who was over 18 at the time of the
    application and therefore he  was  considered  as  an  adult  dependant
    relative under the provisions of Appendix FM.  In the  alternative  the
    application is to be considered under Article 8 outside  of  the  Rules
    which was dependent upon the findings of fact made in relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is common ground between the  parties  that  the
    judge,  although  he  made  reference  to  those  provisions   in   the
    introductory part of the determination, did not seek to apply  them  in
    his findings or conclusions  which  start  at  paragraph  [22]  of  the
    determination.   It  is  argued  by  Ms  Johnstone  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that whilst that might be an error, it is not material  when
    considering the first Appellant's appeal because the  issue  the  judge
    was required to determine under paragraph 352A(iv) was whether each  of
    the parties intended to live with the other  as  his  spouse  or  civil
    partner and that the marriage was subsisting which was the question the
    judge considered under Article 8 albeit  not  under  the  Rule  itself.
    Further Ms Johnstone submits he considered relevant questions  even  if
    not in the context of the Rules.

20.  The question remains as to whether  the  judge  properly  applied  the
    issues to the evidence that was before him.  In  this  respect  I  have
    concluded that he did not.  The first identifiable error flows from the
    finding made concerning the reliance on the  interview  notes  of  2007
    which form the basis of the later refusal which is the subject of  this
    appeal.  The Appellant was never re-interviewed and therefore the  only
    interview with the first Appellant took place in 2007, one  year  after
    her husband had left Uganda to seek asylum in the United Kingdom  which
    was granted.  The thrust of the refusal is based on  the  interview  in
    2007 and it stated:-

         "Your application was refused because of lack of knowledge  of  the
         Sponsor; you were  not  aware  of  significant  incidents  in  your
         Sponsor's life and there were  serious  discrepancies  between  the
         information the Sponsor provided to  the  UK  authorities  and  the
         answers you gave at interview about him."

21. I pause here.  The refusal did not specify which questions demonstrated
    a lack of knowledge nor did it  identify  the  "serious  discrepancies"
    relating to the Sponsor's life.  The rest of the refusal letter went on
    to consider the explanation given by the first Appellant  in  which  it
    was  asserted  that  she  had  not  given  information  concerning  her
    husband's life in Uganda because she was concerned about the safety for
    herself and that of the family members.   The  reason  being  that  the
    Sponsor, who was a recognised refugee and having  experienced  torture,
    detention and having escaped did not trust the Ugandan authorities  and
    feared that the local staff would lead sensitive information  (divulged
    in the interview) to the Ugandan authorities.  The refusal  letter  did
    not accept that that would take place but even  if  there  was  such  a
    fear, that the first Appellant would have said something prior  to  the
    interview  and  not  give  incorrect  information  when  she  did   say
    something.  Again, the refusal letter does not particularise  what  the
    incorrect information was.

22. The judge dealt with these issues at paragraph 22 of the determination.
     He, of course, had the advantage of  hearing  the  Sponsor  give  oral
    evidence and considered that in the light of the  documentary  evidence
    and I do not lose sight of that and the importance of it.   He  reached
    the conclusion that he did not accept  the  explanation  given  by  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor for those answers and found that she had told
    the truth in the interview.  He did not give reasons as such but  posed
    a number of questions at paragraph 22.  It is those questions that have
    been the subject of challenge  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   I  am
    satisfied the judge did not properly  consider  the  replies  given  in
    interview  in  the  context  that  they  were  given  and  against  the
    background of the  Sponsor's  circumstances  and  at  places  they  are
    factually incorrect.  By way of example, the judge stated at  paragraph
    22 "There was no need for M (the first Appellant) in her  interview  to
    say anything about the  Sponsor's  escape  from  detention  or  leaving
    Uganda."  However that is factually incorrect.   During  the  interview
    she was expressly asked questions about her husband and whether he  had
    ever been arrested and if so when (see question  20),  whether  he  had
    been detained (question 21), whether he had been  detained  during  the
    elections (question 24).  In the interview it  can  be  seen  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did ask a number of questions relating  to  her
    husband's experiences in Uganda including arrest and detention.   Other
    questions asked in the interview related to the Sponsor and how he  had
    left Uganda (see question 28).  Another factual error made at paragraph
    22 is where the judge posed the question "If M  was  concerned  not  to
    mention  names,  why  was  F  mentioned?"   However  as  the  interview
    demonstrates the Appellant did not mention F, it was a  question  posed
    directly to her from the interviewer at question 30.

23.  When considering the interview and  the  Appellant's  explanation  for
    giving those answers, it was also important to consider the context and
    the background.  The interview relied on in 2013 took  place  in  2007;
    only one year after her husband had left Uganda.  It  was  accepted  by
    the UK authorities that the Sponsor had been recognised as a refugee on
    account of his experiences in Uganda.  He  had  been  detained  on  two
    occasions (including 2001 for eight months and 2006 from 10th March  to
    30th June 2006 when he escaped from detention and fled Uganda  on  16th
    August 2006).  It was further accepted that he had  been  a  victim  of
    torture as  set  out  in  the  Medical  Foundation  Report.   Thus  the
    Appellant  was  being  asked  to  divulge  information  concerning  her
    husband's experiences in Uganda one year after he left.   There  is  no
    consideration of the context in which the interview answers were  given
    by the Appellant.

24. The factual errors and the lack of context are material issues  because
    the judge reached the conclusion that the marriage was  not  subsisting
    based primarily on the answers given in  the  interview  in  2007  (see
    paragraphs 22 of the determination and 29 where the judge refers to the
    Appellant who "gave answers to  simple  questions.   The  answers  were
    inconsistent with those  given  by  the  Sponsor.")   Thus  substantial
    weight was given to that interview.

25. Furthermore, the judge did not consider the other documentary  evidence
    available to reach a conclusion on the genuineness and  subsistence  of
    the marriage or the makeup of the family unit at the time  the  Sponsor
    left Uganda which was  a  material  issue.   The  documentary  evidence
    consisted of the evidence given by the Sponsor on  arrival  in  the  UK
    (including his asylum interview of 11th October  2006)  where  he  gave
    some of the names of his wives including the first Appellant and F  and
    also his SEF statement where he gave details of being married with  two
    wives and five children.   There  were  a  number  of  money  transfers
    between the parties, personal letters and  cards,  a  large  number  of
    phone cards, and letters from the children.  The judge was required  to
    make an assessment of this evidence in reaching a conclusion  not  only
    on the subsistence of the relationship but also on the  makeup  of  the
    family unit and what it consisted of  at  the  time  the  Sponsor  left
    Uganda as this was a material issue as  it  formed  the  basis  of  the
    refusal under paragraph 352A and D in relation to all  the  Appellants.
    It would have been open to the judge to reject the evidence if  reasons
    were given for  so  doing,   however  there  is  no  reference  in  the
    determination  to  the  other  evidence  provided  in  support  of  the
    circumstances of the first Appellant and  those  of  the  children  and
    there was no engagement with that evidence.

26. There were other material findings that were  not  made  including  the
    makeup of the family unit (relevant to Paragraph 352D  in  relation  to
    the children and also flows from the findings in relation to the  first
    Appellant).  The judge was required  to  consider  the  nature  of  the
    family unit when the Sponsor left Uganda in 2006 and  was  required  to
    consider that in his findings.  It is insufficient to  say  as  he  did
    that they lived communally and it was incumbent on  the  judge  on  the
    unusual facts of this case to consider how the family unit was made up,
    at what time, the relationships between the parties and the children at
    the time the Sponsor left Uganda and in relation to the first Appellant
    whether the relationship continued to subsist in the light not only  of
    the interview in 2007  but  also  the  other  evidence  that  had  been
    produced and appended to the Respondent's bundle.

27. There is no reference to paragraph 352D in the  determination  nor  was
    there any analysis of the individual position of each of the Appellants
    two to six  to  determine  their  appeals  and  in  the  event  of  not
    satisfying the Rules to consider their applications in the  context  of
    the findings made under Article 8 (if so applicable).

28.  A  point  made  by  Ms  Johnstone  was  that  the  evidence  that  the
    relationship was not subsisting related to  the  circumstances  of  the
    birth of the child D and that whilst he was born in 2004, prior to when
    the Sponsor left Uganda that he  was  not  the  father  of  this  child
    (relying on subsequent DNA evidence) and thus she had had a child  with
    another  man  and  therefore  the  relationship  could  not  have  been
    subsisting and the judge was right to make that finding.  However  that
    submission failed to take into account that the evidence was  that  the
    Sponsor was in a polygamous relationship and it was  acknowledged  that
    the marriage was not faithfully monogamous for each party but that  was
    not evidence of its failure or  cessation.   Furthermore,  it  was  the
    Sponsor's case that he had considered himself to be  D's  legal  father
    (having been named on the birth certificate) and was always treated  as
    his son and the evidence that he was not the biological father was  not
    ascertained until the DNA evidence was available years later.  This,  I
    think, illustrates the necessity for careful findings  of  fact  to  be
    made as to the nature of the family unit, what it  comprised  of,  when
    making an  assessment  of  all  the  evidence  and  then  applying  the
    Immigration Rules and if necessary and if relied upon Article 8 outside
    of the Rules.

29. For those reasons, I have reached the conclusion that the determination
    cannot stand and that the appropriate order is for the decision  to  be
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact  can  be  preserved  and  thus
    fresh findings of fact  dealing  with  all  of  those  issues  will  be
    required to be made.  In those circumstances I have  also  reached  the
    conclusion that the correct disposal of the appeal  is  for  it  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh oral  hearing  to  that
    Tribunal.  Due to the nature  of  the  error  of  law,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal will be required to consider the oral evidence of the  Sponsor
    and the documentation to make fresh findings of fact  relevant  to  the
    issues relevant to the appeal.  Whilst it is not the ordinary  practice
    of the Tribunal to remit cases to the First-tier Tribunal,  I  consider
    that there are good reasons why I have reached  this  conclusion  given
    that fresh findings of fact will be required to be made on the evidence
    as a whole and also having given particular regard  to  the  overriding
    objective of the efficient disposal of the appeal.  Thus  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the case is to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Newport for a hearing in accordance  with
    Section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  and
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement  of  10th  February  2010  (as
    amended).

Decision

30. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law.   The  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    hearing on a date to be fixed with a directions hearing.


Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.








Signed                              Date 11/8/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


