
SELF-TYPED
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12829/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 September 2014                            |On 15 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - beijing
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss linlin shao
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms Alice Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms C Solomon, Solomon Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Majid  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 12 May  2014)  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision by an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance as
    the adopted child of Shao Wei. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an
    anonymity order, and I do not consider that such an order  is  required
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Judge Majid allowed the appeal under the  rules  and  under  Article  8
    ECHR. On 29 July 2014 Designated Judge McCarthy granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         The grounds argue that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for accepting that the appellant is the  adopted  child  of
         the sponsor. The grounds are well made  and  identify  an  arguable
         legal error.

Reasons for finding an error of law

 3. The Judge failed to address the cogent reasons advanced by the ECO, and
    endorsed by the ECM, for challenging the substance of the  relationship
    between the claimant and her aunt Shao Win, the veracity  and  legality
    of her adoption by her aunt and the credibility issues  raised  by  her
    aunt's conduct. Among other things, the ECM had  been  advised  by  the
    adoption office in China that, when applying to adopt, Shao Win had not
    disclosed to them that she had been living in the UK for  three  years,
    and had relied on an employment letter which represented that  she  was
    living and working in China. So the adoption office  had  been  falsely
    induced to believe that Shao Win was living in the  same  household  as
    the claimant, providing her with motherly care on a day to  day  basis.
    Furthermore, there was a legitimate concern as to whether  the  sponsor
    could be said to  have  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  claimant's
    upbringing  given  that  the  claimant  had  been  brought  up  in  her
    grandparents' household both before and after the sponsor  migrated  to
    the UK; and her father, Shao Win's brother, was at all  material  times
    either a member of the same household as the claimant or  living  close
    enough to maintain contact with her.

 4. While the claimant's representatives sought to address  these  concerns
    in the rebuttal evidence tendered for the appeal, the judge  failed  to
    engage with the concerns of the ECO and ECM or to make findings on  the
    rebuttal evidence tendered by the claimant.

 5. The judge only made a finding on the issue of sole responsibility,  and
    this finding was itself inadequately reasoned. The following paragraphs
    in TD (Yemen) are pertinent:

         45. To  understand  the  proper  approach  to  the  issue  of  sole
             responsibility, we begin with the situation where a child  has
             both parents involved in its life.  The starting point must be
             that both  parents  share  responsibility  for  their  child's
             upbringing.  This would be the position  if  the  parents  and
             child lived in the same country and we can see  no  reason  in
             principle why it should be different if one parent  has  moved
             to the United Kingdom.

          46. In order to  conclude  that  the  UK  based  parent  had  sole
             responsibility for the child, it would be  necessary  to  show
             that the parent abroad had abdicated  any  responsibility  for
             the child and was merely acting at the  direction  of  the  UK
             based parent and  was  otherwise  totally  uninvolved  in  the
             child's upbringing.  The possibility clearly cannot  be  ruled
             out: Alagon provides an example of this exceptional  situation
             and turns upon an  acceptance  by  the  judge  of  the  wholly
             unusual situation that the father was 'doing nothing  for  the
             child beyond the bare fact of living with  her  on  reasonably
             good terms'.

 6. Because  he  found  the  sponsor  to  be  solely  responsible  for  the
    claimant's upbringing, the judge found her to  be  credible  generally.
    This  was  illogical  and  inadequate  reasoning,  as  the  credibility
    concerns about  the  sponsor  extended  beyond  the  question  of  sole
    responsibility, to questions such as whether a formal adoption procured
    by fraud is valid and/or whether the adoption was  one  of  convenience
    arranged to facilitate the claimant's admission to the UK.

 7. Both parties have been deprived of a fair  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and so the proper course is for the appeal to be remitted for
    a fresh hearing de novo.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside.

Directions

 9. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a complete rehearing before any judge apart from Judge  Majid,  with  a
    time estimate of 2 hours.



Signed        Date 17 September 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

