
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/12511/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2013                                |On 4 July 2013               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             SEINAB AHMED YAHYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SOMALIA

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Wallace, promulgated on 6  February  2013,  dismissing  her  appeal
   against the respondent's decision to refuse her entry clearance  to  join
   her son, who is a refugee in the UK.


2) The appeal failed under the Rules because the  judge  thought  there  was
   insufficient evidence that adequate  accommodation  would  be  available,
   without overcrowding.  The ground  of  appeal  dispute  that  issue,  and
   secondly complain that the judge  failed  to  determine  the  case  under
   Article 8 of the ECHR.

3) Mr Devlin developed his argument under reference  to  paragraph  319V(iv)
   of the Rules; the definitions in paragraph 6 of the  Rules;  the  Housing
   (Scotland)  Act  1987  Part  VII,  sections  135-137;   the   Immigration
   Directorate Instructions of March 2013 Annex F, Chapter 8,  6.3  Guidance
   on Overcrowding; and the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
   made a positive finding of credibility regarding the sponsor. It  is  not
   necessary to rehearse his analysis in full detail,  because  Mr  Matthews
   (fairly and correctly) acknowledged  that  it  is  accurate.   In  brief,
   Glasgow City Council provided and would continue to provide accommodation
   complying  with  statutory  requirements,  and  such   accommodation   is
   sufficient not only for the sponsor's  existing  household  but  for  the
   household with the addition of the appellant.  The evidence  showed  that
   accommodation would be available which did not involve  overcrowding  and
   which did not involve additional recourse to public funds.

4) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  following
   decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to the  First-
   tier Tribunal, is allowed under the Immigration Rules.





                               [pic]
                                4 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
