
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12055/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 December 2014                       |On 17 December 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Mrs Ratree Thorn
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett
For the Respondent:    Mr Wray


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The  appellant  in  this  case  is  a  Thai  national.   She  began  a
    relationship with the sponsor, who is a British national, and they  had
    a child together, Felix Jack Thorn, date of birth 18 June 2013, who, by
    virtue of his father's British nationality, is a British citizen.

2.   The appellant applied for entry clearance to the UK as the  partner  of
    the UK sponsor and that was considered by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    in Bangkok but he refused the application for various  reasons.   There
    were concerns about  the  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant but the  ECO  was  also  not  satisfied  that  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  specifically  Appendix  FM
    paragraph  E-ECP.1.1  were  met.    Therefore   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities he concluded that this was not an application which ought
    to succeed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal proceedings

3.   The appellant subsequently appealed  against  that  decision  and  that
    appeal came before Immigration Judge Majid sitting at Taylor  House  on
    24 September 2014. Both  parties  were  represented  at  that  hearing.
    According to Mr Wray, the Immigration Judge found the sponsor to  be  a
    credible witness but there does not appear to be any clear  finding  of
    credibility anywhere in the determination that I can find and  Mr  Wray
    did not refer me to any particular passage.

4.   The determination does not adopt a conventional format in that it  does
    not clearly set out the law and then the facts and then apply  the  law
    to those facts. Nor did the Immigration Judge give  clear  reasons  for
    reaching the decision he did.  This, by itself, would  not  necessarily
    be fatal but for the fact that the Immigration Judge  appears  to  have
    decided that the case could succeed under Article  8  without  properly
    analysing why the case failed under the Immigration Rules  and  whether
    Article 8 really had any application to the case at all.  It  has  been
    emphasised many times by the higher courts that it is essential  to  be
    able to identify why a judge  reached  his  conclusions,  even  if  the
    detail of how he got there is not immediately apparent.

5.   It seems to have been accepted by the  parties  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the case could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and that was why the Immigration Judge went on to deal with Article 8.

6.   The respondent's grounds of appeal  dated  6  October  2014  have  been
    settled by D Neale. In those grounds the respondent properly summarises
    the test in Article  8  cases  to  be:  whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules for allowing  the
    case under Article 8?  It  has  also  been  said  that  there  must  be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life not continuing abroad in  order
    for the case to succeed under  Article  8  in  circumstances  where  it
    cannot succeed under the Rules.

7.   The respondent submits in her grounds of appeal that the appellant  and
    sponsor entered their relationship in full knowledge of the  fact  that
    there was no automatic right to enter the UK  to  form  a  family  life
    here.  It is right that the UK maintains immigration controls and these
    include insisting that financial requirements  be  met  before  foreign
    nationals are allowed to enter or remain in the UK.  Pausing there,  it
    may be that in the future the appellant might meet  these  requirements
    and be allowed to continue her family life with the sponsor in  the  UK
    but the test as set out by the respondent in her grounds of  appeal  is
    correct.

Conclusions on the arguments before the Upper Tribunal

8.    With  respect,  the  Immigration  Judge's   determination   does   not
    adequately address the respondent's concerns.  He  did  not  apply  the
    correct Article 8 test and he did  not  consider  the  whole  issue  of
    proportionality.  The  principal  issue  before  him  was  whether  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to refuse entry to the UK to a  foreign
    national  on  the  grounds  that  she  failed  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.

9.   The Immigration Judge failed to consider the fact that the  appellant's
    failure to meet the  financial  requirements  of  the  Rules  was  also
    material to the question of proportionality under Article  8.  He  also
    failed to consider whether the relationship between the  appellant  and
    the sponsor could continue from afar. In particular, the appellant  can
    continue to communicate with the sponsor  by  telephone,  e  mail  and,
    possibly, may be able to visit the appellant in the future. It was not,
    in my view, unreasonable for the respondent to decide that this  was  a
    case where entry clearance   should be  refused  and  insist  that  the
    appellant  make  a  fresh  application  when  and  if  she  meets   the
    requirements of the rules.

10.  I am satisfied having heard brief argument  at  the  hearing  that  the
    Immigration Judge did not produce a decision which is cogent,  coherent
    and clear and more importantly it does contain a material error of  law
    as addressed in the grounds of appeal,  namely  it  does  not  properly
    identify the test under Article 8 and reach clear conclusions.

11.  In my view it would not be desirable  to  have  a  further  hearing  at
    which the whole case was reheard  effectively  de  novo.   This  is  an
    appellate tribunal. The directions sent out by Judge  Southern  clearly
    state that if a party wishes to adduce any fresh  evidence  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal he must make an application to do so  and  that
    application must be made no later than 14 days before the hearing.  The
    date they were sent out is not clear from the draft that  I  have  been
    sent but it would have been on or after 12  November  2014.  There  has
    been no application to adduce fresh evidence.

12.  I am  satisfied  that  even  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached   a
    favourable view of the sponsor's evidence, this was  not  a  case  that
    ought properly have succeeded under Article 8 based on the evidence and
    arguments submitted before the Immigration Judge. In the  circumstances
    I do find there to be a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I am going to substitute the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal which is that the appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse entry clearance is dismissed.

13.  As a postscript to my decision I would add that there is no bar that  I
    can see to the appellant making a fresh application for entry clearance
    either on the basis of continuing her family life with the  sponsor  in
    the UK or indeed for the purposes of family visits but I  say  no  more
    about that because obviously the relevant criteria  would  need  to  be
    met.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the respondent is allowed. The decision of the  respondent  to
refuse the appellant entry clearance stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

