
[pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. OA/12835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On: 7 September 2015                 |On: 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


                                   Between

                            Suvejini Surenthiran
                         (Anonymity Order Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, instructed by Greater London  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1     The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the First  tier
    Tribunal Monson dated 24 March 2015 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer  dated  13  May  2013
    refusing her entry clearance  under  Appendix  FM  EC-P.1.1(d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  as  the  spouse  of  Somasuntharam  Surenthiran,  a
    British national ('the Sponsor').

2     The couple were married in Sri  Lanka  on  18  January  2012  and  the
    Appellant had originally applied for entry clearance in 2012, resulting
    in a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer  dated  9  November  2012,
    refusing entry clearance on the grounds, inter alia, that the Appellant
    had not  submitted  bank  statements  of  the  Sponsor  showing  salary
    deposits consistent with the payslips that had been provided in support
    of the application.

3     A second application was made on or around 12 February 2013. This  was
    accompanied by a sponsorship  declaration  from  the  Sponsor  stating,
    inter alia [14] that in respect of one of his two  jobs,  he  was  paid
    cash, and that his income would not reflect in his bank statements.

4      In  the  decision  of  13  May  2013,  the  Respondent  refused   the
    application on the grounds that the evidence submitted  in  support  of
    the application did not meet the relevant requirements in the rules  as
    to specified evidence in the following respects:

    (i)    the letter from the sponsor's employer Bawa Forecourts  did  not
         confirm his gross annual salary for  the period over which  he  had
         been paid the level of salary relied upon in the application;

    (ii)   the letter from the sponsor's other employer Shell Hove did  not
         confirm his gross annual salary for the period over  which  he  had
         been paid the level of salary relied upon in the application;

    (iii)  there were no signed contracts from either employer;

    (iv)   the payslips from Bawa  Forecourts  did  not  cover  a  6  month
         period;

    (v)    the payslips from Shell Hove did not cover a 6 month period;

    (vi)    although  the  Appellant  had  provided  the   Sponsor's   bank
         statements for a period exceeding 6 months, the bank statements did
         not correspond to the same period(s) as the wage slips at paragraph
         2(c), showing that the salary had been paid into an account in  the
         Sponsor's name (or a joint account).

5     A notice of appeal to the First  tier  Tribunal  dated  10  June  2013
    asserted (incorrectly, given that the Appellant  accepts  that  further
    documentation was provided to the Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) and  to
    the First tier Tribunal subsequently) that all relevant documents  were
    submitted with the application and the Appellant  invited  the  ECM  to
    reconsider the ECO's decision.

6     The ECM reviewed the Appellant's application on 5 December  2013,  and
    noted that the Appellant had provided further evidence. The ECM noted:

         "The Appellant has produced further  evidence  in  respect  of  her
         sponsor (sic) ability to meet the income threshold.  Having  looked
         again at the ECO's decision to refuse the appellant on the  grounds
         there was missing specified documents to support the application  I
         note, however, these documents do not address the concerns in their
         entirety and I am not prepared to overlook these concerns  for  the
         following reasons.

         The appellant is required to provide evidence of her sponsor  (sic)
         employment by the means of six months payslips dated within 28 days
         of the application being submitted.  With  the  grounds  of  appeal
         there are a number of payslips provided  for  his  employment  with
         Bawa Forecourts Ltd - however  there  are  still  payslips  missing
         which would render them not consecutive; namely week  21,  30,  31,
         35, and 42.  In  addition  for  his  employment  with  Shell  Hove,
         December 2012 payslips is missing.

         I also note that whilst  the  appellant  has  again  provided  bank
         statements - I note October 2012 and November 2012 is  missing  and
         as such the appellant has not met the requirements  under  Appendix
         FM-SE paragraph 2(c).

         In the light of the  missing  specified  evidence  I  maintain  the
         decision to refuse entry clearance."

7     The Appellant appealed to the First  tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal  was
    originally listed for hearing on 18 July 2014 before Judge  Grant,  but
    this hearing was adjourned at the Appellant's request to obtain further
    evidence of the Sponsor's employment from HMRC. By the time the  appeal
    came before Judge Monson on 9 March 2015, the Appellant had  been  able
    to provide further evidence from HMRC as to the Sponsor's  income,  and
    photocopies of missing payslips, save for a payslip from December  2012
    from Shell Hove, which could not be obtained.

8     The position of the Respondent, represented by Home Office  Presenting
    Officer Ms Deshraj was recorded by the Judge as follows:

         "20.     Having checked all the documentary  evidence,  Ms  Deshraj
         accepted that all the documents identified as missing by the  Entry
         Clearance Manager had now been provided  except  for  the  December
         2012 payslip. But the refusal had been lawful, on the  evidence  as
         it stood at the date of the refusal decision.  The  maintenance  of
         the refusal by the Entry Clearance manager had also been lawful  at
         the time, bearing in mind the continuing absence  of  some  of  the
         documents. The effect was  draconian,  but  the  Rules  had  to  be
         applied."

9     The Judge noted that there were two respects in  which  the  mandatory
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE were not met. The  first  was  that  the
    bank statements did not show payment of the sponsor's wages from one of
    his employment into his bank. The other was that  there  had  not  been
    complete compliance with App FM-SE due to  the  failure  to  produce  a
    payslip for December 2012.

10    The Judge stated at [24]:

         "Since the Entry Clearance manager did not maintain the refusal  of
         the ground that there had be non-compliance with paragraph 2(c)  of
         Appendix  FM-SE,  I  find  that  he  waived  compliance  with   his
         particular provision, as he was entitled to do under the evidential
         flexibility provisions at the beginning of Appendix FM-SE."

11    However the Judge thereafter at [25-28] held that he could  not  allow
    the appeal on the basis of the documentation that was  before  him  and
    held at [28] that his jurisdiction was  limited  to  the  circumstances
    actually appertaining at the date of the refusal decision, and  he  was
    constrained  to  find  that  the  decision  appealed  against  was   in
    accordance with the Rules or otherwise in accordance with the law.

12    The Appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  argue,  in
    summary, that the Judge misdirected himself in law in finding  that  he
    was prohibited from considering evidence that was submitted to the  FtT
    after the date of the ECO's  decision,  on  the  grounds  that  s.85(4)
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('NIAA  2002')  provided
    that:

         "On an appeal under section 82(1) against a decision  the  Tribunal
         may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to  the  substance
         of the decision, including a matter arising after the date  of  the
         decision".

13    Permission to appeal was given by Judge of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    Levin on 18 May 2015.

14    In the hearing, I heard submission from Mr Turner for the Ms  Fijiwala
    for the Respondent.

15    I indicated to the parties  my  preliminary  view  that  the  FtT  was
    entitled to take into account evidence submitted to it  which  had  not
    been submitted with an  application.  Whereas  Appendix  FM-SE  para  D
    specifies that evidence submitted to the Respondent after the  date  of
    application will only be considered by the Respondent  in  the  limited
    circumstances set out in the  sub-paragraphs  that  follow  (D(a)-(f)),
    s.85(4) NIAA 2002 places no similar constraint on the FtT.

16    However, I raised a concern with the parties  that,  contrary  to  the
    Judge's apparent suggestion that the ECM had waived the requirements of
    Appendix FM-SE 2(c) (the requirement for  salary  to  be  paid  into  a
    sponsor's bank account), the ECM had made no such concession.

17    To re-iterate the observations made by the ECM:

         "I also note that whilst the  appellant  has  again  provided  bank
         statements - I note October 2012 and November 2012 is  missing  and
         as such the appellant has not met the requirements  under  Appendix
         FM-SE paragraph 2(c)."

18    Paragraph 2(c) of Appendix FM-SE provides:

         "2. In respect of salaried  employment  in  the  UK  (except  where
         paragraph 9 applies[1]), all of  the  following  evidence  must  be
         provided:

             ...

             (c)  Personal  bank  statements  corresponding  to  the   same
             period(s) as the payslips at paragraph 2(a), showing that  the
             salary has been paid into an account in the name of the person
             or in the name of the person and their partner jointly."

19     Having  highlighted  my  concerns  regarding  the  Appellant's   non-
    satisfaction of App FM-SE 2(c), I stood the matter down for  Mr  Turner
    to consider the point. When the matter was  later  resumed,  Mr  Turner
    submitted that the ECM makes reference to the fact that statements  for
    the months of October and November 2012 were said to  be  missing,  and
    that the later provision of those statements therefore cured the  issue
    relied upon by the ECM.  Mr Turner submitted that the ECO, the ECM  and
    the HOPO before the Judge had all waived the requirement to satisfy App
    FM-SE 2(c).

20     I  do  not  find  that  to  be  a  sustainable  submission.  The  ECO
    specifically raised the non-satisfaction of App FM-SE 2(c) as an  issue
    in the refusal; the Sponsor's income from one of his jobs was not  paid
    into is bank account. App FM-SE para 2(c) is, as the Judge observed,  a
    mandatory requirement that such income should be paid into a  sponsor's
    bank account. It is not possible to submit that the ECO did  not  raise
    that point; he did.  Indeed, the same point  had  been  raised  in  the
    previous refusal.

21    Further, it is similarly not sustainable to submit that  the  ECM  had
    waived the requirement under App FM-SE 2(c).  Although  the  ECM  makes
    reference to two particular months bank statements being missing, there
    is specific reference to non-compliance with App FM-SE 2(c). The  later
    provision of statements for the months referred to would  not,  without
    more, establish that the requirements of App FM-SE 2(c) were  met,  and
    the language used by the ECM does not indicate that mere  provision  of
    the missing documents would result in App FM-SE  being  satisfied.  The
    missing months might have shown that the Sponsor's income had been paid
    into his bank account. It would have taken much more specific  language
    for the ECM to be treated as having made some sort of  concession  that
    mere provision of the missing documents would result in satisfaction of
    App FM-SE 2(c). The whole purposes of the provision is to require  that
    income be paid into the account.

22    Further, even if Ms Deshraj, appearing for the Respondent  before  the
    Judge,  accepted that all the documents identified as  missing  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager had now been provided except for  the  December
    2012 payslip, this says nothing as to  whether  the  provision  of  the
    documents resulted in the relevant rule being  satisfied.  Indeed,  she
    proceeded to resist the appeal being allowed. Before  me,  Ms  Fijiwala
    resisted the Appellant's appeal to this Tribunal on the  basis  that  I
    had identified, ie that App FM-SE 2(c) had not been satisfied.

23    Although considerable time and effort  was  taken  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant to locate and submit to the FtT documentation which  was  not
    submitted to the ECO in the application,  it  seems  to  me  that  this
    effort was misguided. Absent a clear an unequivocal indication from the
    Respondent that it did not intend to rely on the requirement under  App
    FM-SE 2(c) that the Sponsor's income be paid into his bank account (and
    for the avoidance of doubt I find that there was  no  such  concession)
    then the Appellant's application for entry clearance was doomed to fail
    from the outset. The requirement of paying cash earnings  into  a  bank
    account is manifestly  clear  from  App  FM-SE  2(c)  itself,  and  the
    relevant  IDI  guidance:  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.7  Appendix  Armed  Forces  Financial
    Requirement:

         "Under paragraph 1(n) of Appendix FM-SE the  gross  amount  of  any
         cash income may  be  counted  where  the  person's  specified  bank
         statements show the deposit of the full net amount which relates to
         the gross amount shown  on  their  payslips  (or  in  the  relevant
         specified evidence provided  in  addition  to  the  specified  bank
         statements in relation to non-employment income).  Otherwise,  only
         the net amount shown  on  the  specified  bank  statements  may  be
         counted. Those wishing  to  rely  on  cash  income  to  sponsor  an
         application subject to the financial requirement may need to change
         the way they manage their money and bank the  full  net  amount  so
         that they can then rely on the  gross  amount  of  that  income  in
         sponsoring the application. Like the other evidential  requirements
         of Appendix FM-SE which seek  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the
         system for all genuine applicants and  sponsors,  it  is  important
         that those wishing to rely on the gross amount of their cash income
         from  employment  corroborate  this  income  through   their   bank
         statements, as well as the required payslips and employer's letter.



         Example

         The prospective sponsor of an application for entry clearance as  a
         partner is in nonsalaried employment with a  construction  firm  in
         the UK. He is paid weekly in cash  and  receives  payslips  showing
         this net income, together with the gross  amount  and  the  correct
         deductions for tax and National Insurance.  He  currently  deposits
         around half of his net income in his bank  account  each  week  and
         uses the remainder of the cash to pay his  rent  and  some  of  his
         living expenses. He will need instead to bank all of his net income
         each week so that this income is reflected in his  bank  statements
         for a period of at least 6 months prior to the date of  application
         in order to be able to rely on the gross amount of this  employment
         income in sponsoring his partner's application. Failure to do  this
         would mean that the unbanked  cash  income  could  not  be  counted
         towards meeting the financial requirement."

24    The Appellant and Sponsor, and those who have advised them, have  been
    aware since even prior to the present application  of  the  requirement
    that the Sponsor's wages be paid into his bank account. The sponsor was
    aware of the problem, as indicated by his sponsorship declaration  made
    at the time of the present application. The Appellant would have better
    advised to ensure that the sponsor paid his income into the bank for  6
    months prior to making a fresh application.

25    Even if the Respondent's response in this matter under Rule 24 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 did not seek to rely  on
    the point I raised  at  the  hearing  regarding  the  Appellant's  non-
    satisfaction of App FM-SE 2(c), I find that the  point  is  an  obvious
    point of law which it was appropriate for the Tribunal to raise of  its
    own motion.

26    The Appellant's appeal was  also  dismissed  by  the  Judge  on  human
    rights grounds and there is no challenge to that part of  his  decision
    by the Appellant before this Tribunal.

    Decision

27    I find that the Judge's decision  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    involved the making of an error of law, the  Judge  having  erroneously
    directed himself in law that  the  FtT  could  not  take  into  account
    evidence in an appeal such as the present that had not  been  submitted
    with the application to the ECO. However, that error was  not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal. The Judge also erred in law in  appearing
    to find, in the absence of a clear and unequivocal evidence,  that  the
    Respondent had waived the requirements of App FM-SE  2(c).  That  error
    was also not material, given that the appeal was dismissed.

28    I do not set aside the Judge's decision,  although  I  uphold  it  for
    reasons  different  to  those  advanced  by  the  Judge;  ie  that  the
    Appellant's appeal stood to  be  dismissed  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant had not satisfied the requirements  of  App  FM-SE  2(c)  and
    therefore the application stood to be refused under EC-P.1.1(d) and  E-
    ECP.3.1.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Date: 15.12.15

-----------------------
[1] paragraph 9 relates to a director's income from employment and/or
shares in a limited company based in the UK, which does not apply here.


