

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12751/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |On 29th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                             PHANUMAT KHRUTSAHA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr T Lay, of Counsel (by direct access)
Respondent:   Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISIONS, REMITTAL AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 14th May 2013, whereby the application of  the  Appellant
    for the status of settlement to enable her to enter the United  Kingdom
    and reside there with her mother was  refused.   By  its  determination
    promulgated on 04 March  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    dismissed the ensuing appeal.  Permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal
    was granted on the  grounds  of  procedural  unfairness,  disregard  of
    material evidence and/or a failure to make necessary findings and/or  a
    failure to provide reasoned findings and failing to apply  the  correct
    legal test.

 2. In an ex tempore judgment delivered at the conclusion of the hearing, I
    allowed the appeal, on the following grounds, in summary:

    (a)  I consider that the FtT failed to engage, sufficiently or at  all,
         with all material evidence, in a case where  the  evidence  adduced
         was voluminous, the history was  protracted  and  not  without  its
         subtleties and complexities and, colloquially, the devil lay in the
         detail.  As a result of this primary failure, there was  a  related
         failure to make necessary  findings  on  material  factual  issues.
         This  relates  primarily  to  the  so-called  "second"  period  viz
         November 2012 to May 2013, in respect whereof there is a paucity of
         findings in the determination.  I make clear my analysis that while
         there is a series of finding in [6] - [11]  of  the  determination,
         these, carefully and  contextually  examined,  all  belong  to  the
         "first" period, viz that pre-dating November 2012.

    (b)  The determination also suffers from  a  lack  of  clarity  in  the
         findings which were purportedly  made  in  respect  of  the  second
         period, in [12].  In particular, the final part of  this  paragraph
         is couched  in  opaque  terms  and  rehearses  findings  which  are
         formulated as alternatives on a self-evidently key issue.

    (c)  I further consider that the FtT failed to apply the correct  test,
         which the Court of Appeal has determined to be that the  touchstone
         of "sole responsibility" is the continuing control and direction by
         the UK parent concerned in respect of the important decisions about
         the upbringing of the relevant child: see the convenient summary in
         TD - v - Entry Clearance Officer, Sana'a [2006] UK  AIT  00049,  at
         [50].  In its determination, the FtT did not identify the  relevant
         authorities (which were binding  on  it),  did  not  formulate  the
         governing test and did not purport to apply it.

 3. For  these  reasons,  the  second  and  third  grounds  of  appeal  are
    established.   I consider  that, having regard to the conclusions which
    I have  expressed  above,  the  first  ground  of  appeal,  a  discrete
    complaint of procedural unfairness, does not, logically, arise.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

4.   I set aside the determination of the FtT.

5.   At the conclusion of the  hearing,  I  enunciated  the  following  case
    management directions:

    (a)  The appeal will be remitted to a differently constituted  FtT  for
         the purpose of remaking the decision.

    (b)  Any application on behalf  of  the  Appellant  to  adduce  further
         evidence will be made in accordance with  the  relevant  procedural
         rule within 28 days of 16 July 2014.

      c) The relisting will take place not before 01 September 2014.


      d) A Thai interpreter will attend.










                                                 [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 16 July 2014
