
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12188/2013
     OA/12189/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2014                          |On 11 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                             Mr bach Viet nguyen
                            Ms hong nhung nguyen
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - hanoi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Davison
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Vietnam born in 1996 and 2000.  They are
    brother and sister.  They applied for entry clearance with  a  view  to
    settlement as the children of a parent given limited leave to enter  or
    remain with a view to settlement.

 2. The applications were refused under paragraph 301  of  the  Immigration
    Rules on 2 May 2013.

 3. The immigration history  of  their  mother,  the  Sponsor,  is  not  in
    dispute.  She entered the UK illegally in 2005.  She did  not  regulate
    her immigration status for seven years.  In August 2011 she  married  a
    British citizen.  In April 2013 she was granted limited leave to remain
    as a spouse until 2015.  In July 2011 she gave birth to a  daughter  by
    her husband.  Once she had been given limited leave to remain  and  was
    able to travel she, in July 2012 visited Vietnam.  On 10  October  2012
    the Appellants made their applications for settlement.

 4. The basis of the refusal by the Respondent was that the Appellants  had
    lived from a young age in the home of their maternal grandmother.  They
    are in full time education and live in the home of close family members
    with access to modern amenities.  The fact that they  had  waited  some
    six years before making the application indicated that  they  were  not
    living in serious and compelling  circumstances  which  made  exclusion
    undesirable.

 5.  It  was  noted  from  an  interview  that  their  grandmother  attends
    parent/teacher meetings and it is she who consents to them taking  part
    in school excursions without consultation with their mother.

 6. The Respondent noted a claim that their mother calls every day and that
    she supports them financially by sending money each month and  she  has
    also visited twice.

 7. The Respondent concluded that  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  the
    grandmother had abdicated any responsibility for the Appellants and was
    merely acting at the direction of their mother.  It was concluded  that
    it had not been shown that their mother  had  sole  responsibility  for
    them.

 8.  The   decision   was   refused   under   paragraph   301(i)(b)   'sole
    responsibility' and (i)(c) 'serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which make exclusion of the children  undesirable',  and
    on adequacy of accommodation.

 9. They appealed.

10. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 8 August 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier Andonian dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules and  on
    human rights grounds. It appears that (i) (b) and (i) (c) were the only
    issues before him.

11. The judge's findings on sole responsibility are at paragraph  8ff.   In
    summary, he found that while the Sponsor  called  her  children  daily,
    sent money monthly and visited occasionally it was the grandmother  who
    had day-to-day responsibility.  It was she who attended parent/ teacher
    meetings and who consented to the taking part in school excursions.  It
    was she who allows the children to go out. It is  with  her  permission
    and without any consultation with the mother.

12. The mother, indeed, has very little to do with the children 'except  to
    send money and phone them regularly' [8].  When on a few occasions  she
    has been to Vietnam whilst she takes them out the mother 'did  not  say
    in evidence that .. she goes to the schools where the  children  attend
    and asks how they are getting along  or  spends  any  time  with  their
    homework or anything of the sort' [8].

13. The grandmother's interview evidence was that it is  she  'who  attends
    parent/teacher meetings...(and)...who consents to the Appellants taking
    part in any excursions without consulting with the Sponsor mother [8].'
    It is the  grandmother  who  is  'responsible  for  looking  after  the
    children on a daily basis such as feeding, washing  them,  meeting  all
    their demands, in living and studying' [8].  It is the grandmother 'who
    actually looks after the children and there is no particular  direction
    given by the Sponsor in that regard'.  He continued:  'the  reality  is
    that (the grandmother) is the carer of the  children  as  she  candidly
    said  so,  and  at  best  the  Sponsor  can  be  said  to  have  shared
    responsibility  but  not  sole  responsibility  for  the  care  of  the
    Appellants' [8].

14. The judge went on (at [10]): 'It was the grandmother who was taking all
    the interests in so far as the schooling of the children is  concerned,
    who dealt with the school and children's studies and to whom the school
    reports were sent, who attended parents  meetings  and  she  took  full
    responsibility in that regard.  She  also  attends  to  the  children's
    social needs and any medical issues they  may  have'.   ...  'Also  the
    Sponsor in her evidence accepted that if the children are not well they
    turn to their grandmother.  It was the grandmother who  stated  to  the
    ECO that the Sponsor 'does not take any such responsibility towards the
    children in terms of their welfare, education and social issues because
    she has no time ...' [10].   Further,  'save  for  spending  some  time
    together in Vietnam and having a good time, and sending  money  to  the
    children via her mother, and also telephoning the children  and  seeing
    them when she goes to Vietnam, she does not do anything else in reality
    and the  day-to-day  guidance  about  education  is  conducted  by  the
    grandmother' [10].

15. On sole responsibility the judge concluded (at [17]) that 'The evidence
    of the  Sponsor  as  to  having  sole  responsibility  contradicts  the
    evidence of the grandmother'.  The judge did not find the Sponsor to be
    a credible witness.

16. The judge also  considered  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    circumstances requiring the entry of the  Appellants.   She  found  (at
    [6]) that the Sponsor married a UK national in August 2011 but  it  was
    not until 'well over a year later that the Appellants applied for entry
    clearance'.  Such, the judge considered, did not give  the  'impression
    that the Sponsor was very concerned that the children should come  over
    at the earliest opportunity ...'.  Indeed, the  'timing  of  the  entry
    clearance application demonstrates that they are not living in  serious
    and  compelling  circumstances  in  their  country  which  makes  their
    exclusion from the UK undesirable'.  The Appellants are in  'full  time
    education in Vietnam and live at home with close  family  members  with
    access to all modern amenities [7].

17. The judge also considered the best interests of the children. He  found
    that the children have a 'stable environment, have  all  their  friends
    and other relatives in Vietnam, all their  school  friends  there,  and
    live at home and are well looked after by their grandmother  ...  There
    is no medical evidence of such compelling and serious  nature  to  show
    that the grandmother is so ill that the children's best  interests  are
    to be served by leaving Vietnam' [18].

18. The judge noted that the Sponsor came to  the  UK  in  2005  illegally,
    leaving her children behind, the younger child being  only  five  years
    old.  The Sponsor 'considered looking after her children ...  as  being
    less important than coming to the UK as an illegal entrant' [20].  Once
    here she waited  some  seven  years  before  bringing  herself  to  the
    attention of the authorities by which time she had formed a new  family
    unit and had a child by her new spouse.  The  judge  in  light  of  the
    evidence did not believe that the Sponsor  'considered  being  reunited
    with her children to be her overriding objective or that she considered
    their best interests would be served by being with her' [20]. The judge
    concluded on this matter by accepting that the mother  'has  maintained
    an interest in the Appellants' lives' and has visited and assisted with
    their finances but he was satisfied in this case that 'responsibilities
    for the Appellants  has  been  at  best  shared  between  the  maternal
    grandmother and the mother Sponsor [21].'

19. In considering Article 8 the judge found that the Sponsor had left  her
    children soon after divorce from their father leaving them in the  care
    of their grandmother; there was no evidence that their father does  not
    want anything to do with them and does not see them; the children  have
    lived their entire life in Vietnam in the same  home  and  have  become
    socially aware with friends they have  bonded  with.   There  was  also
    nothing to show that their living conditions in  Vietnam  are  anything
    other than equal with their peers, and given the  additional  financial
    support they are sent from the UK, 'possibly even somewhat better  than
    that of their peers' [23].  Family life  with  their  mother  had  been
    conducted at a distance, not through necessity  but  because  of  their
    mother's choice to leave them in the care of others while she  came  to
    the UK.  The current status quo could prevail.   There  is  nothing  to
    prevent the Appellants seeking entry clearance to visit the family here
    or for their mother and stepfather going to Vietnam to see them.  There
    were  no  exceptional  or  compelling   circumstances.   It   was   not
    disproportionate to refuse entry clearance.

20. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Davison sought to rely on  the
    grounds.  On the issue of  sole  responsibility  the  judge  failed  to
    assess all the evidence.  The evidence was  that  the  Sponsor  was  in
    touch with the Appellants' carer, their grandmother, often.  The  judge
    had not properly considered the crucial question of who it was who made
    the important decisions in the Appellants' lives.  The judge  erred  in
    failing to look more closely on this  issue  at  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor and the grandmother's statement.

21. There were also flaws in the consideration of  serious  and  compelling
    circumstances.  The judge was wrong to find that there was delay by the
    Sponsor in seeking to bring the Appellants to  the  UK  and  that  such
    showed a lack of concern by her and also as a  consequence  a  lack  of
    serious and compelling  circumstances.   The  Sponsor  was  married  in
    August 2011 but not granted leave as a result  of  the  marriage  until
    April  2012.   She  visited  the  Appellants  in  July  2012  and   the
    application was made in October 2012.   The  perceived  delay  did  not
    exist.  Such infected  the  judge's  assessment.   Further,  the  judge
    failed  properly  to  assess  the  grandmother's  evidence  as  to  her
    inability through age and ill health to care for the children.

22.  In  reply,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  judge's   decision   was
    sustainable.   He  has  sought  to  apply  the  guidance  given  in  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.
    Whilst he may have concentrated on the day-to-day  responsibilities  of
    the grandmother that was a proper starting point.  He had  given  sound
    reasons having considered the material evidence that such showed shared
    responsibility not sole responsibility.

23. The judge had also reached a conclusion on the evidence on the issue of
    serious and compelling circumstances which  on  that  evidence  he  was
    entitled to reach.  The  grounds  on  both  matters  amounted  to  mere
    disagreement with the negative outcome.  There was no material error of
    law.

24. In considering this matter the relevant case law as the judge noted  is
    TD.  He noted that sole  responsibility  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
    decided on the evidence.  That case stated (at [52ix]): 'The  test  is,
    not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility, but whether  the
    parent has continuing control and direction of the  child's  upbringing
    including making all the important decisions in the child's  life.   If
    not responsibility is shared and so not "sole".'

25. In this case the judge did look at the day-to-day responsibilities  and
    found that these were in the hands of the  grandmother,  such  included
    that the grandmother attended parent/teacher meetings and  has  day-to-
    day care.

26. It is not disputed that he was entitled to  reach  such  a  conclusion.
    The grounds are correct in stating that such  on  their  own  will  not
    determine that responsibility is shared.

27. I do not however  accept  that  he  limited  himself  to  reaching  his
    conclusion on day-to-day responsibility and did  not  consider  whether
    the Sponsor has continuing control  and  direction  of  the  children's
    upbringing and was making all the important decisions.

28. In that regard the judge noted in her favour that  she  is  in  contact
    with them often and sends money.  However he found factors against  the
    parent having sole responsibility particularly  in  the  core  area  of
    their education.

29. In that regard he found that it was the grandmother who consents to the
    Appellants taking part in school excursions.  He added  that  such  was
    'without consultation with the Sponsor mother'.  The grounds  criticise
    that finding as the grandmother did not say such in her interview.  The
    question (Q38) was 'who consents for the applicant  to  join  a  school
    excursion?'.  The reply is 'It's me'.  In my  judgment  the  judge  was
    entitled on the evidence to reach the conclusion he did.

30. The other point taken in the grounds on this matter is that  the  judge
    was wrong to find that because the first Appellant enrolled by  himself
    in a place where  he  can  study  English,  such  'shows  he  can  take
    responsibility' (at [8]).  On that matter the judge in my view did  not
    take account of the evidence  that the Sponsor had spoken  to  him  and
    told him what to do in terms of locating a place where he  could  study
    English.  Such was an error  as he failed to take account  of  evidence
    which did in that one  particular  instance  indicate  a  role  by  the
    Sponsor.

31. However I do not consider it to be a  material  error.   The  judge  in
    respect of the children's education looked at it in the round and found
    that  the  responsibility  fell  on  the  grandmother.   He  noted  the
    Sponsor's oral evidence in that regard that she had 'no time' to do so,
    and that when she goes to Vietnam she and the  children  have  a  'good
    time' going out together.  The judge considered that such evidence  was
    supported by that of the grandmother at interview which resulted in his
    finding that it is the grandmother who looks  after  the  children  and
    'there is no particular direction given by the Sponsor in that regard.'
    [8].  He clearly had in mind such a question as Q45: 'When  the  mother
    returns to Vietnam does she visit the applicants' school and meet  with
    their teachers?' to which the answer was  made  'No,  she's  busy'.  He
    clearly had taken into account the interview answers Q33-45  about  the
    children's schooling including that it was the  grandmother  who  chose
    the schooling (Q33). He did not believe the Sponsor's evidence that she
    helps the children  with  their  homework  on  the  telephone.  It  was
    contrary to what the grandmother said at interview.

32. In my judgment whilst the judge did make  findings  on  the  day-to-day
    care he has gone beyond that and reached findings that the  grandmother
    made many of the important decisions in the Appellants' lives.  He  was
    entitled to make these  findings  on  the  evidence  before  him.   His
    conclusion that  the  Sponsor  did  not  have  continuing  control  and
    direction of the  children's  up  brining  including  making  'all  the
    important decisions' in the children's lives but that responsibility is
    shared between the Sponsor and the grandmother is sustainable.

33. As for serious and compelling circumstances the grounds submit that the
    judge erred in finding (at [6]) that there was delay  of  over  a  year
    following her marriage to a British citizen before the  Sponsor  sought
    to get her children to the UK and that such indicated a lack of concern
    which in turn was not  indicative  of  serious  and  compelling  family
    circumstances.

34.  The judge noted at [20] that the Sponsor  came  to  the  UK  illegally
    leaving her children behind and that she 'considered looking after  her
    children... as being less important than coming to the UK as an illegal
    entrant'. And that 'even once  she  was  here  she  did  not  go  about
    regularising her stay here in the UK at the earliest  opportunity,  and
    so putting herself in a position where she might be reunited  with  her
    children, but waited for about seven years before bringing  herself  to
    the attention of the Home Office..' Such indicated to  the  judge  that
    their best interests were not to be with her. Such a finding  was  open
    to him on the evidence.

35. It appears that the judge failed to  note  that  the  Sponsor  was  not
    granted leave as a result of marriage in 2011 until  April  2012,  thus
    the period until the applications was about six months.

36. I do not find that to be a material error.  The judge as well as noting
    the seven years absence from her children before  she  regularised  her
    position which did not suggest serious  and  compelling  circumstances,
    found further factors which led him to  conclude  that  there  were  no
    serious and compelling circumstances.   He  found  (at  [7])  that  the
    Appellants are in full time education  and  live  at  home  with  close
    family and access to all modern amenities; and at [18] that they have a
    'stable environment', have all their friends  and  other  relations  in
    Vietnam; that they are 'well looked after by their grandmother'.

37. These are findings on the evidence  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach.

38. It was submitted that he failed to take account  of  the  interview  in
    which the grandmother said she was 80 years of age, and weak and  could
    not give much support.

39. The  judge  noted  that  at  the  hearing  it  was  accepted  that  the
    grandmother was in fact 74 years of age.  He found that whilst she  may
    be 'somewhat elderly' she was nonetheless in 'reasonably good  health'.
    He noted that the grandmother had started looking  after  the  children
    when she was 67 years of age  when  the  Sponsor  left  them  with  the
    grandmother to come to the UK as an illegal entrant continuing as  such
    for some seven years before bringing herself to the  attention  of  the
    authorities. The judge noted  as  the  only  medical  evidence  a  note
    stating that she suffers from spinal problems for  which  she  receives
    medication. There was also evidence of some  medication  for  irregular
    heart beat in 2012.

40. I see no merit in the claim in the grounds that the  judge  in  finding
    that the older child, approaching 18 years of age can help  look  after
    his younger sister, indicated that the grandmother needs help and  that
    there are no stable arrangements for the children's care. The  evidence
    as properly found by the judge was to the contrary,  namely,  that  the
    arrangements were stable.

41. The findings in respect of the grandmother's health and abilities  were
    ones that were open to the judge on the evidence before  him.   He  was
    entitled to conclude that there were  no  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances.

42. For the reasons stated I see no material error of law in the First-tier
    Judge's findings and conclusion and his decision stands.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
the decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


