

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  OA/12771/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2013                                |On 3 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                UMAMA SIDDIKA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman of Jalalabad Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who was born  on  1  October
      1990.  On 13 March 2012, she applied for entry clearance as the spouse
      of a British  citizen,  Mr  Iftekhar  Ahmed  under  para  281  of  the
      Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

   2. On 29 May 2012, the respondent refused the appellant's application  on
      the basis that he was not satisfied: (1) that the  parties  intend  to
      live together permanently as husband and wife and that their  marriage
      was  subsisting  (para  281(iii));  (2)  that  the  parties  would  be
      adequately maintained without recourse to public funds (para  281(v));
      and (3) that the parties  would  be  adequately  accommodated  without
      recourse to public funds (para 281(iv)).

   3. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
      hearing, Judge Carroll dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Although the
      Judge was satisfied that adequate accommodation was available, she was
      not satisfied that the parties' marriage was subsisting and that  they
      intended to live permanently together with each other or that they met
      the maintenance requirements of the Rules.

   4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Brunnen) on  3  April  2013.   Judge
      Brunnen granted permission on the basis that the  Judge  had  arguably
      erred in law: (1) in failing to take  into  account  a  visit  by  the
      appellant's husband after the date of decision  in  assessing  whether
      their marriage was subsisting; (2) in doubting the credibility of  the
      appellant's husband on the basis that his  evidence  was  inconsistent
      with the telephone records; and (3) in dismissing the appeal under Art
      8.

   5. In her response to the grounds of appeal under rule 24 of the Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698),  the  respondent
      did not oppose the appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal
      and invited the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision under para 281.

   6.  Consequently,  on  the  basis  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
      respondent's concession, the decision of the  First-tier  tribunal  is
      set aside.  Before me both parties developed their respective cases on
      the merits of para 281.

   7. At the  hearing  of  the  appeal,  Mr  Wilding,  who  represented  the
      respondent,  accepted  that  the   appellant   met   the   maintenance
      requirements in para 281(v) of the Rules.  The only issue was that  of
      the subsistence of the parties' marriage and their intention  to  live
      together permanently as husband and wife.  That requirement is set out
      in para 281(iii) as follows:

           "each of the parties intends to live with the other  as  his/her
           spouse...and the marriage....is subsisting..."

   8. Mr Rahman, who represented the appellant indicated that he wished  the
      appeal to be determined on the documentary evidence and  that  he  did
      not intend to call the sponsor to give evidence.   As a consequence, I
      heard submissions first from Mr  Rahman  and  then  secondly  from  Mr
      Wilding.

   9. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish on a balance of
      probabilities that at the date of decision, namely 29  May  2012  that
      the requirements of para 281, in particular para  281(iii)  were  met.
      In determining the appeal,  I  may  only  consider  the  circumstances
      appertaining at the  date  of  this  decision  (see  s.85A(2)  of  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002).   I  may  consider
      evidence in relation to post-decision matters in so far as they relate
      to the circumstances appertaining at the  time  of  decision  (see  DR
      Morocco  [2005]  UKIAT  00038).   Post-decision  contact  between  the
      sponsor and his spouse is admissible to demonstrate  their  intentions
      and the subsistence of the marriage  and included within  that  latter
      category are post-decision visits by a sponsor to his spouse  to  show
      that the marriage is subsisting (see Naz [2012] UKUT 40 (IAC)).

  10. Mr Rahman  relied  upon  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  dated  11
      February 2013 (at pages 6-8 of the appeal bundle) and  evidence  of  a
      visit by the sponsor to the appellant between 5 September 2012 and  10
      October  2012  together  with  photographs  showing  the  sponsor  and
      appellant together in the sponsor's family home.

  11. In addition, he relied upon a schedule of calls made  using  telephone
      cards made by the sponsor to the appellant on her mobile with a number
      ending "4050".  Those documents cover the period  9  May  2011  to  29
      March 2012.  In addition he  relied  upon  records  of  the  sponsor's
      mobile phone between 29  September  2012  and  1  January  2013  again
      showing telephone calls to the appellant's mobile phone with a  number
      ending "4050".  In response  to  the  view  taken  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge in  relation to the frequency of  calls  shown  in  the
      document, Mr Rahman pointed out (following my raising the point)  that
      many of the calls showed "0.00"  minutes  and  obviously  demonstrated
      that a connection  had  not  been  made.   There  was,  therefore,  he
      submitted, no inconsistency with the sponsor's oral evidence given  at
      the First-tier Tribunal that he telephoned the appellant approximately
      3 or 4 times per week.

  12. Mr Rahman  accepted  that  there  was  no  direct  evidence  from  the
      appellant in  the  form  of  a  written  statement.   Nevertheless  he
      submitted that I should take into account the fact that the  appellant
      and sponsor had lived together for one month following their  marriage
      on 25 November 2009 and also during a subsequent visit between 7 March
      2011 and 7 May 2011 (see section 8.4 of the appellant's  application).
      Further, I should take into account the post-decision visit between  5
      September 2012 and 10 October 2012 following Naz.  I should also  take
      into account the continuous contact by telephone demonstrated  by  the
      telephone records.  Taking all these matters into account,  Mr  Rahman
      submitted that I should find that the  appellant  and  sponsor  had  a
      subsisting marriage and he  relied  upon  GA  ("Subsisting  Marriage")
      Ghana [2006] UKAIT 0046  and  that  they  intended  to  live  together
      permanently as husband and wife.

  13. Mr Wilding reminded me that the appellant has the burden of  proof  in
      this appeal.  He submitted that there was little evidence to support a
      subsisting marriage.  He pointed out that there was no  evidence  from
      the appellant.  He accepted that on the basis of Naz the post decision
      visits were relevant but he did not  accept  that  the  phone  records
      established anything more  than  communication  rather  than,  as  was
      required under the Rules, that  their  marriage  was  subsisting.   He
      submitted that it was quite  extraordinary  that  there  had  been  no
      evidence from the  appellant  as  she  had  been  legally  represented
      throughout the proceedings.  He submitted that on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence the appellant  had  failed  to  establish  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that her marriage was genuine, subsisting and  that  the
      parties intended to live together permanently.

  14. I did not have the benefit of hearing the sponsor give evidence.   The
      only evidence from the sponsor was that  recorded  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's determination and in his witness statement.   His  evidence
      is that he has a genuine and subsisting marriage  with  the  appellant
      and it is their intention to live together permanently as husband  and
      wife.  He says in his witness statement that he and the appellant  are
      "continuously in contact through letters and phone calls" and that the



           "regular contact has  deepened  our  love  for  each  other  and
           therefore I have  no  doubt  in  my  mind  regarding  my  wife's
           intention to come to live with me as I believe her to be pure of
           heart".

  15. There is, of course, evidence of phone contact with a telephone number
      which the sponsor says is the appellant's mobile phone.  I note  that,
      although the appellant says in his witness statement that he  and  the
      appellant are in contact "through letters",  none  were  submitted  or
      relied upon at the hearing before me.

  16. It is surprising  that  the  appellant  has  not  provided  a  witness
      statement in support of her application particularly in  view  of  the
      fact that she has been legally represented.  The  only  evidence  from
      the appellant, so far as I can see, is contained  in  her  application
      form.  In that form she states that they lived together for one  month
      following their marriage on 25 November 2009 and that he again came to
      stay with her between 7 March 2011 and 7 May 2011.   There is also the
      post-decision visit between 5  September  2012  and  10  October  2012
      together with the supporting photographs.  Those photographs do  show,
      in my  judgement,  a  happy  couple.   Nothing  in  those  photographs
      suggests to me that the appellant is  reluctantly  being  photographed
      with her husband and that their relationship is other than genuine.  I
      note that in one photograph there is behind the couple a photograph of
      themselves.  The photographs were, I was told, taken in the  sponsor's
      family home where the appellant now lives as  is  customary  following
      marriage.

  17. There is also evidence that the sponsor has provided financial support
      for  the  appellant  (see  para  3  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
      determination).  The  telephone  records  show  regular  and  frequent
      contact between the sponsor and the appellant. It  was  not  suggested
      before me that the telephone number ending "4050" was not that of  the
      appellant.  Whilst Mr Wilding maybe correct  that  the  mere  fact  of
      contact does not, in itself, establish the nature of the relationship,
      the regularity  and  frequency  of  the  calls  is,  in  my  judgement
      supportive of their marriage being  a  genuine  one  given  the  other
      evidence including the photographs (see Goudey  (subsisting marriage -
      evidence) Sudan  [2012]  UKUT  00041  (IAC)).   Indeed,  there  is  no
      evidence  contradicting  the  sponsor  when   he   says   that   their
      relationship  is  genuine  and  that  it  is  his  intention  to  live
      permanently with the appellant and that he believes that is  also  her
      intention.  It is true  that  the  parties  have  lived  in  different
      countries since their marriage  in  November  2009  and,  indeed,  the
      appellant did not make an application to join her husband  until  over
      two  years  after  their  marriage.   Nevertheless,  the   appellant's
      evidence in her application form is  that  they  have  lived  together
      immediately after their marriage for one month  and,  again,  for  two
      months in 2011.  There is no reason to doubt that  they  also  did  so
      during the post-decision visit during September/October 2012.

  18. In my judgement, all  the  evidence  in  this  appeal  points  in  one
      direction and is consistent with the  parties  having  a  genuine  and
      subsisting marriage and that they intend to live together  permanently
      as husband and wife.  It would be wrong to speculate on the absence of
      a witness statement from the appellant.  She has made  an  application
      and there is no evidence that she did so other than genuinely with the
      intention of joining her husband in the UK voluntarily.

  19. Taking all these matters into account, I am satisfied on a balance  of
      probabilities that the parties have a  subsisting  marriage  and  that
      they intend to live together permanently as husband and wife in the UK
      and  that,  therefore,  the  requirements  of  para  281(iii)  of  the
      Immigration Rules were met at the date of decision.

  20. It is now accepted that the other requirements of para  281  were  met
      and consequently I am satisfied that  at  the  date  of  decision  the
      appellant met all the requirements of para 281.

Decision

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and its decision is set aside.

  22. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  para  281
      of the Immigration Rules.

  23. No reliance was placed upon Article 8 before me.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















