
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12228/2013




|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 July 2014                               |On 28 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT  Appellant

                                     And

                                                                  Respondent
                          MICHAEL JOHN ORIENTE ADAP



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,
    in respect of a  decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    promulgated on 29 April 2014  in  which  he  allowed  the  respondent's
    appeal granting leave to enter the UK.  The respondent is Michael  Adap
    who is 16 years of age.  The matter comes before me  for  consideration
    as to whether or not there was a material error of  law  in  the  First
    Tier Judges' decision.  The respondent's  mother/sponsor  attended  the
    hearing before me.  I heard submissions and at the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing I gave an extempore judgment.  I found no material error of law
    and dismissed the appeal.

Background

2.   The respondent applied to join his sister and mother in  the  UK.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter refers to paragraph 297  with  reference  to
    (1)(e).  The documentation concerning the respondent referred to him as
    a third born child whereas he has stated himself to be  a  second  born
    child.  Also of concern was the absence of any consent from his father.

3.   In his determination First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid (FTJ) allowed  the
    appeal on immigration grounds and human rights  grounds.   The  sponsor
    attended the hearing but the respondent was not legally represented  in
    the UK.  The  findings  made  in  the  determination  are  limited  but
    essentially  the  FTJ  found  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  the
    respondent's sister to be credible [12] and he also took  into  account
    the affidavit of the sponsor  [10],  and  a  declaration  made  by  the
    respondent's father [12].

4.  The grounds of appeal raised by the appellant were that the  FTJ  failed
    to make proper findings of fact and or reasons with  reference  to  the
    immigration rules and failed  to  give  reasons  why  the  respondent's
    circumstances were not sufficiently recognised by the Rules. Permission
    to appeal was granted by First Tier Judge Page on the grounds that  the
    determination was unclear in  particular  as  to  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

Submissions

5.   I heard Mr Walker's realistic and helpful submissions this  morning.  I
    have looked at the determination overall and whilst  I  find  that  the
    judge may not have set out his reasons as clearly as he could  have,  I
    am satisfied that he has  engaged  with  the  material  issues  in  the
    appeal.  The determination, it has to be said, fails to set out clearly
    and precisely findings, but the FTJ has made reference to the  relevant
    Immigration Rules with reference to the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

6.   I am satisfied that he engaged with the two particular concerns  raised
    by the Secretary of State. He found on the  evidence  before  him  both
    written and oral, that  the  concerns  were  fully  and  satisfactorily
    addressed.  There was evidence from the respondent's father  consenting
    to  him  moving  to  the  UK  and  the  sponsor  gave  evidence   which
    satisfactorily resolved  a  discrepancy  in  the  records  showing  the
    respondent as the third  child.   There  was  no  issue  raised  as  to
    financial dependence or sole responsibility. I also take  into  account
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge also indicated in the  determination
    that the Home Office Presenting Officer raised no challenge to the oral
    or documentary evidence produced and there is certainly no reference to
    any challenges in any submissions.  This was a matter  that  Mr  Walker
    brought to my attention. I find that the decision therefore made by the
    First-tier  Judge  was  open  to  him  that  the  respondent  met   the
    requirements of paragraph 297.  Accordingly I find  that  this  renders
    his consideration of Article  8  unnecessary.   Article  8  is  briefly
    mentioned at [19] of the determination.  The bulk of the  determination
    consists of citations and references to case law, and were it  not  the
    case that the immigration rules were met I would have  found  an  error
    with regard to the Article 8 assessment.


7.   Accordingly I have decided that there is no material error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision and that the determination shall stand. The appeal
    is dismissed. I direct that the  respondent  is  to  be  granted  entry
    clearance forthwith upon the issue of this determination .





Signed                                  Dated as signed  25.7.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



No anonymity order
No fee award


Signed                                  Dated as signed  25.7.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




