
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/12092/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2014                        |On 21 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               Mr RAJIN GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Gurung, sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS








      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 12 August 2014
           against  the  determination   of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
           Kanagaratnam who had allowed the Respondent's appeal against the
           refusal of his application for entry clearance  as  a  dependant
           child in a determination promulgated on 7 July 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Nepal,  born  on  3  June  1995,
           currently resident there.  He had applied  for  entry  clearance
           for settlement under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  as
           the son of Mr Ganesh Gurung ("Mr Gurung"), a national  of  Nepal
           with ILR, on  8  October  2012.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
           accepted that the Respondent's late mother had been  married  to
           his sponsor, but the Respondent had stated that  the  Respondent
           was not his biological father and it was not accepted that there
           was a recognisable family relationship between them.  There  was
           no evidence  that  money  transfers  had  taken  place  for  the
           Respondent's support.  The Respondent  had  resided  with  other
           relatives in Nepal since  the  death  of  his  mother  in  2000.
           Adequacy of accommodation  was  not  proven.   Refusal  did  not
           amount to a breach of  Article  8  ECHR.   The  application  was
           refused on 5 April 2013.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Secretary of  State  was  granted  because  the  judge  had  not
           considered whether paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration Rules had
           been met, given that it was admitted that the  sponsor  was  not
           the  Respondent's  biological  father,  nor  whether   paragraph
           297(i)(f)  applied,  i.e.,  whether  there  were   serious   and
           compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  made   his
           exclusion undesirable.


      4.    Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.  It
           was directed that the appeal would be reheard immediately in the
           event that a material error of law was found.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Bramble for the Appellant (the Secretary of State) relied  on
           the grounds and the grant of permission to  appeal.   The  judge
           had not addressed the consequence of the fact that although  the
           Respondent had applied to join the sponsor on the basis that the
           sponsor was the Respondent's father, it had been admitted  after
           the entry clearance application  had  been  submitted  that  the
           sponsor was at best  the  Respondent's  stepfather,  subject  to
           proof of the death of the Respondent's biological father.   Such
           proof had not been provided.  The definition of "parent" set out
           in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules applied.  Nor was  there
           any evidence that the sponsor had  adopted  the  Respondent,  or
           that there  had  been  a  de  facto  adoption  recognised  under
           paragraph 309A of the Immigration Rules.   Even  had  the  judge
           found that the sponsor was a "relative" (and how he  would  have
           done so was not obvious), paragraph 297(i)(f) had not  been  the
           subject of any findings.  At [9] of his determination the  judge
           had misstated the facts: the entry clearance application had not
           stated that the sponsor  was  not  the  Respondent's  biological
           father.  Moreover, the accommodation issue had not been conceded
           and yet  the  judge  reached  no  finding  on  the  point.   The
           determination should be set aside, and the  appeal  reheard  and
           dismissed.


      6.    Mr Gurung, the Respondent's sponsor, was not in  a  position  to
           assist the tribunal on the legal issues which arose.  Mr  Gurung
           informed  the  tribunal  that  he  had  always  acted   as   the
           Respondent's father and had supported him.  The  Respondent  was
           currently studying in Nepal.  There  had  never  been  a  formal
           adoption under Nepalese law.




      The error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal gave its decision at the hearing that the Secretary
           of State's appeal would be allowed  and  briefly  explained  its
           reasons and stated that detailed reasons would  be  given  which
           now follow.  Mr Bramble's submissions were correct.   The  judge
           had erred in a number of ways.  First and  foremost,  the  judge
           had failed to consider the consequences of  the  fact  that  the
           Respondent had admitted that he was not the  biological  son  of
           his sponsor, after the  entry  clearance  application  had  been
           made.  The judge was mistaken in finding against  that  evidence
           that the sponsor's evidence had been forthright that he  had  at
           the inception stated that the Respondent was not his  biological
           son.  The documents before the tribunal used the  term  "father"
           without qualification: see, e.g. Q.78 of  the  application  form
           where it is stated "He [i.e.,  the  sponsor]  is  my  biological
           father", which is admitted to be untrue.  There was no  evidence
           of adoption by the sponsor under Nepalese law.  As  the  sponsor
           and the Respondent had lived apart, de facto  adoption  had  not
           and indeed could not have been shown.  RM (Kwok On Tong:  HC 395
           para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039 applied  and  the  judge  was
           required to ensure that the whole of  the  relevant  immigration
           rule had been met before allowing the appeal.


      8.    The judge had similarly failed  to  consider  the  accommodation
           requirements of paragraph 297(iv),  which  had  been  placed  in
           issue by the Entry Clearance  Officer.   The  determination  was
           silent on the point.  That was a material error of law.


      9.    It was also the case that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
           whether paragraph 297(i)(f) applied, i.e.,  whether  there  were
           serious and compelling family or other considerations which made
           his exclusion undesirable.  That was a further material error of
           law.


      10.   There are various other errors in the  determination,  beginning
           with the incorrect statement that the appeal had been determined
           by the judge on the papers, when, as  stated  elsewhere  in  the
           determination, representatives of both parties had been  present
           for the hearing.  Such mistakes really ought not to occur.  They
           reinforce the impression that the judge had not given the appeal
           proper attention.


      11.   Accordingly, for all of these reasons, the tribunal  finds  that
           the determination must be set aside and remade.   The  Secretary
           of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




      The fresh decision


      12.   In this part of the determination for  convenience  and  clarity
           the tribunal will refer to the parties by their original  titles
           in the First-tier Tribunal.  There was no need for  any  further
           evidence for the original decision to be remade, and no need  of
           any further submissions.


      13.   As has already been noted, there  was  no  evidence  before  the
           tribunal to show that the Appellant's  sponsor  was  capable  of
           being recognised as the  Appellant's  parent  as  that  term  is
           defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules. The application
           was  accordingly  misconceived.   Mr  Gurung  had  informed  the
           tribunal that there had never been an  adoption  under  Nepalese
           law.  Although there  was  some  evidence  that  Mr  Gurung  had
           contributed to the Appellant's support in Nepal, the Appellant's
           upbringing has been in the hands of other relatives, and not the
           sponsor.   Mr Gurung has been engaged in full time work  in  the
           United Kingdom since 1996, save for  periods  of  illness.   The
           tribunal  is  not  satisfied  that  Mr  Gurung  has   had   sole
           responsibility for the  Appellant's  upbringing  and  so  finds.
           Nor was there any evidence that  the  Appellant  was  not  being
           properly looked after in Nepal.


      14.   As to accommodation,  the  only  evidence  before  the  tribunal
           showed that Mr Gurung is a lodger,  with  a  bedroom  in  shared
           accommodation.  There was no evidence of the landlord's  consent
           to the presence of an additional person in that bedroom, or that
           there was any additional accommodation available at the house in
           question.  Indeed, the landlord stated in his letter  confirming
           Mr Gurung's occupancy that the landlord had two daughters living
           with him and that  Mr  Gurung  occupied  the  spare  room.   The
           arrival of a young male stranger is matter which  would  require
           express consent.    The tribunal finds that  the  Appellant  was
           unable to show that adequate accommodation was available.


      15.   Thus the Appellant was  unable  to  show  that  his  application
           satisfied paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules and his  appeal
           must be dismissed.  Although Article 8 ECHR was not specifically
           argued, the tribunal treats any such issue as obvious: see  R  v
           the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  ex  p  Robinson
           [1997] 3 WLR 1162.  It is plain that the level  of  family  life
           between  the  Appellant  and  the  sponsor  is  weak  but   more
           importantly  that  the  refusal  decision  does  not  create  an
           interference as it simply maintains the status  quo,  i.e.,  the
           existing situation.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kanagaratnam  is  set  aside  and
remade as   follows:

      The appeal is DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     20 October 2014




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     20 October 2014
