
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12076/2013
     OA/12078/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 October 2014                               |On 21 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    l p g
                                   t t t n
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants  are  citizens  of  Vietnam.   They  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as family members of the sponsor (Mr  N
    V T) under paragraph 297 of HC 395 (as amended) on the basis  that  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for their upbringing and/or that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    their exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.  The  applications
    were refused by the respondent by  a  notice  dated  23  May  2013;  in
    particular, the respondent was not satisfied that the sponsor had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant.  The appellants appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Blackford) which, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 29 May 2014, dismissed the appeals.  The appellants now appeal, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The sponsor has been settled in the United  Kingdom  for  a  number  of
    years.  The appellants (now aged 19 years and  14  years  respectively)
    remained in Vietnam with their mother.  They would  have  continued  to
    live with her had not problems arisen in 2010.  The appellants'  mother
    had married in 2009 (she had not been married to the  sponsor  although
    there is DNA evidence to show that he is  the  natural  father  of  the
    appellants).  In 2010, there was an incident involving the  husband  of
    the mother of the appellants who appears to have attempted to  sexually
    abuse the appellants.  The appellants moved  to  live  with  a  cousin.
    Since September 2010, they  have  been  living  with  a  niece  of  the
    sponsor.  The sponsor visited the appellants in Vietnam  in  2011.   He
    claims to have sole responsibility for their upbringing.

 3. Mr Martin, for the appellants, challenged the manner in which the judge
    had  concluded  at  [53]  that  the   sponsor   did   not   have   sole
    responsibility.  The judge had written:

    Sole responsibility may not be easy to prove.  However, it seems to  be
    the way in which the difficulty can be addressed by  a  sponsor  is  to
    provide detail.  In my judgment the sponsor could have provided a great
    deal more detail of the conversations that he has had  with  his  niece
    regarding decisions about the appellants' upbringing and education.  He
    could have told me in  detail  what  were  the  issues  that  had  been
    addressed and given details of the conversations he had  had  with  his
    niece.  That is almost entirely lacking although  his  niece  has  gone
    into greater detail than the sponsor has.  When we  add  this  lack  of
    detail  to  the  remarkable  vagueness  demonstrated  by  the   sponsor
    regarding the sexual abuse by the stepfather and any lasting effect,  I
    find that the appellants have not discharged the burden of  proving  to
    the required standard as regards the issue of sole responsibility.

 4. Mr Martin submitted that a lack of detail alone appears  to  have  been
    insufficient to persuade the judge that the sponsor did not  possess  a
    sole responsibility; rather,  it  was  a  combination  of  that  factor
    together with "this lack of detail ... regarding the  sexual  abuse  by
    the stepfather" which led the judge to that conclusion.   He  submitted
    that the "lack of detail" regarding the sexual  abuse  allegations  had
    not been material to the question of sole  responsibility  and  should,
    therefore, have been disregarded by the judge.  It  would  follow  that
    the lack of detail alone would have been insufficient to lead the judge
    to dismiss the appeal.

 5. That submission has some force in the light of  the  positive  findings
    which the judge made at [49].  The judge accepted "in broad terms" [the
    sponsor's] account of  being  positively  involved  in  his  daughters'
    upbringing and his account as  well  as  his  niece's  account  of  the
    conversations  which  they  have  had  about  his  daughters'  welfare,
    education, health and so-on".  He also found that it  was  "very  clear
    that the  sponsor  has  become  heavily  committed  to  his  daughters'
    welfare" and I accept the point made  by  Mr  Martin  at  the  dramatic
    change in their lives which occurred when they left [there] as to  have
    had a cause".  Mr  Martin  submitted  that  the  judge  had  regard  to
    irrelevant matters in rejecting what he had otherwise planned to  be  a
    credible account.

 6. However, as Mr McVeety pointed out, the intervening paragraphs  [50-52]
    must be read in conjunction with [53].  At [50], the judge  noted  that
    he had "reservations about the extent of  the  sponsor's  involvement".
    He was "surprised" that the sponsor was unable to tell him which of his
    daughters had allegedly been the victim of attempted sexual abuse.  The
    sponsor had also been unable to give  any  detail  as  to  any  lasting
    impact of that  attempted  abuse  upon  either  appellant.   The  judge
    observed at [52] that "the situation is such that  it  would  be  quite
    possible  for  the  sponsor  to  have  sole  responsibility   for   his
    daughters."  That statement is not in  the  nature  of  a  finding  but
    rather an observation on the jurisprudence, from which the  judge  then
    proceeded to quote.  By reference to the case  law,  he  noted  that  a
    parent may have  sole  responsibility  notwithstanding  the  fact  that
    financial responsibility is shared with  another  individual.   He  was
    aware also that "the relative with whom the child lives" may "have some
    degree of responsibility".  The judge then quite properly moved  on  to
    make his own assessment of the whole evidence.  He rejected at [53] not
    the sponsor's claim to have involvement in his  children's  lives,  but
    the extent and depth of that involvement.  I can identify no  error  of
    law in the judge's approach or analysis.  I consider that it  was  open
    to the judge to be surprised by the fact that the sponsor was unable to
    say which of his daughters had been the victim of attempted abuse.  The
    judge clearly found that that ignorance, coupled with  the  credibility
    of the sponsor to give details about his  discussions  with  his  niece
    regarding the upbringing of the children, indicated  that  the  sponsor
    did not have sole responsibility as claimed.  I consider that to  be  a
    finding which was open to the judge on the evidence before him.   There
    is no inconsistency with the positive findings  at  [49].   As  I  have
    said, it was possible for the  judge  to  find  that  the  sponsor  was
    involved in the lives of his children without necessarily finding  that
    he had sole responsibility for their upbringing.

 7. The remainder of Mr Martin's submissions (and the  grounds  of  appeal)
    amount to no  more  than  disagreement  with  the  judge's  conclusion.
    Because that  was  a  conclusion  properly  reached  by  the  judge  by
    reference to the evidence and supported by cogent and clear  reasoning,
    I find that the appeals should be dismissed.

DECISION

 8. These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 21 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

