
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12802/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26th January 2015                          |On 3rd June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             master youwei huang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colvin, promulgated on 11th November 2014, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 8th October 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Master Youwei Huang.  The Respondent subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China, who was born on 19th October 1995,
    and who appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated  31st  May
    2013, to refuse him entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom  as
    a dependant of his parents, in accordance with paragraph 297 of HC 395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is dependent on his father, Mr Yanxing
    Huang, who is his Sponsor.  The father arrived in the UK  on  6th  June
    1996, and his wife joined him from China on 28th May 2003.  The  father
    was granted ILR on 13th August 2009 under the  Legacy  Programme.   His
    wife made an application for leave to remain as a spouse soon after  he
    was granted ILR.  Her application, however, was refused but was allowed
    on appeal which was heard on 8th March 2013, on human rights grounds on
    the basis of the family relationship.  She was issued with a  residence
    card on 30th July 2013.

 4. The Appellant's wife looked after the Appellant when  the  father  left
    China in 1996, though he has financially supported the  entire  family.
    When his wife came to the UK in 2003, the Appellant was looked after by
    his wife's sister-in-law, although the father continued to make all the
    immediate decisions in his son's life.  This  included  decisions  with
    respect to his education and medical treatment.   The  father  went  to
    China in May 2010.  This was the first opportunity  after  having  been
    granted ILR.

 5. The judge records that, "it was an emotional reunion with his  children
    and he stayed for six weeks.  Since then he and his wife have  returned
    to see the Appellant on many occasions with the last time being in July
    2014" (paragraph 6).

 6. In cross-examination before the judge, the father  confirmed  that  his
    son, the Appellant, had been living with his wife's  sister-in-law  for
    the last ten years.

         "He has been to see him in China four times since 2010.  He is  now
         nearly 19 years old and is attending university studying a  teacher
         training course for which he is  paying.   If  the  application  is
         successful he will complete his education in the  UK  and  he  will
         support him.  He [the father] takes money for his maintenance  when
         he visits China.  The Appellant does not speak English.  He accepts
         that his wife has limited leave to remain in the UK" (paragraph 7).

 7. The Appellant's mother, Mrs Yougin Yu, also gave oral  evidence  before
    the judge, and she stated that

         "her husband has always been the head of the household and made all
         the major decisions  affecting  their  son's  life.   He  made  the
         decision for their son to  join  them  in  the  UK.   She  won  her
         immigration appeal on the basis of being the spouse of her  husband
         who has ILR in the UK.  It is unreasonable  to  conclude  that  her
         leave would not lead to settlement" (paragraph 8).

 8. The main question before the judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  could
    satisfy the requirements for indefinite leave to settle in the UK under
    paragraph  297  and  his  mother  only  had   "limited   leave".    The
    representative for the Respondent Secretary of  State,  submitted  that
    the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  this  provision,  but   that   the
    requirements of paragraph 301 should also be considered.

 9. The judge accepted that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 297 for indefinite leave to remain in the UK  because  the
    Appellant's mother only had limited leave following  the  determination
    of her appeal of human rights grounds in 2013.  At the  time,  however,
    the judge had made the comment in her  determination  that,  "given  my
    findings of fact, mainly that the Appellant is a spouse in a subsisting
    relationship, it seems clear that she would in due course, by reason of
    Mr Huang's status, obtain a right  to  settlement  in  the  UK".   (see
    paragraph 15 of the determination of Judge Colvin)

10. The judge  held  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    alternative of paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules for limited leave
    to enter and remain in the UK with his  parents.   This  had  not  been
    addressed by the Respondent either in the refusal letter or in the  ECM
    review.  The judge went on to allow the appeal under paragraph 301.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge was wrong to allow  the
    appeal in the manner that he  did,  on  grounds  that  the  Appellant's
    mother has limited leave "with a view to settlement"  because  she  was
    granted limited leave outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of
    Article 8.  In fact, the Appellant's mother would not be  eligible  for
    settlement until she has completed a total of ten years in the UK.   In
    the meantime she would need to reapply for leave in this category every
    two and a half years until the total of ten years is reached.

12. On 30th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that  the  definition  of  "a  view  to  settlement"  needed  for   the
    consideration.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 26th January 2015, Mr Wilding, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that there  were
    two issues.   First,  whether  the  Tribunal  could  properly  look  at
    paragraph  301.   Second,  if  the  Tribunal  could  properly  look  at
    paragraph 301, was the Appellant's mother's leave granted with  a  view
    to settlement.

14. Mr Wilding drew my attention to paragraph 301.  This  appears  at  page
    787 of Phelan's Immigration  Law  and  Practice  (2013).   It  is  said
    "requirements for limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with a view to settlement as a child of  a  parent  or  parents
    given limited leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    view to settlement".  The judge had allowed the appeal under  paragraph
    301(i)(a), and this viewed with  the  situation  where  one  parent  is
    present and settled in the UK (the Appellant's father)  and  the  other
    parent is being, or has been given limited leave to enter or remain  in
    the UK with a view to settlement (allegedly  the  Appellant's  mother).
    The  question  of  "with  a  view  to  settlement"   arose   in   these
    circumstances, as is plain to see.

15. However, Mr Wilding took me to page 764 of the  handbook.   This  deals
    with the requirements to be met under part 8 after 9th July 2012  after
    Appendix FM came into operation.  At  paragraph  8  to  80,  there  are
    "additional requirements" and sub-paragraph (f) makes the point that

         "paragraphs 301-303(f) continue to apply to applications made under
         this route on or after 9th July 2012 and are  not  subject  to  any
         additional requirement listed in (b) above, by a child of a  person
         to whom those paragraphs relate who has been granted limited  leave
         to enter or remain or an extension of stay following an application
         made before 9th July 2012".

16. The difficulty here, submitted Mr  Wilding,  is  that  the  Appellant's
    mother made her application on 28th August 2012.  This  was  after  9th
    July 2012.  Her discretionary leave was then granted only after she won
    her  appeal.   Therefore,  paragraph  301  was  not  available  to  the
    Appellant for use.

17. Second, and in any event, paragraph  301  was  not  available  for  use
    because  the  Appellant's  granted  leave  was  not  "with  a  view  to
    settlement".  Mr Wilding asked me to compare this  with  paragraph  281
    for settlement of spouses which reads

         "requirements for leave to enter the United Kingdom with a view  to
         settlement as the spouse with a view  to  settlement  as  a  spouse
         [also a partner] of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement".

18. Mr Wilding submitted that this was a different Rule with respect  to  a
    different purpose compared to paragraph 301.   The  Appellant's  mother
    would require various extensions of stay before  she  could  apply  for
    permanent resident after ten years in the UK.

19. Mr Wilding asked me to find an error of law and remit the  matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. For his part, Mr Lam submitted that  the  first  ground  argued  today,
    namely, that paragraph 301 had a different purpose, was not set out  in
    the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal.   The  only  issue  there  was  the
    meaning of "with a view to settlement" and this is how  permission  had
    been granted.  No application had been made to amend the  grounds.   In
    any event, Mr Lam would resist a late application on this basis.

21. Second, paragraph 301 was not applied to any Immigration Rule.  It  was
    a freestanding provision.  It has not been abolished.   It  remains  in
    place.  Therefore the Appellant could avail himself of it.  Mr Lam  had
    to accept that the application in this case by the Appellant  was  made
    on 28th August 2012.

22. Finally, if this Tribunal was not with Mr Lam on any of these  matters,
    then the judge should have allowed the appeal under Section 55  of  the
    BCIA, as this being in the best interests of the child, as this  was  a
    matter that was raised before the judge, and is set out clearly in  the
    skeleton argument before the judge, but was not considered  at  all  by
    the judge.  Mr Lam asked that this Tribunal remake the  decision,  were
    it to make a finding on an error of law.

23. In reply, Mr Wilding submitted that if  a  ground  of  appeal  had  not
    properly been put before the Tribunal, he would make an application now
    to amend the grounds.  However, paragraph 301 was an obvious issue that
    should have been apparent from the outset.  He submitted that I make  a
    finding of an error of law and  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

24. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I am  also  satisfied
    that I should remake the decision because  the  general  Rule  is  that
    wherever the Upper Tribunal is able to do so, it is enjoined to  remake
    the decision, rather than remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is a case where findings were made on the  core  aspect
    of the Appellant's claim, such that it would enable  this  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision.  I make a finding of an error of law because  this
    is a case where the appeal could not have been allowed under  paragraph
    301 because the Appellant's application was made after 9th  July  2012,
    it being made on 28th August 2012, so that the  benefits  of  paragraph
    301 were not available to the Appellant.  I now proceed to  remake  the
    decision.

Remaking the Decision

25. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

26. There is the skeleton argument of Mr Lam before the First-tier Tribunal
    during the hearing at Taylor House.  He refers  to  family  life  under
    Article 8 with an expressed reference to Beoku-Betts [2008]  UKHL  (see
    page 6 of the index bundle of 35 pages.  The judge did  not  deal  with
    Article 8.  The skeleton argument before  this  Tribunal  from  Mr  Lam
    refers to the failure of the judge to deal with  Article  8  and  draws
    attention to  the  principle  in  T  (Section  55  BCIA  2009  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483, as a  matter  that  should  apply
    with respect to the child's welfare.  In remaking the decision,  I  can
    have regard to these matters.

27. In this respect, it is clear that the judge made findings with  respect
    to the Appellant's case, such that  Section  55  considerations  should
    have been brought  to  bare  all  these  facts.   Paragraph  6  of  the
    determination makes it clear that the Appellant's father supported  the
    entire family in China.  He "made all the major decisions in his  son's
    life such as his education and medical treatment" and that "he went  to
    China in May 2010 which was the first opportunity after  being  granted
    ILR".

28. Since being granted ILR, he and his wife  have  returned  to  "see  the
    Appellant on many occasions with the last  time  being  in  July  2014"
    (paragraph 6).  Paragraph 7 makes it clear that even though the  father
    "takes money for his maintenance when he visits  China"  and  that  "he
    will support him".

29. Paragraph 8 is the most important finding which makes it clear that the
    evidence in the written statement by the mother is  accepted  that  the
    father was "the head of the household and made all the major  decisions
    affecting their son's life.  He made the decision for their son to join
    them in the UK".

30. In these circumstances, the developing case law on Section  55  of  the
    BCIA, now makes it clear, that even if Section  55  was  not  expressly
    raised, where there are children concerned, and the matter is  obvious,
    regard must be had to the obligations that are attached to  a  decision
    maker where the "best interests" of the child are an issue.  It is  now
    well established that where  the  interests  of  the  child  are  under
    consideration appropriate enquiries need to be made in entry  clearance
    cases with regard to the age, care arrangements of the  child  (see  JO
    (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517).  The decision maker  must
    be properly informed of the position  of  the  child.   Being  properly
    informed and conducting a scrupulous  analysis  is  a  prerequisite  of
    identifying the child's best interests, and then  balancing  them  with
    the other essential considerations.  Performing these duties will be an
    intensely fact-sensitive matter and a  contextual  exercise.   In  this
    case the ECO did not do this.  The judge below did not do  this.   This
    was a failing of an administrative responsibility.    It was a  failure
    of a legal obligation.  This leads to the following result.

31. First, the facts of this case clearly  indicate  that  the  Appellant's
    welfare will be jeopardised by exclusion from the United Kingdom.  This
    is a matter set down not only in the skeleton argument before me, it is
    also based upon the findings of fact made by the judge, which show that
    with the Appellant's mother and father both  in  the  UK,  arrangements
    have thus far had to be made for the Appellant's care through a  family
    relative, yet the  Appellant  remains  dependent  completely  upon  his
    father in the UK.  It is  possible  that  if  one  has  regard  to  the
    "exclusion undesirable" provisions of the Immigration  Rules,  and  the
    extra statutory guidance for Entry  Clearance  Officers  to  apply  the
    spirit of the statutory guidance in circumstances  where  children  are
    involved, that the balance  is  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  (see  T
    (Section 55 BCIA 2009 - entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT  00483
    (IAC).  It is  clear  that  the  best  interest  consideration  is  not
    irrelevant to an Article 8 evaluation.

32. Indeed,  the  case-law  makes  it  clear  that,  "it  is  difficult  to
    contemplate a scenario where the Section 55 duty was  material  to  the
    immigration decision and indicate a certain outcome that Article 8  did
    not" (see paragraph 29 of T (Section 55 BCIA 2009  -  entry  clearance)
    Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483.  When the facts of this case are considered,
    it is plain that whereas there is no moral or physical  danger  to  the
    Appellant, he is young, in his formative years,  and  has  been  looked
    after by someone, other than his two parents, both of whom are  now  in
    the UK.  The wishes of the Appellant are to  be  with  his  mother  and
    father in the UK.  The mother and father are  in  a  position  to  look
    after the Appellant, provide maintenance and accommodation for him, and
    have a clear desire to  care  for  him.   In  these  circumstances  the
    requirements of Article  8  are  plainly  met.   This  is  so  for  the
    following reasons.

33. If one applies Lord Bingham's tabulation as established in  Razgar  (at
    paragraph 17), the following emerges.  First,  it  is  plain  that  the
    continued exclusion of the Appellant is an  interference  by  a  public
    authority, namely, the Secretary of State, with  the  exercise  of  the
    Appellant's right to respect for  family  life.   The  family  life  is
    qualitatively different with one that the Appellant is enjoying in  his
    country of origin, as against the family life that he will  enjoy  with
    his mother and father in the UK, both of whom are keen and able to look
    after the Appellant, and this especially  given  that  the  Appellant's
    father has played such a pivotal role  in  his  upkeep  throughout  his
    life.Second, the interference  here  does  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as to potentially engage the operation of Article 8 (bearing in
    mind that this is a low threshold).  Third, however,  the  interference
    is in accordance with the law because the Appellant cannot comply  with
    the Immigration Rules at paragraph 297 of HC 395.  Fourth, though,  the
    interference is not necessary in a democratic society,  because  it  is
    not necessary for the economic wellbeing of the  country,  or  for  the
    prevention of crime, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedoms
    of others.  There is no hint whatsoever of any wrongdoing or illegality
    by any of the parties concerned.  In fact, all the evidence is that the
    Appellant's parents are in the UK and that his care through his sister-
    in-law is not ideal.  Fifth, all-in-all, the interference here  is  not
    proportionate to the  legitimate  public  end  that  is  sought  to  be
    achieved.

34.  It  is  well  accepted  that  the  material  question   engaging   the
    proportionality of an administrative decision that threatens to break a
    family is whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  remain
    separately from his natural parents, which in this case means both  his
    mother and father, both of whom now have an legitimate legal status  in
    the UK.  On the facts of this case, it is not reasonable.

35. On the totality of the evidence before me, I find  that  the  Appellant
    has discharged the burden  of  proof  and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent do not justify the  refusal.   Therefore,  the  Respondent's
    decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th May 2015
