
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   YAO [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Entry Clearance Officer  however  for
    the purposes of this decision I refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr [L] was the appellant.

 2. Mr [L] is a national of Niger born on 30 December 1987 and appealed the
    decision of an Entry Clearance Officer dated 28  August  2014  refusing
    him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  child  of  a  settled
    person, [HG], a British citizen present and settled in the UK.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 24 March  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Bart-Stewart  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed with permission
    on the grounds that  the  judge  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on material matters.  In particular it  was  argued  that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons as to why  the  sponsor  met  the
    sole responsibility test, particularly given that the sponsor had  left
    the appellant at the age of 11, did not know key details including  the
    name of the appellant's school or that he had slept  outside  for  some
    six months, and arguably failed to explain how she was  satisfied  that
    in reality the sponsor was involved in  the  appellant's  life  to  the
    degree required.

 4. There was no appearance by or on behalf of Mr  [L].   I  was  satisfied
    that the notice of hearing had been properly issued and I note that the
    sponsor was legally represented.  I considered the  relevant  Procedure
    Rules, in particular the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, Rule 2 the overriding objective, the case management powers under
    Rule 5 and Rule 38,  where if a party fails to  attend  a  hearing  the
    Upper Tribunal may proceed with the  hearing if the Upper Tribunal:

      a) is satisfied that the party has been notified  of  the  hearing  or
         that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the  party  of  the
         hearing; and

      b) consider that it is in the interests of justice to proceed with the
         hearing.

 5. I was so satisfied and proceeded with the appeal.

 6. Miss Fijiwala relied on the case  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  I also  indicated  that  as
    alluded to by the permission judge I had sight of the relevant  extract
    from Macdonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice  9th  edition  Sections
    11.87 - 11.91.  I also had regard to Buidov [2012] EWCA Civ 1739.

 7. It was Miss Fijiwala's submission that the judge failed  to  apply  the
    relevant legal test. The judge's findings were set  out  at  paragraphs
    [29] to [33] of the decision, in relation to sole responsibility.  Miss
    Fijiwala conceded that the judge had accepted that there was one  visit
    from the sponsor to the appellant.  At [33] and [34] the judge  focuses
    on the fact that the appellant's father had not played a role and found
    that the sponsor  had  exercised  sole  responsibility.   It  was  Miss
    Fijiwala's submission that no findings had been made as to who had care
    and control of the appellant.  Miss Fijiwala also  submitted  that  the
    judge had made findings including at [30] that the  evidence  from  the
    school that "parents need to get  involved"  undermined  the  sponsor's
    claim that she received regular reports by email and that  she  was  in
    telephone contact with the appellant's teachers.  In that  regard  Miss
    Fijiwala submitted that it was difficult to see  how  the  judge  could
    have  reached  the  decision   that   the   sponsor   have   had   sole
    responsibility.

 8. Miss Fijiwala conceded that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    conflated paragraph 297(i)(e) with paragraph 297(i)(f) which related to
    serious and compelling family or other considerations which might  make
    exclusion of the appellant undesirable and  suitable  arrangements  had
    been made for the child's care. Miss Fijiwala conceded that  the  judge
    had not allowed the appeal  on  that  basis  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had allowed the appeal solely on the basis that she had  found
    that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing
    and she did not rely on this part of the grounds.

Decision on Error of Law

 9. I have considered the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart in its entirety and note that the judge set out in considerable
    detail the evidence before her including the oral  evidence  given  and
    the submissions.  The judge also properly directed herself at  [23]  in
    relation to TD (Yemen) above as follows:

         "Sole responsibility is a factual matter to be decided upon all the
         evidence. where one parent is not involved in a child's  upbringing
         because he (or she) had abandoned or abdicated responsibility,  the
         issue may arise begotten the remaining parent and others  who  have
         day to day care of the child  abroad.   The  test  is  whether  the
         parent  has  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the   child's
         upbringing, including making all the  important  decisions  in  the
         child's life. However, where both parents are involved in a child's
         upbringing, it will be exceptional that one of them will have 'sole
         responsibility'."

10. The  judge  reminded  herself  that  there  were  relevant  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions  (IDIs).   Those  relevant  IDIs,  July  2012,
    Chapter 8 Section FM 3.2 paragraph  4.3  suggests  that  the  following
    factors should be considered where the issue of sole responsibility  is
    not clear:

      i) The period for which the parent in the UK has been  separated  from
         the child;

     ii) What the arrangements were for the care of the  child  before  that
         parent migrated to the UK;

    iii) Who has been entrusted with day-to-day  care  and  control  of  the
         child since the sponsor migrated here;

     iv) Who provides  the  financial  support  for  the  child's  care  and
         upbringing and in what proportion;

      v) Who takes the important decisions  about  the  child's  upbringing,
         such as where and with whom the child lives, the choice of  school,
         religious practice, etc.

     vi) The degree of contact that has been maintained  between  the  child
         and the parent claiming responsibility; and

    vii) What part in the child's care  and  upbringing  is  played  by  the
         parent not in the UK and relatives.

11. I am satisfied that the judge's decision reflects  a  consideration  of
    the above issues.  It was also evidence that the judge had in mind  the
    issues of concern to the respondent including as set out at [20] of her
    decision where the Presenting Officer had submitted  that  the  sponsor
    knew nothing about her son, his sleeping on the floor or how his school
    fees were paid.

12. I am satisfied that the judge carefully considered all of the  evidence
    before her and made findings including that the  sponsor  had  been  in
    Niger and Ivory Coast for six weeks in total  in  2012  and  find  that
    there was likely to have been physical contact  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor prior to the date of decision.  The judge  went  on  to
    consider the evidence of contact including phone bills and  found  that
    there was not evidence of daily calls as the sponsor  had  claimed  and
    that the sponsor's claim to receive regular post by  email  and  be  in
    telephone contact with the appellant's teacher was "rather  undermined"
    by comments from the school.  The judge also  took  into  consideration
    that there was a large amount of money  transfer  receipts.  The  judge
    went on to consider difficulties with the sponsor's evidence  including
    that she did not often answer direct  questions  in  a  direct  manner.
    However she found that:

         "The sponsor's account of her visit to her son was vivid as was her
         account of the emotional support, the provisions she has  made  and
         their conversations.   She  explained  the  appellant's  desire  to
         remain in Niger during  the  visit  in  2012  and  her  account  of
         advising her son that he was only being treated  well  because  she
         was there and they should return to Ivory Coast.  This came out  as
         a spontaneous response and I find cogent evidence of the  decisions
         that she has made.  She explained that despite the  claim  of  ill-
         treatment in Ivory Coast, she considered that priority to  be  that
         the appellant gets an education  and  therefore  remains  in  Ivory
         Coast.  She explained the provisions made with Mr Bah so  that  the
         appellant could remain with him until he went to Niger."

13. Although the judge went on to find that  it  was  surprising  that  the
    sponsor was unaware that his cousin had been making him sleep  outside,
    the judge took into consideration that the appellant was not living  in
    the UK and that the judge had to take into account a different  culture
    and environment. The judge also  reminded  herself  that  the  relevant
    guidance and case law accepted that day-to-day  care  had  to  be  with
    someone and found that there was no evidence  that  "someone"  was  the
    appellant's father.  The judge found  that  the  regular  transfers  of
    money to various different people in Niger supported  and  corroborated
    the sponsor's evidence that the appellant's father  had  not  played  a
    role and supported a finding that the appellant has lived with  various
    individuals and has had to move  between  relatives  and  friends  and,
    particularly significantly that  "the  constant  is  support  from  his
    mother".

14. It is clear therefore that the judge applied the relevant guidance  and
    case law The judge set out the various difficulties with  the  evidence
    and gave cogent reasons for preferring the account of the sponsor  that
    in effect this was a child who had been moved between various relatives
    and friends during his mother's absence and that it was his mother  who
    provided for him financially, took the important  decisions  about  her
    child's  life  including  about  his   education   and   had   ultimate
    responsibility for him.

15. I do not accept therefore Miss Fijiwala's submission that  the  judge's
    decision was predicated solely on financial support.  This  is  clearly
    not the case including as the judge found the sponsor's account of  the
    decisions that had been made in relation to the  appellant's  life  and
    whether he should live in Niger or Ivory Coast and his education, to be
    credible, as set out paragraph [31] of her decision.

16. The fact that the judge has in this case not accepted  everything  that
    was said by the sponsor does not  indicate  a  material  error  in  her
    decision.  Whilst it is clear from the judge's decision  that  elements
    of the  sponsor's  account  were  perhaps  exaggerated,  this  did  not
    undermine her core finding that  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  the
    sponsor  has  exercised  sole  responsibility   for   the   appellant's
    upbringing.  The fact that the evidence  might  not  have  demonstrated
    this beyond a reasonable doubt is not the test.



Conclusion

17. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  disclose  a
    material error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date     30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




