
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12474/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 9 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SAIQA TAHIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The respondent to this appeal, Ms Tahir, is a  citizen  of  Pakistan
      born on 8 August 1991. The appellant is the entry  clearance  officer,
      who has appealed  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Beach,  who
      allowed Ms Tahir's appeal against the refusal of  entry  clearance  to
      enable her to join her husband, Dr Muhammad Tahir ("the  sponsor")  in
      the UK.


   2.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Ms Tahir from  now
      on as  "the  appellant"  and  the  entry  clearance  officer  as  "the
      respondent".


   3.   I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The respondent considered  the  appellant's  application  under  the
      rules for partners found in Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      HC395. In a decision dated 13 May  2013  the  respondent  decided  the
      appellant did not meet paragraphs E-ECP.2.6 & 2.10 or E-ECP.2.5 of the
      rules. The couple said they met and married in August 2012  but  there
      was no evidence of contact  since  then  and  no  photographs  of  the
      wedding. The entry clearance officer was not  satisfied  the  couple's
      relationship was genuine and subsisting and that they intended to live
      together permanently in the UK or even that they had met.


   5.   In her grounds of appeal, the appellant pointed out the sponsor  had
      made three  visits  to  Pakistan  since  the  marriage  and  a  family
      registration  certificate  had  been  issued.  She  attached   further
      evidence, such as photographs, records of  contact  by  text  message,
      telephone and email and evidence of her husband's trips.

   6.   The sponsor  attended  the  hearing  before  Judge  Beach  and  gave
      evidence. The judge found him a credible witness and found as follows:




          (1) the couple had met because  the  marriage  certificate  showed
         their  signatures  and  the  wedding  photographs   depicted   them
         together;
         (2) the sponsor had honestly believed the marriage certificate  was
         sufficient evidence of his relationship;
         (3) he had only realised he needed to  keep  a  record  of  contact
         after reading the decision;
         (4) the couple had spent a considerable  period  of  time  together
         during the sponsor's visits to Pakistan and on  a  trip  they  took
         together to Abu Dhabi; and
          (5) the sponsor had used calling cards to telephone the appellant.


   7.   The judge found the rules were met and allowed the appeal.  She  did
      not make a fee award.


   8.   The respondent filed grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  which
      argued that, despite directing herself in terms of  section  85(5)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  judge  had
      materially erred by admitting  as  evidence  plane  tickets,  boarding
      passes and evidence of telephone calls and emails which post-dated the
      decision. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Ransley.

   9.   The sponsor did not attend  the  appeal  hearing.  Mr  Avery  simply
      relied on the reasons seeking permission to appeal.

  10. Notwithstanding the unexplained absence of the sponsor, I decided that
      the judge did not make a material error of law such that her  decision
      should be set aside and her decision allowing  the  appeal  under  the
      rules shall stand. My reasons are as follows.

  11. Section 85(5) of the  2002  Act  disapplies  the  general  rule  which
      permits a Tribunal to consider evidence  about  any  matter  which  it
      thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision.  Section  85A(2)
      provides that in appeals such as this one,

         "... the Tribunal may consider only the circumstances  appertaining
         at the time of the decision."

  12. However, that does not  mean  that  post-decision  evidence  is  never
      relevant in overseas appeals. The former similar provision in  section
      85(5) was interpreted in  DR  (ECO:  Post-decision  evidence)  Morocco
      [2005] UKIAT  00038  Starred.  For  example,  in  In  Naz  (subsisting
      marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT  00040  (IAC),  the
      Upper Tribunal explained that post-decision visits by a sponsor to his
      spouse were admissible in evidence to who the marriage was subsisting.




  13.  I  note  also  that  the  judge's  main  reason  for  accepting   the
      relationship was genuine and subsisting was that she found the sponsor
      a credible witness. She accepted his oral evidence in its entirety.


  14. In the circumstances, the judge was entitled to rely on  the  evidence
      she referred to in reaching her conclusion that the  rules  were  met.
      Her decision does not disclose any material error of law.

DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  on
    a point  of  law  and  her  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


    No fee award.


                               Signed                 Date 9 June 2014






                               Neil Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the
                               Upper Tribunal


