
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/12967/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2014                    |On 15 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                            Houria Moradi Dezaki
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  Istanbul
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    comprising a panel of Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  French  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk, promulgated on 19 June 2014  dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  15
    May 2013 to refuse entry clearance as a spouse pursuant to section EC-P
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on  20  January  1977.  On  11
    September 2012 she was married to Mr Majid Jahanai (d.o.b. 21  February
    1975), a British citizen - hereafter 'the sponsor' - in Esfahan,  Iran.
    On 17 December 2012 the Appellant applied for entry  clearance  with  a
    view to settlement as the spouse of the sponsor.  The  application  was
    refused for reasons set out in a Notice of Immigration  Decision  dated
    15 May 2013, with particular reference to paragraphs EC-P.1.1(d) and E-
    ECP.3.1 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Essentially  the
    Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules by reference to the sponsor's income, and  in
    particular that there had been a failure to provide specified documents
    in accordance with the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons
    set out in its determination. Essentially the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that the Respondent's decision was  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules. It was observed that the Appellant did not  seek  to
    rely upon Article 8 of the ECHR (determination at paragraph 6).

 5. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Digney on 29 August 2014.

 6. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  2  September  2014
    drafted in measured and equivocal terms because of an apparent lack  of
    access to the file.

Consideration

 7. The First-tier Tribunal identified that there  was  one  issue  in  the
    appeal: "whether the documents in relation to  the  sponsor's  finances
    could now or should now be admissible",  which  did  not  require  oral
    evidence  and  could  be  determined  on  the  basis   of   submissions
    (determination at paragraph 3). (See further in this context  paragraph
    13 where the deficiencies  in  the  documentation  submitted  with  the
    application are identified,  and  the  fact  that  "the  necessary  and
    specified bank statements were now available and produced" noted.)

 8. The First-tier Tribunal determined that the  personal  bank  statements
    that had been omitted from the application  were  not  covered  by  the
    provision of paragraph D(b)(i)(aa) of Appendix FM-SE,  and  accordingly
    the discretion under the Rules for the Respondent's  decision-maker  to
    request the omitted documents was not at large. It could not  therefore
    be said that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law for a failure to  consider  the  utilisation  of  such  discretion,
    (Determination at paragraphs 14 and  15.)  Further,  after  considering
    paragraph D(c) and D(d)(iii)(1) the Tribunal found that  there  was  no
    error on the part of the Respondent in failing to request  the  omitted
    business bank  statements  (paragraphs  16  and  17).  The  appeal  was
    dismissed accordingly.

 9. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in respect of these
    matters is set out with simple clarity, properly reflects the  (agreed)
    facts, follows the wording of the Rules, and is unimpugnable.

10. In so far as it is argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    understanding of the meaning of a 'sequence', I find no  merit  in  the
    Appellant's submissions. In my judgement it was entirely  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal - and indeed entirely reasonable - to conclude that
    the missing personal  bank  statements  did  not  constitute  documents
    omitted from a sequence of  documents  that  were  submitted  with  the
    application. This was not a situation of 'gaps'  within  the  documents
    submitted  that  might  have  been  filled;   the   missing   documents
    essentially were in respect of  a  period  prior  to  the  sequence  of
    documents that were submitted with  the  application.  The  application
    failed in this regard  because  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  submit
    documents going back far enough in time; it did not fail because  there
    were documents missing in the sequence of documents actually submitted.

11. Given the rejection of  the  above  aspect  of  the  challenge,  it  is
    essentially to be acknowledged that the Respondent reached  a  decision
    that was in accordance with the Immigration  Rules.  The  Appellant  is
    left with this alternative argument that the First-tier Tribunal should
    have admitted into evidence the documents now available that  had  been
    omitted from the Appellant's application,  and  re-evaluated  the  case
    under the Rules in light of those documents. (This was the  main  basis
    upon which permission to appeal was  granted,  Judge  Digney  alighting
    upon the possible significance of the words "evidence must be provided"
    at paragraph 2 of Appendix FM-SE, in the  requirement  "In  respect  of
    salaried employment in the UK... all of the following evidence must  be
    provided:".)

12. In this context  the  principal  submission  is  this:  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred at paragraph 3 of its determination  in  expressing  the
    issue in the appeal as one of admissibility of evidence; the  documents
    now submitted were admissible because post-decision evidence was not to
    be excluded if it shed light on the circumstances appertaining  at  the
    time of the Respondent's decision (section 85A(2) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  -  see  also  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038); the  documents  now  available
    were demonstrative of the circumstances appertaining at the date of the
    Respondent's  decision  and  showed,  in  the  prescribed  manner,  the
    financial circumstances of the sponsor  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

13. I can see no merit in the case as advanced on behalf of the  Appellant,
    whether by reference to paragraphs 4 and 5 of  the  Grounds,  the  oral
    submissions of Mr Hodson, the observations of Judge Digney in  granting
    permission  to  appeal  (which  in  any  event  went  no  further  than
    identifying an arguable issue), or otherwise.

14. In order  to  succeed  in  her  application  for  entry  clearance  the
    Appellant had to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at  the
    date  of  the  Respondent's  decision.  In  respect  of  the  financial
    requirements she was, pursuant to the Immigration Rules, required:  (a)
    to demonstrate the sponsor had a level of  income  in  accordance  with
    that specified  under  paragraph  E-ECP.3.1  of  Appendix  FM;  (b)  to
    demonstrate that the income was from specified sources (E-ECP 3.2); and
    (c) to establish (a) and (b) by the production  of  specified  evidence
    pursuant to Appendix FM-SE.

15. The circumstances appertaining at the date of the Respondent's decision
    included that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  produce  the  specified
    evidence. The availability of such evidence now,  does  not  alter  the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of  the  Respondent's  decision.
    The post-decision production of  the  omitted  bank  statements  cannot
    alter the fact that at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because she had not complied with  those  requirements  in  respect  of
    specified evidence.

16. I find no error  of  law  in  the  approach  taken  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.

18. The appeal is dismissed.

19. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     8 May 2015
