
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA126232014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2016                                |On 9 June 2016                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                            MR DIPENDRA SHRESTHA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Nepal  called  Dipendra  Shrestha  whose
    appeal is OA/12623/2014.  He was born on 4 February 1988 and applied on
    21 August 2014 for  entry  clearance.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal classified that as  entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  the
    sponsor but that does  not  entirely  encapsulate  the  nature  of  the
    application.  The applicant made an application under paragraph 194  of
    the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules and those provided:
         "194.    The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                enter the United Kingdom as the partner  of  a  person  with
                limited leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  ...
                are that:
                (iii)  each of the parties intends to live with the other as
                    his or her partner during the applicant's stay  and  the
                    relationship is subsisting".

 2. Although there are also accommodation requirements, it is accepted that
    those accommodation requirements are met and the only issue related  to
    the question as to whether or not the parties  intended  to  live  with
    each other during the  applicant's  stay.   At  the  material  time  it
    appears that the applicant's stay was valid until 4 April 2015 but  was
    subsequently extended until a date sometime in this year.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision made on 10 September 2014 was on
    the basis that the decision maker accepted that the marriage was valid,
    and it was also noted that the appellant's wife as his sponsor had made
    two trips to Nepal in the period 2006 and 2010  but  that,  apart  from
    those two trips, she had remained in the United Kingdom as  a  domestic
    worker.  That was relied upon in part by the decision maker as  showing
    an absence of a subsisting relationship.  However I  am  bound  to  say
    that from my experience that is a pattern of return-home visiting which
    is not unusual where an individual is working in the United Kingdom and
    has, on occasions, returned to her home country.

 4. The decision however was made under paragraph 194.  That was looked  at
    by the Entry Clearance Manager in  a  decision  that  was  made  on  19
    December 2014.  Once again, that makes reference to  paragraph  194  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge however appears  to  have  overlooked
    the terms of paragraph 194 and dealt with it as if this were an Article
    8 claim by reference to Appendix FM.  That is simply wrong.  It  was  a
    paragraph 194 application.  However, the  judge  applying  Appendix  FM
    looked to consider whether the relationship between the  applicant  and
    their partner must be genuine and subsisting and whether the  applicant
    and their partner must intend to live together permanently.  Whilst  it
    is clear there is  a  correlation  between  the  relationship  and  the
    application that was made, it does not seem to me that a  determination
    which is made on an entirely  different  footing  can  be  sustainable,
    notwithstanding the findings that were made by the judge in relation to
    some parts of the oral evidence.

 5. The problem that I face with this application is that if  there  is  no
    subsisting relationship as originally claimed by the  respondent,  then
    inevitably that meant that, at the time this application was made,  the
    parties were separated and their marriage was at an  end.   This  would
    have meant that the decision to  sponsor  the  appellant  made  by  his
    spouse was made notwithstanding the fact that they were  separated  and
    had nothing more to do with each other and was, in short,  a  thorough-
    going fraud.  If that were the case then it was the  intention  of  the
    appellant to enter the United Kingdom on the basis  of  his  having  no
    relationship with his wife, presumably therefore having no intention of
    living with her during the period of her visa, living somewhere  other,
    presumably not relying upon her earnings to support him,  inferentially
    working without leave, inferentially supporting himself both  in  terms
    of accommodation  and  maintenance  by  his  own  resources,  and  then
    remaining at the conclusion of her visa unlawfully.  I have to say that
    strikes me as being a most speculative approach to the application  and
    the appeal.  It seems much more likely that the application was made on
    the basis that this was a valid marriage, that the sponsor had  visited
    Nepal in circumstances where it can properly be  inferred  she  visited
    her spouse; where the sponsor elected to support the  application  made
    by the appellant and where the appellant himself  provided  information
    as to what was his intention, (namely to join his wife  in  the  United
    Kingdom).  This is a much more likely reason for this application being
    made and suggests that it  is  entirely  genuine.   I  simply  find  it
    impossible to accept that the respondent on the material before him was
    able to reach the decision that this whole application was a sham.

 6. For these reasons I consider that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    wrong in her approach to the statutory regime that  she  was  meant  to
    apply.  All that the appellant had to establish was  that,  during  the
    relatively short period of the applicant's stay,  they  were  going  to
    live together and it was entirely  speculative  to  consider  that  the
    application was a fraudulent one.

 7. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and substitute a decision allowing the appeal under paragraph 194
    of the Immigration Rules.  There is no viable Article 8 claim.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of  law
and I set it aside.

I allow the appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph  194  of  the  Immigration
Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 12 May 2016

