
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/13466/2014
                                                               OA/13467/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17th March 2017                    |On 8th June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        Miss Kadeja Shanella Campbell
                        Miss Chantay Samoya Campbell
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms C Bexson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Jamaica  born  respectively  on  11th
    September 1998 and 17th July 1996.  Both  Appellants  made  application
    prior to their 18th birthdays for entry  clearance  as  a  child  of  a
    person settled  in  the  UK  and  their  applications  were  considered
    pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  In both cases  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Notices of Refusal dated 4th July 2014 found
    that  the  parent  they  were  seeking  to  join  has  not   had   sole
    responsibility for their upbringing pursuant to paragraph 297(i)(e) and
    that  there  were  no  serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which would make their exclusion undesirable pursuant to
    paragraph 297(i)(f).  The Appellants'  appeals  were  reviewed  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager and he upheld  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance.

 2. Thereafter the Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th February
    2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 16th February 2016  the
    Appellants' appeals were dismissed.

 3. The Appellants through their legal  representatives  on  16th  February
    2016 lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    contended:

 a) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in respect of the findings
    on sole responsibility and that whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    correctly directed herself to the leading authority of  TD  (Yemen)  on
    sole responsibility the judge failed to distinguish paragraph 46 of  TD
    given that there was no parent living abroad.

 b) That because of the unusual factual circumstances of  the  appeals  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge should have departed from the test as to sole
    responsibility as set out in TD (Yemen).  The grounds pointed out  that
    as is accepted TD (Yemen) is concerned with the vast majority of  cases
    where only one parent is in the UK and the other parent is outside  the
    UK,  usually  in  the  applicant's  home  country.   Therefore  it  was
    submitted that the test for sole responsibility is framed against  that
    factual norm in that where both parents  were  involved  in  a  child's
    upbringing it would be exceptional that one of  them  will  have  "sole
    responsibility".  However, it was contended that that framework was not
    appropriate given that both parents live in the UK.

 c) The judge erred in her assessment of paragraph 297(i)(f)  in  that  the
    judge relied on her own knowledge when considering the effects  of  the
    various health conditions affecting the Appellants' carer and  that  in
    any  event  the  judge  should  have  considered  the  health  of   the
    grandmother as at the date of decision and  not  as  she  considers  it
    would likely be in the future.  Further it was contended that the judge
    had erred in failing to give weight to the fact that both legal parents
    are long-time residents of the UK and the fact that there exists family
    life between the grandmother and the  Appellants  did  not  necessitate
    that an analysis was conducted as  to  whether  the  exclusion  of  the
    Appellants would be undesirable,  particularly  in  circumstances  when
    neither parents live in the Appellants' home country.

 d) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  consider  the  Article  8
    position as at the date of decision.

 4. On 3rd February 2017 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parker  granted
    permission  to  appeal.   In  granting  permission  Judge  Parker   had
    carefully considered the judge's decision, particularly with regard  to
    the fact that the judge had  applied  TD  (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049
    despite the Appellants' circumstances  being  materially  different  to
    those of the Appellant in that case and that the judge's assessment  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f) appeared to rely on her own knowledge and  that  it
    was infected.  On 21st February 2017 the Secretary of  State  responded
    to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.

    Submissions/Discussion

 5. Ms Bexson relies on those Grounds of Appeal, submitting that  her  main
    point is the distinction between the factual matrix of this case and TD
    (Yemen) and the failure, it is submitted, of the judge  to  distinguish
    the different factual circumstances of this  matter.   She  reminds  me
    that both the Appellants' parents live in the UK  and  that  there  was
    evidence that they both have responsibility.  Further  she  submits  it
    could not be shown  that  responsibility  had  been  abdicated  as  the
    Appellant's parents were here in the UK and that  therefore  there  had
    been a failure by the judge to consider the facts and that TD could  be
    departed from given the circumstances.  She submits that the judge  has
    construed the test for sole responsibility in a literal way and that it
    had never been the contention of the Appellants that their  mother  was
    not partly responsible for their upbringing.  What she submits is  that
    the judge should  have  looked  at  the  position  of  the  Appellants'
    grandmother and that this has not been properly considered.

 6. Further she contends that the judge  was  wrong  to  rely  on  her  own
    knowledge of the health of the grandmother and that  the  grandmother's
    health should have been  considered  at  the  date  of  decision.   She
    submits that this taints the decision and creates a material  error  of
    law.  Finally she submits that the judge has erred in  looking  at  the
    position under Article 8 at the date of hearing and not at the date  of
    decision.  She asked me to allow the appeal and  to  either  remake  it
    allowing it or to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

 7. In response Mr Tarlow relies on the Rule 24 reply and he  asked  me  to
    give it due consideration.  Consequently adopting that approach I  note
    that  the  Rule  24  response  contends  (at  paragraph  3)  that   the
    distinguishability or otherwise of TD is "a  red  herring"  given  that
    both of the Appellants' parents were present in the UK then  the  issue
    is that of "serious and compelling family or other considerations  that
    make the exclusion of the children undesirable under 297(i)(f)  of  the
    Rules".  It is Mr Tarlow's contention that the judge from paragraph  31
    onwards has considered this and made sustainable findings.

 8. Further he submits that a reading of paragraph 32 does not discern that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  imported  her  own   knowledge   when
    considering the Appellants' grandmother's health and  that  her  letter
    dated 11th June 2014 was provided from Dr Forbes  to  the  effect  that
    there  was  "no  significant  deterioration"   in   the   grandmother's
    condition.  He submits that the remainder of the challenges  amount  to
    little more than disagreement.

    The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

    Findings on Error of Law

11. This matter turns on whether or not the judge has materially  erred  in
    law in particular with regard to the manner in which she  has  followed
    TD (Yemen) and thereafter gone on to consider paragraph  297(i)(f).   I
    am satisfied that there is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  It is important that I  give  my
    reasons.  It is also important to note that the issue before me is  not
    whether I, or another judge, would have come to  a  different  decision
    but as to whether or not there are material errors of law disclosed  in
    that decision.  The judge  has  immediately  grasped  the  nettle  with
    regard to the guidance given in TD (Yemen) and has set out at paragraph
    22 the questions that should be answered.   Thereafter  the  judge  has
    gone on to consider those factors  in  some  detail  at  paragraphs  23
    through to 29.

12. However, it is contended that because both parents are in the  UK  that
    the approach adopted by the judge is wrong.  I agree with the  comments
    of Mr Tarlow which follow the expressed view set out by Mr Whitwell  in
    the Rule 24 response that to try to make such arguments is  effectively
    a red herring and that the real issue is whether there were serious and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    Appellants undesirable.

13. The judge has considered these factors very thoroughly at paragraphs 31
    to 35.  She has found that there was no evidence before  her  that  the
    Appellants are not fit and healthy young persons living  a  comfortable
    life in Jamaica.  She  has  noted  their  education  and  she  has  not
    overlooked the position regarding the grandmother's  health  which  has
    been given due, full and proper consideration at paragraph 32.  She has
    noted the Appellants' ages and that they have a settled life in Jamaica
    where they have formed strong bonds with friends in the community.  The
    judge has made a finding that it would be in their best  interests  not
    to disrupt the settled life that they have there.  That  is  a  finding
    that I think the judge was perfectly entitled to make.  She  cannot  be
    criticised for the approach which she has adopted.

14. Further the judge has gone on to  give  due  and  proper  consideration
    albeit brief to the position under Article 8 and has made  findings  at
    paragraphs 36.  At paragraph 37, having considered the evidence in  the
    round, she sets out the correct burden of proof and makes findings that
    she is entitled to.

15. In all the circumstances this is a judge who has properly addressed the
    issues that were before her and has properly applied the case  law.   I
    acknowledge that reference is made to the manner in which at  paragraph
    32 the judge has shown her own knowledge or imparted her own  knowledge
    with regard to treatment that could be provided for  the  Appellant  by
    way of dialysis.  It may well be an error for a judge  even,  as  I  am
    sure in this case, inadvertently to impart his or her own knowledge but
    I agree with the submission made by Mr Tarlow that even if that  is  an
    error bearing in mind  the  manner  in  which  this  case  is  properly
    addressed it is not material.

16. For all the above reasons this is a decision that discloses no material
    error of law and the appeal is consequently dismissed and the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The appeal of the Appellants is dismissed and the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed D N Harris                            Date 30th March 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed D N Harris                            Date 30th March 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
