
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th September 2016                        |On 10th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Ishmail Kamara
                        (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer but for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer  to
    the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    that is the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent and Mr Kamara  as
    the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 11th April 1972  and
    was refused entry to the United Kingdom on the basis of his convictions
    which made it undesirable for him to be given a family permit to  enter
    the UK to join his spouse  and  child  under  Regulation  19  (1)  with
    reference to paragraph 21(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (EEA Regulations). The appellant  appealed  that
    decision and his  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese on 29th October 2015.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  basis  of  lack  of
    reasoning.  It was advanced that the reasoning  was  contained  in  one
    sentence, finding that the  appellant  no  longer  posed  a  threat  to
    society when 'looking at the offences as a total and  also  looking  at
    the length of time which has passed'. The offences  were  noted  to  be
    limited to '2003/2006'. In  fact  the  appellant  was  administratively
    removed by the SSHD on 5th November 2007.

 4. The second ground of appeal was that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    given no reasoning for the assertion that the refusal would breach  his
    rights under the ECHR.

 5. The application for permission to appeal  was  heard  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Archer on 23rd May 2016 who was said to have orally upheld the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Sadly, since that date  the
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge has passed away.  Mr Coleman at the hearing
    before me stated that at a previous hearing on 23rd  May  2016,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Archer had given a decision such that there was no
    error of law and the  application  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    appeal should be dismissed.  Mr Coleman requested that I refer  to  the
    record of proceedings. In fact, no reasoning could  be  discerned  from
    the record of proceedings as to why First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Archer
    gave that decision.

 6. Mr Whitwell's submission on behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer  was
    that no decision was effective until promulgated.

 7. The Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules set out as follows

         40.- Decisions


         (1)      The Upper Tribunal may give a decision orally at a
         hearing.


         (1A)     Subject to paragraph (1B), in immigration judicial review
         proceedings, a decision which disposes of proceedings shall be
         given at a hearing.


         (1B)     Paragraph (1A) does not affect the power of the Upper
         Tribunal to-


             (a) strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b) or
             8(2);


             (b) consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


             (c) determine an application for permission to bring judicial
             review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


             (d) make a consent order disposing of proceedings, pursuant to
             rule 39, without a hearing.


         (2)      Except where rule 22 (decision in relation to permission
         to appeal) or rule 22A (special procedure for providing notice of a
         refusal of permission to appeal in an asylum case) applies, the
         Upper Tribunal must provide to each party as soon as reasonably
         practicable after making a decision (other than a decision under
         Part 7) which finally disposes of all issues in the proceedings or
         of a preliminary issue dealt with following a direction under rule
         5(3)(e) -


             (a) a decision notice stating the Upper Tribunal's decision;
             and


             (b) notification of any rights of review or appeal against the
             decision and the time and manner in which such rights of
             review or appeal may be exercised.


         (3)      Subject to rule 14(11) (prevention of disclosure or
         publication of documents and information), the Upper Tribunal must
         provide written reasons for its decision with a decision notice
         provided under paragraph (2)(a) unless-


             (a) the decision was made with the consent of the parties; or


             (b) the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal not
             giving written reasons.


         (4)      The Upper Tribunal may provide written reasons for any
         decision to which paragraph (2) does not apply.


 8. It is clear that the Upper Tribunal may give a  decision  orally  (Rule
    40(1)) but that provision is subject to Rule 40(3) which confirms  that
    the Upper Tribunal must provide written reasons for its decision with a
    decision notice provided under paragraph 2(a) unless (a)  the  decision
    was made with the consent of  the  parties  or  (b)  the  parties  have
    consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving  written  reasons.   Neither
    party gave consent in this matter, certainly not  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

 9. The Rules also set out provision  for  setting  aside  decisions  which
    dispose of proceedings and which I  set out  below

         43.- Setting aside a decision which disposes of proceedings


         (1)      The Upper Tribunal may set aside a decision which disposes
         of proceedings, or part of such a decision, and re-make the
         decision or the relevant part of it, if-


             (a) the Upper Tribunal considers that it is in the interests
             of justice to do so; and


             (b) one or more of the conditions in paragraph (2) are
             satisfied.


         (2)      The conditions are-


             (a) a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to, or
             was not received at an appropriate time by, a party or a
             party's representative;


             (b) a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to the
             Upper Tribunal at an appropriate time;


             (c) a party, or a party's representative, was not present at a
             hearing related to the proceedings; or


             (d) there has been some other procedural irregularity  in  the
             proceedings.


10. No decision was  promulgated  with  written  reasons  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Archer.  As indicated there has not been compliance  with  the
    Rules and it is not possible  to  understand  why  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Archer came to the decision he did.  I therefore, in reliance  on
    Rule 43, set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Archer
    owing to a procedural irregularity which cannot be cured and because it
    is in the interests of justice to do so.

11. As I stated at the hearing before me the matter was heard de novo.  The
    decision of Judge Abebrese in respect of the EEA Regulations  comprises
    one line as follows:

         'The Tribunal looking at the offences as a total and  also  looking
         at the length of time which has passed the Tribunal finds  that  in
         the round and on balance that  this  appellant  would  not  pose  a
         threat to society if he were to be returned to this country'.

12. At paragraph  11  of  the  decision  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    appellant had 25 offences for driving whilst disqualified  and  driving
    whilst uninsured [8] and [11]. The judge also noted that the  appellant
    was convicted  of  offences  in  relation  to  possession  of  class  C
    controlled drugs. The tribunal did not accept the appellant's  argument
    that the drug offence did not relate to him.   There  were  in  fact  a
    string of offences dating from 2006.  Although reference  was  made  to
    the offences nowhere did the decision identify that the  appellant  was
    administratively removed in 2007 or that he was working,  as  disclosed
    by the Entry Clearance Manager as a bus driver during his period in the
    United Kingdom.  The  reasoning  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese in this respect is  inadequate.  There  were  no  findings  in
    relation to the family.

13. In relation to Article 8 the judge had this to say at [11]

         'Alternatively the Tribunal also  finds  in  any  event  that  this
         appellant having a child in this country and  also  having  already
         appealed  against  a  refusal  of  his  marriage  successfully  the
         Tribunal finds that he does have family in this country and that he
         does in any event come within Article 8 of the European  Convention
         on Human Rights and a refusal on that basis would on the facts  and
         the evidence be in breach of the Convention'.

14. Mr Whitwell argued that Article 8 had no application  in  any  evidence
    following Amirteymour as this was under the EEA Regulations.   Even  if
    that is the case this is a matter to be canvassed before the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. Amirteymour and  others  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC, concerned an in country appeal with no decision
    on removal, and I note the Tribunal had this to say regarding an appeal
    on human rights grounds (Section 84(1)(c))

         'As we accept that the ground of appeal set out in section  84  (1)
         (c) is theoretically available in EEA appeals,  but  is  of  little
         assistance to an appellant challenging a decision with  respect  to
         documentation. In such a case, the appellant is  only  entitled  to
         the document if he has established the relevant right of  residence
         under EU law; a successful claim that he cannot be removed pursuant
         to article 8 could not entitle him to the document, as it could not
         give rise to a right under EU law.

15. I find that there is an error of law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese on  the  basis  that  inadequate  findings  and
    reasoning have been given both in  respect  of  why  the  appellant  no
    longer represented a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society (Regulation 21(5)
    of the EEA Regulations), and in  relation  to  the  findings  on  human
    rights. Both grounds of challenge are made out by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  Indeed there is a recitation of the proceedings and  evidence
    in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  but  little  by  way  of  actual
    findings and overall there was an absence of  findings  such  that  the
    decision could be remade.

16. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington               6th October 2016

