
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13626/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 30 January 2014                            |on 31 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                DJODJO MUYIGA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

         ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (DRC)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Mr R Gibb of Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Agnew, promulgated on 11 June 2013,  dismissing  her  appeal  under
   paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2) The appellant argued that there  was  error  in  4  respects  -  (1)  the
   appellant being a child at the date of decision,  failure  to  treat  her
   best interests as a primary consideration; (2) failure to  take  relevant
   factors into account, in particular the totality of money transfers  from
   the appellant to the sponsor, and the reasons why the appellant  and  her
   siblings moved to Kinshasa; (3) error in taking the date of birth of  the
   appellant's sibling Basile as 14 September 1992 and so considering him an
   adult, his date of birth being 14 September  1997;  and  (4)  holding  as
   adverse to the appellant's case an alleged discrepancy about whether  she
   had been in the care of her grandfather, a matter of which she  ought  to
   have been put on notice.

3) I advised parties at the outset that I  had  traced  the  origin  of  the
   error regarding the age of the appellant's sibling.  The date was wrongly
   stated by the administration of the First-tier Tribunal on the outside of
   the Tribunal file.  It appears that unfortunately the judge took the date
   from there, and having no reason to think that this person's age  was  an
   issue, did not cross-refer to the other materials.

4) Mr Gibb submitted thus.  He acknowledged that the best interests  of  the
   child had not been stated as a specific ground of appeal  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal, and that Mundeba [2013] UKUT 00088,  referred  to  in  the
   grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, was not cited to the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  He also acknowledged that the case as put  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal (the other siblings having  withdrawn  their  appeals)  posed  a
   choice between taking the appellant, a near  adult,  away  from  siblings
   with whom she has lived so far in order to live with  the  sponsor,  with
   whom she has not lived since 2004.  He argued however  that  the  sponsor
   had been the child's effective parent and principal  or  sole  carer,  so
   that the bond between them  was  a  very  strong  one,  which  the  judge
   overlooked.  There had been evidence of money transfers  over  and  above
   those listed by the judge at paragraph 20.  He accepted  that  the  judge
   was not provided with any schedule of dates and amounts and he could  not
   say how much further the overlooked evidence took the  case,  other  than
   that there were "quite a few" other transfers.  He said that the error at
   paragraph 19 of the determination regarding  the  age  of  Basile  was  a
   matter which the judge thought went to the core.   The  judge  overlooked
   the sponsor's explanation of why the children were transferred  from  the
   remote rural area where they lived with their grandparents  to  Kinshasa.
   The judge's point regarding the grandfather  caring  for  the  appellant,
   although obvious on reading the court judgment,  was  overlooked  by  the
   Entry Clearance Officer, the Entry Clearance Manager and  the  Presenting
   Officer as well as by the appellant's representative.  That suggested  it
   was a matter on which the appellant should have been invited to  comment.
   If so, it was not just an empty procedural matter, because the  appellant
   now puts forward a possible answer.  A letter from the  sponsor's  lawyer
   in DRC dated 26 August 2013 says  that  this  "can  be  considered  as  a
   material  error  which  falls  outwith  the  wording  of  the  judgment."
   Finally, Mr Gibb submitted that the determination as a whole was  fatally
   undermined by a combination of errors, and an entirely fresh  hearing  in
   the First-tier Tribunal was required.

5) The Presenting Officer fairly mentioned that the  question  of  the  best
   interests of the child, while not put as clearly as it might have been in
   the First-tier Tribunal, was recorded by her colleague  as  part  of  the
   submissions for the appellant.  There was error about the age of  Basile.
   While the point about the court order and the  grandfather's  involvement
   might be thought obvious once seen, no-one had noticed it apart from  the
   judge.  Again very fairly, Mrs O'Brien  pointed  out  that  although  the
   passage quoted by the judge (9/10 of the appellant's First-tier  Tribunal
   bundle) goes against the appellant, there is  another  passage  from  the
   same proceedings (9/8) which is in her favour, narrating that  since  the
   death of their parents the children have been  financially  supported  by
   the sponsor.  Mrs  O'Brien  suggested  that  if  a  fresh  decision  were
   required the real crux of the case might be in paragraph  297(f)  of  the
   Immigration Rules rather than  in  separate  consideration  of  the  best
   interests of the child and Article  8.   She  reserved  the  respondent's
   position regarding the lawyer's letter of 26 August 2013.

6) The judge does not seem to have considered the  age  of  the  appellant's
   sibling by itself decisive, but she did give it importance.  I think  the
   error must have contributed to her conclusion  that  she  was  not  being
   given a true picture of the appellant's circumstances.

7) The omission to put the terms  of  the  court  judgment  to  parties  for
   further comment did not appear to me to constitute legal error, until  it
   was  pointed  out  that  the  wording  of  the  court  materials  may  be
   inconsistent.  Further analysis is required in any fresh decision.

8) Any error about amount and dates of money transfer  receipts  arose  from
   the appellant's failure to present her case clearly, and  even  if  there
   was an oversight, it was not shown to be  significant.   Nor  does  there
   appear to have been an explanation about the children moving to  Kinshasa
   which helped their case very much.

9) The judge's approach to the best interests of the child appears  to  have
   reflected the case as put to her,  and  it  might  be  thought  that  all
   relevant considerations were implicit in the determination.

10) However, I conclude that the errors over the age of a sibling  and  over
   the  effect  of  the  court  judgment  together  undermine  the   judge's
   conclusion that the evidence as a whole was unreliable.  On the basis  of
   such a finding, parties were in agreement on the  further  course  to  be
   followed.

11) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of  its
   findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and
   Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
   necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include  Judge
   Agnew.

12) It is not anticipated that the First-tier Tribunal may need  to  hold  a
   CMR hearing.  Parties are directed to comply for  purposes  of  the  next
   hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, insofar as not already complied with,
   and particularly in respect of any new materials, with  the  requirements
   set out in the Practice Directions  (PD 7.5 and 8.2).

                               [pic]
                                30 January 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
