
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: OA/13279/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                       |Decision signed:          |
|                                         |02.11.2014                |
|on    30.07.2014 & 27.10.2014            |sent out on:              |
|                                         |04.11.2014                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                             Travor MUGARISANWA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:            (on 30 July)
For the appellant:  Mr F Habtemariam ((working under the supervision of
                    Cambridge Law Centre)
For the respondent: Miss J Isherwood

       (on 27 October)
The sponsor appeared in person; Mr S Kandola for the respondent

                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Janice Woolley and a lay member), sitting  at  Richmond
    on 25 April, to  an appeal against  refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order by a citizen of Zimbabwe, born 16 June 1975. Permission was given
    mainly on a ground relating to the primacy of the Rules, with  which  I
    shall deal first; but it was extended to the  other  grounds,  which  I
    shall go on to.



ERROR OF LAW?

 2. History

              2002  enters as visitor - overstays till 2008
              2007  meets Melody  (originally  from  Zimbabwe,  but  now  a
               British citizen)
              2008  tries to re-enter on  false  Portuguese  passport  -  8
               months' imprisonment, with recommendation for deportation  -
               claims asylum - appeal dismissed - order signed
              2009  further representations - treated  as  application  for
               revocation  -  refused  -  voluntary  departure   -   appeal
               withdrawn
    01.12.    2009  Melody gives birth to their daughter R in UK
              2010  marries Melody in Zimbabwe
    01.08     2011  B born to Melody in UK
              2011  application for visit visa - refused - appeal dismissed


    21.02.    2012  application for revocation
    04.06.    2013  revocation refused

 3. Rules/law
    The Home Office grounds argued that the panel should  have  applied  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,  effectively  requiring  exceptional
    circumstances if they were to depart from  the  terms  of  the  current
    Rules. They made no attempt to suggest  the  precise  basis  under  the
    Rules on which such circumstances would  be  required.  Miss  Isherwood
    suggested that the relevant version in a deportation case is  the  'new
    Rules'. The reason for that lay in the following paragraph

       A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation  under
       Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will  only  succeed
       where the requirements of these rules as at  9  July  2012  are  met,
       regardless  of  when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
       deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

 4. Since the panel described this (at paragraph 32) as "essentially a case
    under article 8", I assumed that this provision applied to the  present
    case, and approached it on the basis of the 'new Rules' throughout. The
    case was not covered by Edgehill & another [2014] EWCA Civ  402,  where
    neither of the individual cases dealt with involved deportation.

 5. However, the panel do not seem to have been referred by either side  to
    A362, and they dealt at paragraph 31  (oddly  cross-headed  'Findings')
    with paragraph 398 on its own terms.

       Paragraph 398 [of those Rules] does  not  apply  in  this  case.  The
       decision to make the deportation order was made under s. 3 (6) of the
       Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that the sentencing judge had  made
       an order for deportation. The respondent did not include s. 3 (5)  in
       his [sic] reasons as he was entitled to do had he so chosen.

 6. This slightly gnomic  utterance  is  quite  clear  when  set  out  with
    reference to the legislation. Sections 3 (5) and (6) of the Immigration
    Act 1971 refer respectively to deportation on 'conducive grounds',  and
    to deportation on a court's recommendation. What follows  is  paragraph
    398 under the 'new Rules'

       Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to the
       UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and
       (a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
       public good because they have been convicted of an offence for  which
       they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  4
       years;
       (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
       public good because they have been convicted of an offence for  which
       they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  4
       years but at least 12 months; or
       (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
       public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,  their
       offending has caused serious harm or they are a  persistent  offender
       who shows a particular disregard for the law,
       the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider  whether
       paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be in
       exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in  deportation
       will be outweighed by other factors.

 7. Clearly neither (a) nor (b) applies in the present  case;  and  neither
    does (c), for the reason given by the panel. Deportation on a  judicial
    recommendation is not covered by paragraph 398 at all, and, where  that
    is the only basis for the order, then paragraph 398  does  not  require
    exceptional circumstances for it to be  successfully  challenged,  even
    under the 'new Rules'. So far, there was nothing wrong with the panel's
    decision.

 8. However, the decision under  appeal  had  been  made  by  reference  to
    paragraphs 390 and 391, which specifically relate to revocation  cases:
    the general relevant considerations are laid out in both  old  and  new
    Rules as follows:

       390. An application for revocation of a  deportation  order  will  be
       considered in the  light  of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
       following:
       (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
       (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
       (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of an
       effective immigration control;
       (iv) the interests of  the  applicant,  including  any  compassionate
       circumstances.

 9. The relevant considerations in a criminal case are now these: paragraph
    391A begins "In other cases ...", clearly meaning,  in  context,  cases
    other than criminal ones.

       391. In the  case  of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
       conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a  deportation
       order against that person will be the proper course:

       (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the  person
       was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less  than  4  years,
       unless 10 years have elapsed since  the  making  of  the  deportation
       order, or

       (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the  person
       was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years, at any
       time,

       Unless, in either case, the continuation would  be  contrary  to  the
       Human Rights Convention or the Convention and  Protocol  Relating  to
       the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional  circumstances
       that mean the continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.

10. The same considerations were set out  at  paragraph  391  in  the  'old
    Rules': the first category of offence was differently described, but in
    a form which made no significant difference in the  present  case.  The
    reason for that was that the relevant period was defined with reference
    to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, and under  s.  5  of  that
    Act, the period for a sentence of imprisonment of less than  30  months
    is in any case ten years. It followed that the proper  course  in  this
    appellant's case would have been continuation of the deportation  order
    against him, subject only  to  the  terms  of  the  proviso,  beginning
    "Unless ...".

11. While paragraph 391 in the 'old Rules' was differently laid out, it  is
    clear that the terms of the  proviso  applied  to  both  categories  of
    offender (short and long sentence prisoners, or former  prisoners).  It
    simply allowed for revocation where refusal "... would be  contrary  to
    the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating  to
    the Status of Refugees". The question is whether the  addition  of  the
    words "...or there are other exceptional circumstances  that  mean  the
    continuation is outweighed by compelling factors"  just  added  another
    category of those who could  avoid  the  normal  consequence  of  their
    convictions; or whether it was intended to govern the whole proviso  by
    requiring Convention grounds, as well as others, to be  exceptional  or
    compelling.

12. MF (Nigeria) was of course a deportation case, though MF,  unlike  this
    appellant, does seem to have come within  paragraph  398  of  the  'new
    Rules'. This was the context for what the Court of Appeal said here:


  43. The word "exceptional" is often used to  denote  a  departure  from  a
      general rule.  The general rule in the present context is that, in the
      case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and 399A  do  not  apply,
      very compelling reasons  will  be  required  to  outweigh  the  public
      interest  in  deportation.    These   compelling   reasons   are   the
      "exceptional circumstances".

     44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are  a  complete  code
         and that the exceptional circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the
         balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

13. In this case the general rule for  a  person  deported  on  a  judicial
    recommendation, or otherwise, following a sentence of  less  than  four
    years' imprisonment, is that the order should continue. That is subject
    to the proviso: under the terms of that, continuation of the order  may
    be contrary to the Refugee Convention, or to article  3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention. In either of those cases, there will be  no  further
    argument, and it must be revoked.

14. The question in this case, however,  as  probably  in  most  revocation
    cases, is whether  continuation  of  the  deportation  order  would  be
    contrary to article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. Here it is  clear
    that the whole of part 13 'Deportation', in which paragraphs 390 -  400
    appear, together with paragraph 276ADE and  appendix  FM,  referred  to
    specifically in 400, are to be considered as a 'complete code', for the
    reasons given in MF (Nigeria).  On  a  common  sense  basis,  it  might
    equally be considered absurd if a deportation order could  be  made  on
    one basis, but was then liable to revocation on another.

15. It follows that what the panel were required to do under paragraphs 390
    - 391 was to assess the proportionality of  the  appellant's  continued
    exclusion in terms of whether, taking account  of  what  the  Court  of
    Appeal  described  as  the  'Strasbourg  jurisprudence',   there   were
    exceptional or compelling reasons why the deportation order against him
    should be revoked. They did not  consider  this,  mainly  because  they
    correctly saw paragraph 398 as not including this  requirement  in  the
    present case; but, however understandable  in  terms  of  the  argument
    presented to them, it was in my view a material error of law.

16. I briefly considered the  rest  of  the  Home  Office  grounds,  before
    deciding what should happen to the case now. The  first  pair,  dealing
    with the Rules and article 8, were numbered a) and b); so are the rest,
    but it is this second series that I deal with now. [Simple  consecutive
    numbering of paragraphs has for some time been  the  accepted  judicial
    style, and should be adopted by all Tribunal-users, please].

17. The second a) begins by disputing that  the  situation  is  'materially
    alerted' [sic] since the order was made. This as it happens  refers  to
    what is now paragraph 391A of the Rules, which  in  my  view  does  not
    apply in a criminal case; but it couldn't be called arguable on its own
    terms. Following the appellant's voluntary departure in  2009,  he  and
    Melody have married and had two daughters, besides the lapse of time in
    itself.



18. The other point taken against the panel at a)  was  that  the  negative
    factors they noted at paragraph 44 should have been given more  weight.
    There is nothing in this: the panel rightly noted them and clearly took
    account of them. b) refers to the appellant's "flagrant  disregard  for
    immigration control"; but this,  including  overstaying  and  illegally
    working here till 2008, was exactly what the panel took into account at
    paragraph 44. The other points they made there, that  the  offence  for
    which the appellant went to prison was his first, and  that  there  was
    nothing to show he had misused the Portuguese passport, other  than  in
    trying to return to this country, were  correct  on  the  facts  before
    them.

19. The remaining point, at c), is as follows:

       ... the panel's findings at s. 46 are fundamentally  flawed  as  they
       seek to diminish the severity of the appellant's offence.  The  panel
       do not engage with the material facts of the  decision  made  by  the
       Sentencing  Judge,  which,  was  in  essence,  that  the  appellant's
       presence in the UK was undesirable and a recommendation was therefore
       made ...

20. What the sentencing judge actually said to the appellant  was  this  "I
    understand some  of  the  pressures  that  must  have  fallen  on  your
    shoulders as you found [yourself] on the wrong side of  the  line  from
    the current political climate in  your  home  country".  As  the  panel
    noted, the judge took account of that,  and  the  appellant's  lack  of
    previous convictions and  immediate  plea  of  guilty.  Of  course  the
    appellant had no right to be in this  country  at  the  time,  and  the
    length of his sentence did not bring in automatic deportation;  so  the
    judge made a recommendation.

21. In my view, there was nothing in any of the  Home  Office's  complaints
    about the panel's decision on the merits of  the  case.  Whether  those
    added up to such 'exceptional' or 'compelling' features in the case  as
    the Rules now required (in the light of any  continuing  obligation  of
    Melody's to serve as an Army dental nurse) may or may  not  be  another
    question. I saw no reason not to decide this for myself, at  a  further
    hearing; but in view of the panel's comprehensive findings of  fact,  I
    saw no need for further formal oral evidence.

RE-HEARING

22. Evidence        At the re-hearing  Melody  appeared  to  represent  the
    appellant, which she was well able to do. She explained  that  she  had
    joined the Army as a dental nurse in 2008, and been posted to  Germany:
    the appellant had been able to join her there for up to six months at a
    time, and help with the children when they were born in 2009 and  2011.
    However, when she had been due for a posting to  Afghanistan,  she  had
    had to refuse it, though she wanted to go, as there would have been  no
    way of looking after the children while she was there.

23. Finally in March 2013 Melody was posted back to this country, where the
    appellant was unable to follow her, and she became even more depressed,
    a state which had set in after R was born in 2009. That had led to  her
    going to Zimbabwe to marry him there, with a view to his being able  to
    join her here; but the application and appeal process had taken so long
    that her depression got worse. She was still  keen  to  carry  out  her
    duties, but had had to  work  limited  hours,  by  agreement  with  the
    military authorities; however she had been unable to join her  unit  on
    an exercise in Canada. Finally in November 2013 she had  been  given  a
    medical discharge.

24. Since then Melody had been at home with the children:  since  2012  she
    has been a British citizen, so  she  would  have  no  problems  getting
    employment from that point of view; but she seems to  have  become  too
    depressed at one point to work, and in September 2014  had  to  declare
    herself bankrupt. Now she is at college, doing a foundation course  for
    a humanities or social science degree, for  which  the  Army  will  pay
    under the terms of her discharge, so long as she claims her entitlement
    within two years.

25. As for the children, R had started school this September:  when  Melody
    had been to a Parent Teacher Association about her, the teaching  staff
    had expressed the opinion that she was missing her father.  As  for  B,
    she spoke to him on the phone; but she was too young to miss him in the
    same way as R. Melody said it would change her life  if  the  appellant
    were allowed back in: previously, when she was in  the  Army,  she  was
    supporting him; but now he is staying in  Zimbabwe  with  his  parents,
    helped by remittances from his brother and sister in this country.

26. Law       Mr Kandola referred me to R. v  Benabbas  ([2005]  EWCA  Crim
    2113, though he was unable to provide me with the  citation).  As  that
    suggests, this was a criminal appeal  against  the  sentencing  judge's
    recommendation for deportation: it is enough to  cite  this,  from  the
    final paragraph:

       ... the judge was right therefore to say that the appellant's use  of
       a  forged  passport  undermined  the  good  order  of   society   and
       constituted the appellant a threat. In  Nazar  terms,  his  continued
       presence would be a detriment to this country.

27. The deportation order against this appellant was signed on 18  December
    2008: it follows from paragraph 391 (see 9) that its continuation would
    be the proper course, till the same day in 2018, unless there were such
    'exceptional' or 'compelling' features in the  case  as  to  make  that
    contrary to article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. Since this is not
    an EEA case, I am not limited to considering the  appellant's  personal
    conduct, nor forbidden to consider general deterrence or economic ends,
    but have to take into account all those questions, as set out  in  such
    well-known authorities as  N  (Kenya)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1094  and  OH
    (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694.

28. Conclusions     It is now nearly 6� years since this appellant was sent
    to prison for eight months for trying to get back into this country  on
    a false passport. While it would be wrong to minimize the  significance
    of that, particularly in the light of what was said in Benabbas, I also
    need to remember what the judge said in sentencing him (set out at 20):
    for good reason, the sentencing judge's views must form the main  basis
    for my own, so far as the  facts  of  the  offence  are  concerned,  as
    explained in Masih (deportation - public interest -  basic  principles)
    Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC).

29. The deportation order  was  signed  six  months  later,  so  that  this
    appellant would normally have to wait  another  four  years  before  he
    could expect to have it revoked. However, during  the  six  which  have
    nearly passed since it was signed, he has not  only  made  a  voluntary
    departure and withdrawn his original appeal against  it,  but  begotten
    two children, now nearly  five,  and  three,  who  are  either  British
    citizens already, or entitled to be registered as such at once in  line
    with their mother, who went out to Zimbabwe in order to be  married  to
    him.

30. While Melody would have been well aware of the difficulties facing  the
    appellant in any attempt to return  to  this  country,  both  when  she
    conceived R and when  she  was  married  to  him,  and  following  that
    conceived B, she too has had serious difficulties, as a result  of  her
    determination to be loyal to him. She clearly enjoyed her Army service,
    which, as with any other member of the armed forces, involved important
    work in the national interest, and in her case could  and  should  have
    continued, as a letter in the Home Office bundle shows, till 2020.

31. Although Melody was able to have the appellant with her in Army housing
    in Germany, as another letter confirms, she was unable to join her unit
    on posting to Afghanistan, or even on exercise in Canada,  since  there
    was no way for her to see that the children were looked  after  without
    his being there. It is not surprising that she  should  have  left  the
    service at the end of 2013, following which she has had  serious  money
    troubles.

32. While the terms of Melody's discharge provided for payment for  her  to
    follow a course leading  to  a  degree,  she  needs  to  take  that  up
    effectively by the start of the 2015 - 16 academic year: no doubt  that
    too would be hard for her without anyone to help with looking after the
    children. While B is really too young for her consciously to  miss  her
    father very much, R clearly does, to the extent that her teachers  have
    noticed it. It would clearly be in both their best interests for him to
    be allowed to return and join them to live as a family together.

33. Of course, while that must be a primary consideration in deciding  this
    case, it cannot be a paramount one, and certainly not one  which  could
    decide the result on its own. However, giving full weight to the strong
    public interest in deterring others  from  subverting  the  immigration
    system by using false documents, I have also  to  recognize  that  this
    appellant followed the course which others in his position should,  but
    rarely do, and withdrew his appeal against deportation and returned  of
    his own accord to his country of origin. There he has  spent  the  last
    five years: I am not so much concerned with such difficulties as he has
    had there, which are the result of his own actions, as with the  effect
    on his wife and children. I should remember here that in  2011  he  was
    refused a visa  to  visit  them  here,  and  his  appeal  against  that
    dismissed.

34. The military authorities clearly did their  best  to  look  after  this
    divided family, and will, as the result of Melody's  service  give  her
    the chance to get a degree; but meanwhile she is left to  cope  on  her
    own, and has faced serious difficulties  in  doing  so.   The  ten-year
    restriction on revocation applies to all those sentenced  to  terms  of
    imprisonment between the very shortest and four years: while  the  Home
    Office are of course entitled to have a fixed policy on  that,  and  to
    have it set out in the Rules approved by Parliament, the rigidity  that
    causes may in some exceptional cases result in a decision which is  not
    proportional, given the time  which  has  already  gone  by  since  the
    original order, to the public interest involved. For the reasons I have
    given, I am satisfied that this case is one of  them,  and  it  follows
    that the appellant's appeal will be allowed.

Home Office appeal allowed: decision re-made
Appellant's appeal against refusal of revocation allowed
                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                  03.11.2014
