
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13756/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2013                                |On 3rd June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                               NOSHEEN KANWAL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turnock made following a hearing  at  Bradford  on  22nd
    January 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  4th  March  1979.   She
    applied for entry clearance to come to the UK as the  wife  of  Iftikar
    Ali who had leave to remain under the  PBS  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    category.  She was refused on 19th June 2012  under  paragraph  320(7B)
    because, in a previous application for entry clearance in 2007, she had
    submitted a false United Bank statement with her application.

 3. The judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  did  not  appeal  against  that
    decision. She said in her grounds of appeal and  submissions  that  she
    was saddened at the refusal and had no energy left and was discouraged.
    She believed that the United  Bank  statement  and  all  of  the  other
    supporting documents which were handed over to the consultant who dealt
    with her application were genuine but it seemed that the consultant may
    have altered them in order to influence the decision. She was  entirely
    unaware of that. The judge said that it was not clear why a  consultant
    would  falsify  documentation  submitted  in  support  of   a   student
    application if there was genuine documentation available.  He  did  not
    find the Appellant's explanation credible and  he  concluded  that  the
    refusal of the application was correctly made under the  provisions  of
    paragraph 327B.

 4. The judge also dismissed the appeal under the  ECHR  finding  that  the
    Sponsor is awaiting a decision on his application to remain in  the  UK
    as an entrepreneur  but in the  meantime  the  couple  could   stay  in
    contact and visit each other.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    did not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  there  was  no  document
    verification report produced detailing how the falsity of the  document
    had  been  established.   She  confirmed  that  all  of  the  documents
    submitted were genuine. The most recent copy  from  the  relevant  bank
    provided to the court confirmed that it was  so.   She  said  that  she
    never accepted that false documents were submitted by  her  or  by  the
    consultants.  Original documents had been produced which confirmed  the
    financial  position  of  the  Sponsor  at  the  time   of   her   first
    application.

 6. Secondly, the judge was wrong in his findings in relation to Article 8.
     The Appellant has been married to the Sponsor for seven years and  her
    first priority is her husband and she  wants  to  have  children.   The
    couple have fertility problems and they need to live together to  start
    their family.

 7. Finally her husband is a qualified financial analyst, self-employed  in
    the UK and the dismissal of the appeal is an unlawful interference with
    her family life.

 8. Permission to appeal ws granted by Judge  Lewis  on  12th  March  2013.
    Judge Lewis said that the  grounds  did  not  appear  to  disclose  any
    arguable error of law with respect to Article 8 but it was arguable  as
    to whether the findings of the judge were reasonably open to him on the
    evidence in respect of the decision under the Rules.

The Hearing

 9. The Sponsor did not appear.  I  am  satisfied  that  he  was  correctly
    served with notice at his last known address. The  Appellant  was  also
    served at her home in Pakistan in compliance with the  requirements  of
    the Procedure Rules.

10. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge's decision was properly made.

Findings and Conclusions

11. Under paragraph 320(7B), where an applicant has previously breached the
    UK's  Immigration  Rules  by,  inter  alia,  using  deception   in   an
    application for entry clearance within the last ten years, a subsequent
    application for entry clearance is to be refused.

12. The problem for the  Appellant  is  that  she  did  not  challenge  the
    original refusal, made in 2007, and is therefore not in a  position  to
    argue now that the decision was wrongly made.

13. In any event the Appellant appears, in her Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    judge, to base her case upon  ignorance  of  the  false  documentation,
    rather than arguing that it was genuine.  She acknowledges, by stating,

         "It seems that it was the consultant that may have altered them  in
         order to influence the Entry Clearance Officer's decision"

    that false documentation was indeed produced.

14. The judge considered the Appellant's explanation and concluded that  it
    was not  credible  that  the  consultant  would  falsify  documentation
    without any reference to her, and, if he had, the Appellant would  have
    challenged  the  consultant  or  made  some  representations   to   the
    authorities who refused the application, which she did not do.  It  was
    plainly open to the judge to reject the Appellant's explanation as  not
    credible and to conclude that the refusal under paragraph  320(7B)  was
    properly made).

15. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the judge correctly applied the  five
    stage test, properly directed himself as  to  the  law  and  reached  a
    decision  open  to  him  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance   was
    proportionate.  It is not at  all  clear  what  the  Sponsor's  present
    position is. The evidence before the judge was  that  he  had  made  an
    application to seek to remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur but  Mr  Diwnycz
    was not able to shed any light on what had  happened  so  far  as  that
    application was concerned.  In the meantime, as  the  judge  said,  the
    couple can continue to visit and to stay in contact with each other and
    it will be open to the Appellant to make an application in the  future.
    The judge attached significant  weight  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    obligation to maintain a proper immigration control, and that  includes
    a proper sanction against persons who  commit  deception.  That  was  a
    matter for him.



Decision

16. The judge did not err in law.   His decision stands.   The  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse her entry clearance is dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

