


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13208/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 25 February 2014                         |On : 04 March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              pahal sing gurung
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 25 May 1991. He  applied  for
   entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the over-age dependent  relative
   of his father Bahadur Gurung, who had been granted  indefinite  leave  to
   enter on the basis of his former services in the  Gurkhas.  He  has  been
   given permission  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Cohen  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse his application.

2. The appellant made his application for entry clearance on 26 April  2012.
   His parents were both granted settlement under the HM Forces rules on  22
   February 2010 and had entered the United Kingdom on 9 May 2010. They  had
   applied for settlement together when he was  18  years  of  age  but  his
   application was refused on 16 July 2010 and this was therefore his second
   application. When interviewed about his application the appellant  stated
   that he had one brother and five sisters who were all married  and  lived
   in India or Nepal. He had a grandmother and uncle living in Nepal and his
   parents were living in the United Kingdom. He was living alone in  rented
   accommodation and was studying.  He  was  supported  financially  by  his
   parents. He was the youngest child of the family and the  only  unmarried
   child and therefore, according to  his  culture,  remained  part  of  his
   parents' family unit.

3. The appellant's application was refused by  the  respondent  on  11  June
   2012 under paragraph 317 of HC 395 and the Home  Office  policy,  on  the
   grounds that it was not accepted that he was dependent upon her father or
   that he  was  living  alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
   exceptional compassionate circumstances, given in particular that he  had
   siblings and other family members living in  Nepal.  The  respondent  was
   also not satisfied that the appellant's  father  was  in  a  position  to
   accommodate and  maintain  him  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  having
   recourse to public funds and therefore refused the application under  the
   Immigration Rules. The respondent considered the appellant's  application
   under the Home Office policy for dependants over the age of 18 of Foreign
   and Commonwealth HM Forces members but concluded that  he  did  not  fall
   within  the  terms  of  the  policy  since  there  were  no   exceptional
   circumstances in his case. The decision was also considered not to be  in
   breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

4. The appellant's appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cohen
   on 14 October 2013. It was conceded on behalf of the  appellant  that  he
   could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  317  of  the  immigration
   rules. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor who explained  that  his
   son, the appellant, had moved into  independent  accommodation  with  his
   friends when he was aged about 14 to 15 years  old  in  order  to  attend
   school, about four hours' journey from their village,  but  would  return
   home during the school holidays for a maximum of a month each  time.  The
   judge, in considering Article 8 of the ECHR, found that the  relationship
   between the appellant and the sponsor  did  not  extend  beyond  that  of
   normal family ties, although he also  accepted  that  there  was  limited
   family life between them. On  the  basis  that  he  had  been  living  an
   independent life since the age of  14  or  15,  he  considered  that  the
   appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom was appropriate.  He  found
   there to be no "exceptional circumstances" under the policy and concluded
   that any interference with family life would be proportionate and not  in
   breach of Article 8. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  grounds
   that the judge had made inconsistent findings in regard  to  family  life
   and as to whether Article 8 was engaged on that basis; that the judge had
   erred by using an exceptionality test in his  proportionality  assessment
   under Article 8; that the judge's treatment of the  "historic  injustice"
   to Gurkha veterans was inadequate;  and  that  he  had  failed  to  apply
   anxious scrutiny in making his decision.

6. Permission to appeal was granted 28 January 2014 on the grounds raised.

Appeal Hearing and Submissions

7. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  on  the  error  of
   law.

8. Mr Ball expanded upon the grounds of appeal, submitting  that  the  judge
   had failed to make clear findings on the existence of family life for the
   purposes of Article 8, a crucial matter in this category of case, and had
   failed to engage with the principles in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ
   8. The respondent had failed to point to any matters over and  above  the
   public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy to  justify  the
   interference with the appellant's family life.

9. Mr Avery submitted that the judge had found  that  family  life  had  not
   been established, but had then gone  on  to  consider  the  case  in  the
   alternative on the basis that there was limited  family  life  since  the
   appellant was leading an independent life. He had looked at the "historic
   injustice" and had decided that any interference  was  proportionate.  He
   was entitled to reach such a conclusion.

10. I advised the parties that, in my view the judge had erred in  law.  His
   findings on family life were inconsistent. In this category of  cases  it
   was essential for there to be a clear finding in that respect, since that
   was the starting point upon which the principles in Gurung were  founded.
   The judge had not properly engaged with the principles in that  case  and
   in the circumstances his conclusions were not sustainable. Accordingly  I
   set aside the judge's decision and enquired of  the  parties  as  to  the
   process of re-making the decision.

11. Although there was no objection by the parties to the decision being re-
   made by myself on the basis of the findings of fact at  paragraph  10  of
   the judge's determination, it seems to me, upon reflection,  and  upon  a
   careful consideration of the evidence and the findings, that  this  is  a
   case that would benefit from further oral evidence  to  clarify  matters,
   given the clear absence of findings on crucial aspects of the case.

12. Whilst Mr Avery did not challenge  the  findings  at  paragraph  10,  he
   relied  upon  the  fact  that  the  judge,   in   paragraph   11,   noted
   inconsistencies in the evidence of  the  sponsor  about  the  appellant's
   living arrangements. Indeed the judge, having  noted  inconsistencies  in
   the evidence, did not go on to make clear findings in  that  regard.  The
   findings are particularly unclear as to the appellant's circumstances  in
   the two years between his parents departing from Nepal in  May  2010  and
   the decision to refuse entry clearance in June 2012 and did not appear to
   address that period at all. Although there was evidence before the judge,
   at page 73 of the appeal bundle, to the effect  that  the  appellant  was
   still studying at the  same  institution  in  June  2013,  that  evidence
   suggested that he remained in  the  same  school  year  as  stated  in  a
   previous letter of 3 April 2012 at page 34 of the bundle.  That  was  not
   addressed by the judge and there were indeed  no  clear  findings  as  to
   whether or not it was accepted that the appellant was still  studying,  a
   matter that had been raised in the entry clearance decision. In addition,
   no findings were made by the judge about the appellant's  emotional  ties
   to his parents in the two years following their departure from Nepal  and
   at the time of  the  entry  clearance  decision,  nor  indeed  about  the
   financial ties, albeit  that  there  was  relevant  documentary  evidence
   contained in the appeal bundle before him. Neither was any  consideration
   given to the appellant's relationship with his siblings who  remained  in
   Nepal. All of those matters were material  to  the  question  of  whether
   family life existed at the time of the decision to refuse entry clearance
   but were not addressed by the judge by way of clear findings.

13. In all of these circumstances, it  seems  to  me  that  the  appropriate
   course would be for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
   for the case to be determined afresh and for fresh and clear findings  to
   be made on the appellant's circumstances and his family ties, in order to
   establish whether Article 8 was engaged on  the  basis  of  family  life.
   Clearly if it was found that that was the case, it would then be for  the
   First-tier Tribunal to go on  and  determine  whether  the  appeal  would
   succeed under Article 8 in the  light  of  the  guidance  in  Gurung  and
   Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT
   00567.

14. For all of these reasons, I find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal contains errors  of  law  and  has  to  be  set  aside.  In  the
   circumstances, it is appropriate for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for all matters to be determined.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
   appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Cohen.










                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
