
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13929/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2016                   |On 16th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [X y]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of China.  His appeal  against  a  decision
    to refuse him entry clearance  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Talbot ("the judge") in a decision  promulgated  on  2nd  October
    2015.  The  appellant  sought  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependent child of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
    and his case  was  advanced  on  the  basis  that  he  could  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  (in  paragraph  301)  and  in
    reliance upon his human rights, under Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

2.    Following  dismissal  of  the  appeal,  the  appellant   applied   for
    permission to appeal on the basis that the judge had failed  to  decide
    the appeal in a coherent and rational way.  In considering the  Article
    8 case, the judge referred to a number of facts that did not relate  to
    the appellant's case at all.  The judge recorded the  appellant's  name
    inaccurately (describing him as "Alvin", rather than ["XY"]), suggested
    that he  suffered  from  malaria,  although  this  was  not  the  case,
    suggested that the appellant had submitted a doctor's letter,  although
    he had not done so, and described the appellant's family  circumstances
    wholly inaccurately (even suggesting that the appellant was born in the
    UK, although he was born in China).  It was  also  contended  that  the
    judge erred in failing to place weight on  a  material  aspect  of  the
    appellant's evidence, being the presence in the United Kingdom  of  his
    two younger siblings, British  citizens.   The  decision  contained  no
    assessment of the best interests  of  the  appellant  and  his  younger
    siblings, as children.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on  8th  June  2016.   In  a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State made on 22nd June 2016, the appeal
    was opposed on the basis that the decision could be read so as to  make
    complete sense, so long as two paragraphs, numbered 16 and  17  at  the
    end of the decision, were ignored.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Davison said that it was very likely that the judge  had  transposed
    two paragraphs from a completely different case, into the  decision  in
    the present appeal.  Nonetheless, this could not be dismissed as a mere
    typographical error.  At the heart of the case lay an assessment of the
    welfare of children, including the appellant and, at  the  very  least,
    the decision had clearly not been proofread.

5.   The judge also failed to assess the case in the light of  the  presence
    here of the appellant's siblings, British citizens.  At paragraph 21 of
    the decision, the judge observed that the grant of discretionary  leave
    and the grant of leave under the rules in a specific category,  with  a
    view to settlement, were different things.  However, whether  that  was
    so  or  not  very  much  depended  on  the  reason  for  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave.  The appellant's mother  was  given  discretionary
    leave as the spouse of someone with indefinite leave to remain and  the
    obvious inference  was  that  her  leave  was  given  with  a  view  to
    settlement by her after the required number of years.

6.   Ms Ahmad handed up the judgment in Muse [2012] EWCA  Civ  10  and  drew
    attention to paragraph 33, where the Court of Appeal gave guidance that
    reasons given in a judgment might not need to refer to  every  material
    consideration.  The last two paragraphs of the decision clearly did not
    deal with the case before the judge, but if they were ignored,  it  was
    clear from the rest of the decision that the judge had  considered  all
    the evidence.  There were  clear  findings  showing  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's father had had sole  responsibility  for
    his upbringing.  At the end of the day, any error in  the  presence  of
    the two offending paragraphs was not material in the light of the clear
    reasoning which appeared earlier in the decision.

7.   Overall, there was nothing in the evidence  before  the  judge  or  the
    grounds of  appeal  suggesting  a  case  meriting  consideration  under
    Article 8, outside the rules.

8.   In a brief response, Mr Davison said that  the  salient  issue  in  the
    appeal was the  appellant's  case  that  he  should  be  reunited  with
    siblings in the United  Kingdom.   Cogent  reasoning  was  required  in
    relation to this issue.  The judge  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    presence of the appellant's mother in the United Kingdom.   Before  the
    judge, it was argued on the appellant's behalf that  paragraph  301  of
    the rules was met, in the light of the discretionary leave given to the
    appellant's mother, with a view to settlement.  Although the purpose of
    the leave given to her was not expressly stated in  the  grant  itself,
    seen in context the leave was  given  as  a  spouse,  with  a  view  to
    settlement.

Decision on Error of Law

9.   The decision has been prepared by a very experienced judge and I  agree
    with Mr Davison that the inclusion of the  final  paragraphs  may  well
    have been an error caused by "cut and paste" word processing.  Although
    the details contained in  those  final  paragraphs  clearly  relate  to
    another person, the blunt fact  is  that  they  were  included  in  the
    decision sent for promulgation.  They too concerned  a  case  in  which
    paragraph 297(i)(f) of the rules was in  issue.   Careful  proofreading
    would have revealed the mistake in the inclusion of the paragraphs.

10.  At first sight, there is force in Ms Ahmad's submission that  all  that
    is required is a reading of the decision which ceases  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 22 and ignores what follows.  Putting to one side  the  other
    grounds of challenge, the earlier paragraphs set out what  happened  at
    the hearing,  summarised  the  parties'  cases  and  show  the  judge's
    reasoning.  That approach, however, simply fails  to  engage  with  the
    inevitable doubt in  the  mind  of  a  reasonable  person  reading  the
    decision that the judge has, in the hackneyed  phrase,  considered  the
    case with "anxious scrutiny".  As explained by Carnwath LJ (as he  then
    was) in R (YH) [2010] EWCA Civ 116, what is required  in  decisions  is
    sufficient to show by their reasoning that  every  factor  which  might
    tell in favour of a claimant has been properly taken into account.  The
    fundamental difficulty  posed  by  paragraphs  which  contain  so  many
    different biographical and personal features that  they  indicate  that
    another person's case has been confused with the one before  the  judge
    is that it is not clear that the relevant factors  have  been  properly
    taken into account.  As further explained by Moses LJ in  ML  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 844, there  can  be  no  confidence  that  the  correct
    approach has been taken where a Tribunal of  fact  plainly  appears  to
    have taken into account matters which ought not to have been taken into
    account.  Indeed, ML (Nigeria) was similar to the present appeal as  it
    concerned a decision in which a paragraph (at least one) relating to an
    appellant from Sri Lanka was included in  a  case  concerning  risk  on
    return to Nigeria.

11.  The overall conclusion reached by the Court of Appeal in  ML  (Nigeria)
    was that the errors, similar to those in the  present  appeal,  plainly
    amounted to an error of law because the claimant in that  case  had  no
    proper or fair hearing at all.  I reached the same conclusion  in  this
    appeal.

12.  There is no need to consider in detail the other grounds  of  challenge
    and Mr Davison's submission that the judge erred in his  assessment  of
    paragraph 301 of the rules.  What is clear is that the decision must be
    set aside and remade and, as both representatives  agreed,  the  proper
    venue for that is the First-tier Tribunal.   There  is,  I  find,  some
    force in Mr Davison's argument that the  only  inference  that  can  be
    drawn from the grant of discretionary leave to the  appellant's  mother
    was that it was granted to her as a spouse, with a view to  settlement,
    but I express no  final  view  and  there  appears  to  be  no  guiding
    authority on the point.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.  Further case management will be made at  Taylor
House.

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 16/08/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
