

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/14202/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 2nd July 2014
                             On 3rd July 2014
Prepared 2nd July 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             FADUMO MAHDI AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr J Dhangi (Counsel, instructed by UK Immigration
Lawyers)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for entry to the UK as the spouse of the Sponsor,
   a Somalian national with ILR. The application was refused as the ECO was
   not satisfied that the divorce certificate relied on was a genuine
   document and on other grounds too. The Appellant appealed to the First-
   tier Tribunal, the appeal was heard by Judge Hawden-Beale on the 13th of
   March 2014 in Birmingham.

2. The appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 21st of
   March 2014. In relation to the divorce certificate that had been
   submitted the approach taken was set out in paragraph 14 of the
   determination under section 108 of the Nationality, Immigration and
   Asylum Act 2002. The Judge decided that it was not in the public interest
   to reveal what checks had confirmed that the document was not genuine,
   she also stated that she appreciated the difficult position that this
   placed the Appellant and Sponsor in their inability to rebut what was
   said about the document.

3. The findings in respect of the divorce are set out in paragraphs 21 to
   23 of the determination. In paragraph 23 the Judge indicated that having
   granted the application under section 108 the contents of the report
   could not be revealed and that without the document verification report
   there would still have been significant concerns about its reliability.

4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In
   summary the Appellant complained that in considering the application
   under section 108 the Judge had not followed the guidance set out in OA
   (Alleged forgery; section 108 procedure) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00096. OA
   had not been cited and the determination did not disclose any knowledge
   of its existence although it was not an error not to cite cases by name.
   The determination did not show that the Judge had adopted the correct
   procedure and referred to paragraph 31 of OA and the need for the Judge
   to explain the general principle of all evidence being presented openly
   and the departure that section 108 represents. Having invited submissions
   and then considered the application in the absence of the representatives
   a separate record of the section 108 application should be kept. It was
   also asserted that there was no reference to the standard of proof in
   assessing forgery.

5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on the 15th of
   May 2014. In the determination Judge Bird stated that in paragraph 14 the
   Judge had not explained why revealing the checks would not be in the
   public interest, it was arguable that the proper procedure had not been
   followed.

6. I read the papers before the hearing in the Upper Tribunal and then
   heard submissions from Mr Smart in the absence of the Appellant and his
   representatives. That part of the hearing consisted of my informing Mr
   Smart that having read the document verification report I could see why
   the Judge found that the report could not be disclosed and why very
   little could be said about the reasons why as that would reveal
   information contrary to the public interest. This was repeated to Mr
   Dhangi in open court.

7. In making his submissions Mr Dhangi accepted that failing to cite a case
   by name would not be an error in itself but there were concerns that the
   Judge was not aware of OA and had not applied the proper procedure. There
   was no reference to the importance of general principle of all parties
   being informed of the evidence or the importance of departing from that.
   The Record of Proceedings did not show the procedure adopted and no
   recognition of the shift in the burden of proof or the standard required.



8. While paragraph 14 does not set out in detail the approach that the
   Judge took it does show that the Judge had regard to the nature of
   section 108 and the difficulties that the Appellant would have in meeting
   the case raised by the ECO. It is not correct to state that the Judge did
   not give attention to or reasons for finding that the nature of the
   report should not be disclosed, that was addressed in the final sentence.
   The burden of proof shifting to the ECO and the standard of proof,
   requiring cogent evidence are not explicitly stated but the Judge
   approached the case on the basis of the evidence presented by the ECO
   which indicates a shifting on the burden on this issue and the
   difficulties faced by the Appellant. Read as a whole the determination
   does not reveal an error of law.

9. Having considered the contents of the document verification report
   myself I am satisfied that even if more explicit recognition of the terms
   of OA and the burden and standard of proof had been set out there would
   have been no difference in the result. The nature of the report is such
   that the reasons why the certificate was rejected could not be revealed,
   that would alert those making such documents to matters of concern and
   reveal the nature of the examination undertaken. The Judge could have
   done no more than state what she did in paragraph 14.

10. The contents of the report arise with the ECO taking this issue on. The
   evidence it contains is more than sufficient to discharge the burden of
   proof that rested on the ECO and would satisfy a higher standard than the
   cogent evidence required to discharge the civil standard. I appreciate
   that this leave the Appellant and Sponsor in a difficult position but
   under section 108 the result is fully justified.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 2nd July 2014


