
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14296/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2014                        |On 9th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         MR TERENCE NGWASHI FRUTUMAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr T Gaisford, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is  the  entry  clearance  officer,
    referred to hereafter as the ECO.   The  respondent,  Mr  Frutumah,  is
    referred to hereafter as the claimant.  He is a  national  of  Cameroon
    and was born on  18th  June  1978.  On  6th  February  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes (the Judge) heard his appeal against the  decision
    made by the respondent on 3rd June 2013 to refuse his  application  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a spouse under Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules.  In a determination dated  4th  April  2014  the
    Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowed  it
    on Article 8 ECHR family human rights grounds.

 2. After an initial refusal in the First-tier Tribunal the ECO was granted
    permission on 1st August 2014 in the Upper Tribunal to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the Judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons;

         "Arguably Judge Boyes erred by failing to identify how  the  issues
         considered amounted to compelling circumstances in accordance  with
         the principles  in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
         approach) [2013] UKUT 640, in particular when it was accepted  that
         the appellant was in a position simply to make a fresh  application
         supported by the required documentation."

 3. The matter accordingly  came  before  me  for  an  initial  hearing  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law.

 4. The background to the appeal is that Judge heard oral evidence from the
    sponsor, Mrs Cynthia-Ella Maamu Sangwe and accepted her  evidence  that
    she originates from Cameroon but is now a British  citizen  living  and
    working full-time for the NHS in the United Kingdom. The claimant first
    came to the  United  Kingdom  with  a  student  visa  valid  from  25th
    September 2002 to 25th September 2003 but he did not meet  the  sponsor
    until 7th September 2007; they  formed  a  relationship  but  separated
    before rekindling their relationship in 2011.  In May 2011 they decided
    to marry and did so on 10th October 2011. They started living  together
    as a couple with the intention of doing so permanently.

 5. The claimant made a  further  unsuccessful  application  for  leave  to
    remain on 16th July 2012 but whilst this  was  pending  he  obtained  a
    travel document to travel  at  his  own  expense  to  Cameroon  on  7th
    December 2012. A further marriage ceremony took place with the  sponsor
    in Cameroon on 11th  January  2013  and  the  pending  application  was
    refused on 21st February 2013. The out of country application for leave
    to enter as a souse was made on 4th April 2013 resulting in  the  ECO's
    refusal on 13th June 2013.  At the time of the  application,  in  April
    2013, the sponsor was pregnant with the claimant's child which was born
    on 12th September 3013. The ECO's refusal was reviewed and upheld after
    consideration of the grounds of appeal by an  entry  clearance  manager
    (ECM) on 18th November 2013.

 6. The ECO refused the application under Immigration Rules on  grounds  of
    suitability because the claimant failed to declare two historic driving
    offences on  his  application  form  and  on  financial  grounds.   The
    application was further refused under paragraph 320(11) for overstaying
    and use of deception, as well as absconding.  The ECO made  no  mention
    of,  and  gave  no  consideration  to,  Article  8  in   refusing   the
    application.

 7. The ECM upheld the refusal  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  ECO  and
    considered Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis that the  claimant  could
    keep contact with his family and  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being continued by the claimant and sponsor in
    Cameroon together.  The ECM found no interference caused to family life
    by the decision, or alternatively that such interference  is  justified
    and proportionate when weighed against the need to maintain immigration
    control.

 8. The Judge found that paragraph 320(11) did not apply  to  the  claimant
    but found that he could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  in
    relation to suitability or as a spouse under Appendix FM because  of  a
    lack of specified evidence in relation to  the  financial  requirements
    which were otherwise met. The  Judge  therefore  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but then went on to consider Article  8  of
    the ECHR on which ground he allowed the appeal.

 9. Mr Duffy addressed me at the hearing in accordance with  the  submitted
    grounds of appeal for the  ECO  as  follows.  The  ECO  challenges  the
    decision on the grounds that the Judge failed to identify the nature of
    the compelling circumstances he found  not  to  be  recognised  by  the
    Rules. The ECO asserts that Appendix FM is the route to be followed for
    those seeking leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of  family  life  with  a  British  or  settled  person  and  the
    circumstances of this case are sufficiently recognised and catered  for
    by the Rules. It is asserted that in allowing the appeal under  Article
    8 the Judge was wrong because the case of  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 makes clear that the  Article
    8 assessment shall only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Rules.

10. The ECO's grounds assert that there must be  exceptional  circumstances
    at this stage of decision-making which, in accordance with the case  of
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), amount to an unjustifiably harsh outcome
    from refusal. It is asserted that in this case the ECO has applied  the
    law and caused no  prejudice  to  the  claimant;  family  life  can  be
    continued in Cameroon and Article 8 should not be  used  to  circumvent
    the Rules. There is no interference with family life  as  the  claimant
    was conducting his married life in Cameroon whilst his wife was in  the
    United Kingdom.

11. The Judge is asserted on behalf of the ECO to have failed to conduct an
    analysis of why the claimant could not simply make a fresh application,
    or why it would be unjustifiably harsh to expect him to do so.  In  the
    light of the finding by the Judge that, but for specified evidence, the
    financial requirements of the Rules  are  met  any  separation  of  the
    parties pending the making of a fresh application would be temporary.

12. Mr Duffy accepted in his submission to me that there is now  a  British
    child to be  considered  but  he  stated  that  this  factor  does  not
    necessarily alter the balance; this is not a case  where  someone  will
    never be able to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Finally,  Mr  Duffy
    submitted that this is a case where the Rules were not met  because  of
    the use of incorrect documents, but that  does  not  make  the  outcome
    disproportionate.  The Judge has erred in law and the  decision  should
    be set aside and remade by dismissal of the appeal.

13. Mr Gaisford in his oral submissions took issue with the use of the word
    "simply" in the permission to appeal and by Mr Duffy in his submissions
    that the claimant could simply make a fresh  application.  Mr  Gaisford
    submitted that such a course of action is not at  all  simple  and  the
    Judge had said exactly why  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect
    another application to be made. I find merit in this submission for the
    claimant and I find that the Judge took full account of the possibility
    of a fresh application being made. In paragraph 36 of the determination
    the Judge found as follows:

         36. It is not in dispute that the appellant and sponsor are married
         and that they have a young baby together.  The  appellant,  sponsor
         and their child therefore enjoy family life. I consider that family
         life is interfered with by the respondent's  decision  because,  at
         the very least, it means that the sponsor, who is a British citizen
         with a British child born in the UK, would have to choose to remain
         in the UK separated from the appellant, or,  alternatively,  return
         to Cameroon, either permanently, or for an indeterminate period  of
         time whilst a further entry clearance application is made,  and  in
         doing so, leave (her) permanent, secure, employment in the  UK.   I
         consider that Article 8(1) is therefore engaged.

14. The Judge in my view continued to weigh in the balance the  possibility
    of a fresh application being made, particularly  the  likely  delay  in
    doing so,  when at paragraph 44 he made the following findings:

         44. As the respondent states, the appellant was in the  UK  without
         leave for most of the time that he was in the UK, although  between
         2005 and 2010 he did have an application,  and  subsequent  request
         for reconsideration, pending. No explanation has been  provided  by
         the respondent as to why the outcome of either of  these  took,  in
         total, in the region of five years.  In addition, the appellant did
         also seek to regularise his stay in the United  Kingdom  by  making
         two applications for further leave to remain, and,  whilst  he  had
         left by the time the second one was determined, the first  one  did
         not carry a right of appeal because no decision to remove had  been
         made.   The  appellant  subsequently  left   the   United   Kingdom
         voluntarily,  at  his  own  expense,  and   submitted   a   further
         application for entry clearance and, in doing so, subjected himself
         to immigration control."

15. In paragraph 45 of the  determination  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    decision of the respondent is disproportionate took  into  account  the
    claimant's efforts to  regularise  his  position  after  his  voluntary
    return to Cameroon at his own expense; he found  the  impact  upon  the
    child and sponsor to be disproportionate and noted  that  the  claimant
    has in these circumstances not seen the sponsor since January 2013.  He
    found that: "a further indeterminate period of delay whilst  a  further
    application for entry clearance  is  made  would  be  disproportionate,
    particularly bearing in mind the age of the child and the importance of
    the appellant being present  during  such  an  important  developmental
    period of the child's life."

16. I am satisfied that the judge properly directed himself  in  accordance
    with relevant case law  at  paragraph  33  of  his  determination.   He
    directed himself that having found the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules not to be met he may go on to consider the case under  Article  8
    of the ECHR if he found that the Rules have not addressed any family or
    private life issues in  accordance  with  MF  (Article8  -  new  rules)
    Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC)  and  Izuazu  (Article8  -  new  rules)
    [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC). He considered the case of  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin) and whether the Immigration Rules provided a complete  code
    in this case.

17. At paragraph 34 of his determination the Judge states that he considers
    the case not to be one catered for within Appendix FM of the  Rules  or
    paragraph 276ADE. He found, in particular, that the Rules do not  allow
    for consideration of the best interests of the child in the  particular
    circumstances of this case, namely the failure  to  disclose  a  matter
    that, whilst material, was in reality unlikely to lead to a refusal  of
    entry clearance bearing in mind the  relatively  minor  nature  of  the
    claimant's conviction which  related  to  a  brake  light  and  driving
    licence offence.  In relation to the non-disclosure  of  these  matters
    the Judge found the claimant not to have intended  to  deceive  but  to
    have been careless.

18. In his  submissions  to  me  Mr  Gaisford  relied  on  the  case  of  R
    (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) heard by Michael  Fordham
    QC, sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge. He found that the  "threshold
    questions", as they have been described, inform the question of what is
    appropriate for the decision letter to go  on  to  contain  by  way  of
    assessment; they are not obviating the need for the Secretary of  State
    at  least  to  address  her  mind  to  the  question   of   exceptional
    circumstances and to give some reasoning which indicates that  she  has
    done so and the conclusion at which she has arrived.

19. This finding has since been endorsed by Judge  A  Grubb  sitting  as  a
    Deputy High Court Judge in  the  case  of  R  (on  the  application  of
    Halimatu SA Adiya Damilola Aliyu and Fatima  Oluwakemi  Aliyu)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).  He found that there was nothing  to  suggest
    that the official dealing with the application of one of the claimant's
    before him had turned his or her mind to the question of whether  there
    were  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  that,  in  his  judgment,  was
    unlawful.

20. Judge Grubb adopted the reasoning in Ganesabalan in which he considered
    that Michael Fordham QC had  helpfully  sought  to  draw  together  the
    threads of the many authorities, including MM.  His summary of his view
    as to the correct legal approach was that:



         "... Where a person seeks leave to remain, relying on private  life
         or family life or both, and relying on Article  8,  and  where  the
         claim fails at the first  stage  by  reference  to  the  applicable
         Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE):

         (1)  There is always a 'second stage' in  which  the  Secretary  of
         State must consider the exercise of discretion  outside  the  Rules
         and must be in a position to demonstrate that she has done so.

         (2)  The extent  of  that  consideration  and  the  extent  of  the
         reasoning called for will depend on the nature and circumstances of
         the individual case.

         (3)  In a case in which the consideration or reasoning  is  legally
         inadequate, and leaving aside cases in which there is  a  right  of
         appeal to a tribunal, it is open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         resist the grant of judicial review if she is able  to  demonstrate
         that the decision would inevitably have been the same."


21. Amongst the six key points emerging from the case law summarised by the
    Deputy High Court Judges the following were set out as the  fourth  and
    fifth:

         ..the  discretion  outside  the  Rules   variously   described   as
         "exceptional circumstances"  or  circumstances  of   "unjustifiable
         hardship"    involves   the   Secretary   of   State   applying   a
         proportionality test by reference to Article 8 (see MF (Nigeria) at
         [44] and [45] and MM (Lebanon) [130] and [134]); and

         ..there is "no prior threshold" to the exercise of discretion based
         upon whether the individual could establish an "arguable" claim for
         the exercise of  discretion  based  upon  factors  which  have  not
         already been assessed under the Rules.  Those  "threshold"  factors
         were, rather, relevant to the nature  of  the  assessment  and  the
         reasoning that was  called  for  in  considering  the  exercise  of
         discretion outside the Rules.

22. In making these findings, Michael Fordham QC noted  that  the  guidance
    recognised that the decision-maker was "required to  consider  relevant
    factors  in  order  to  determine   whether   there   are   exceptional
    circumstances" - the emphasis on "whether" being added by Judge  Grubb.
    Mr Gaisford's submissions to me were that the Judge in  this  case  had
    approached the issues in accordance  with  the  case  law  and  without
    error.  He submitted that once the proportionality  exercise  had  been
    conducted the Judge could consider whether  to  allow  or  dismiss  the
    appeal and there was no test of "exceptionality" as such.

23. I accept this submission and I find that the judge did not err in  law.
    Looking at the decision as a  whole,  it  is  evident  that  the  Judge
    considered that the particular circumstances of this claimant  and  his
    family amounted to exceptional compelling circumstances in the  context
    of  Article  8  and  those  circumstances  are  fully  aired   in   the
    proportionality assessment.  Not  least  because  of  his  findings  in
    relation to the best interests of the child in this case  I  find  that
    the Judge was entitled to find reasons outside the Rules on  which  the
    appeal succeeds. The Judge in my  view  directed  himself  properly  in
    arriving at an Article 8 consideration of the case and weighed all  the
    relevant factors in the balance.  Where the balance fell was a  finding
    of fact to be made by the Judge, absent perversity.

24. In summary, I find that the making of the decision  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of a material error on a  point  of
    law and it follows that the Judge's decision stands and this appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

25. I find that the making of the decision in the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and  it  follows
    that the Judge's decision stands and this appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 3rd December 2014


Fee Award

The position remains as in the First-tier Tribunal that there  is  no  award
for the reasons given by the Judge.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 3rd December 2014

