

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/14438/2013
                                                               OA/14440/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 17th February 2015                         |on 23rd February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MUHAMMED SIBTAIN &
                              MUHAMMAD HASNAIN
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination remakes the decisions in the appeals brought to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by Muhammed  Sibtain  and  Muhammad  Hasnain  ("the
    claimants")  against  decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at
    Islamabad ("the ECO") dated 5th and 6th June 2013.

 2. The decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson dated  5th  and  issued  on
    11th  September  2014  should  be  treated  as  an  appendix  to   this
    determination.   It  explains  why  the  determinations  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lea have been set aside for error of law.  For avoidance
    of delay, a transfer order was made for the hearing of the  appeals  in
    the Upper Tribunal to be completed by a judge other than Judge  Dawson.



 3. The facts are set out in  the  determinations  of  Judge  Lea  and  the
    decision of Judge Dawson.  In short, the claimants  are  two  brothers,
    citizens of Pakistan.  On 23 April 2009 they married two  sisters  (the
    sponsors), also of Pakistani origin, who came to the  UK  in  2005  and
    gained citizenship in 2006.  The first claimant and his wife  have  two
    children, born on 30th December 2009 and on 14th May 2011.  The  second
    claimant and his wife have one child,  born  on  1st  July  2011.   The
    sponsors have visited their husbands  in  Pakistan  but  have  remained
    generally resident in the UK.  The sponsors  depend  on  public  funds.
    The claimants cannot satisfy the financial requirements of Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules for entry to the UK.  They invoke Article 8 of
    the ECHR, outwith the Immigration Rules.

 4. The claimants submitted  a  notice  under  Rule  15(2A)  with  updating
    statements by the sponsors.  Mrs O'Brien opposed admission  of  further
    evidence, on the basis that entry clearance cases fall to  be  resolved
    as at the date of the decisions by the ECO not only as to the Rules but
    also as to Article 8.  Mr Byrne accepted that the relevant date is that
    of the decisions by  the  ECO  but  contended  that  the  supplementary
    statements could cast light on the circumstances as then existing.  Mrs
    O'Brien indicated that she would not wish to  cross-examine  either  of
    the sponsors.  I admitted  their  statements  into  evidence.   Neither
    party  in  submissions  relied  on  anything   in   the   supplementary
    statements.  The important facts underlying the plain question  whether
    the claimants have a right to enter the UK under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    have not changed.

Submissions for Claimants

 5. A decision which separates parents from children is unusually stark and
    rarely proportionate: EB (Kosovo) [2009] 1 AC 1159 at paragraph 12.

 6. The ECO and the Tribunal cannot proceed on the footing that UK  spouses
    and children should leave  the  territory  of  the  European  Union  to
    maintain their family life: Sanade [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC).

 7. Paragraph EX1 of the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  relevant  factor  when
    assessing proportionality outside the  Rules:  MS  [2013]  CSIH  52  at
    paragraph 30.

 8. Appendix FM and EX1 would ask, if the claimants were in the UK, whether
    it was reasonable to expect the UK citizen children to leave the UK.

 9. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that the public interest  does
    not require removal of a person who is not liable to deportation  where
    that person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    UK citizen child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK.

10. The distinction between entry and removal cases for Article 8  purposes
    is not material, and both require the same proportionality  assessment:
    Quila [2012] 1 AC 621 at paragraph 43.

11. The Rules for entry clearance do not have a "safety  valve"  equivalent
    to paragraph EX1, nor is there a provision to look outside  the  Rules.
    As  the  Rules  in  this  respect  are  not  a  "complete   code"   the
    proportionality test is "more at large": MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at  130
    - 135.

12. The minimum income requirement in the  Rules  is  not  unlawful  or  in
    breach of section 55 from the 2009  Act  (the  need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children in the UK) but that  does  not  resolve
    the need to conduct an assessment: MM at paragraph 162.

13. Based on that legal framework, Mr Byrne argued that the decisions  give
    rise to a colossal interference with family life.  There  could  be  no
    premise that the sponsors and children might leave the EU  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  The interference was contrary to the best interests  of  the
    children to live within their family unit.  There  was  no  feature  to
    justify such a separation and to make this  one  of  those  rare  cases
    which both severs a genuine bond between spouses  and  a  genuine  bond
    between parents and  children.   There  was  no  practical  distinction
    between separations arising through expulsion and  through  refusal  of
    entry, the consequences being of equal gravity.  It would be artificial
    to exclude reference to paragraph EX1 of the Rules and section 117B  of
    the  2002  Act  as  setting  out  the  Government's  position  on  what
    constitutes proportionality.  It was not reasonable for the children to
    be required to leave the UK.  Materially  lower  living  conditions  in
    Pakistan and discrimination against women, matters shown by  background
    evidence and within the knowledge of  the  Tribunal,  were  significant
    further factors.  Although the public  interest  prescribes  a  minimum
    level of income within the Rules, the Tribunal  was  entitled  to  have
    regard  to  the  underlying  reality  in  this  particular  case.   The
    claimants had expressed a credible and realistic intention to  work  in
    the UK and not to constitute a public burden.  In the circumstances  of
    the case the decisions to refuse entry clearance were disproportionate.

Submissions for ECO

14. In accordance with the now settled authorities on  the  interaction  of
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR, the first question for
    the Tribunal was whether there was any good reason to look outside  the
    Immigration Rules at all.  This case disclosed no particular facts such
    as to constitute an unjustifiably  harsh  outcome.   Similar  instances
    would  be  numerous.   The  circumstances  were  not   exceptional   or
    compelling but representative of what the Rules are designed to govern.
     UK spouses who choose to marry and found a family with persons who are
    not EU residents are not entitled to assume that  their  future  family
    life may be carried on in the UK without  meeting  the  minimum  income
    thresholds provided in the Rules for recognised public purposes.

15. The Rules in this area do  not  include  a  provision  for  exceptional
    circumstances such as paragraph EX1, but it was accepted  that  an  ECO
    must always consider whether there are circumstances requiring separate
    consideration under Article 8.  At this point in submissions  reference
    was made to the original  decisions.   Neither  of  them  contains  any
    reference to Article 8.  Mrs O'Brien  said  that  was  a  flaw  in  the
    decision making but an immaterial one because  the  obvious  answer  is
    that this case is not exceptional but typical.  There  was  nothing  to
    require the ECO or the Tribunal to proceed to an Article  8  assessment
    outside the Rules.

16. Paragraph EX1 was not to be extended into these cases.   In  SM  [2014]
    CSIH 98 at paragraph 19 the opinion of Lady Clark of  Calton,  refusing
    an application for leave to appeal, was emphatically  against  such  an
    argument:

       No sound legal basis was put before me to explain why there  was  or
       should be some read  across  from  Rules  relating  to  'in-country'
       applications to Rules relating to 'out of country' applications  ...
       the assertion was not based on any legal principle and defied common
       sense.

17. The family units in the present case have only ever  existed  in  their
    present form and not in the  UK.  Refusal  of  entry  clearance  simply
    maintained the status quo.    The  situation  was  the  choice  of  the
    parties, not interference by state decision,  and  so  did  not  engage
    Article 8.

18. Even if the cases were to be looked at outside the Rules non-compliance
    with the minimum income requirements was a very weighty factor  in  the
    public  interest.   The  aspirations  of  the   claimants   to   become
    financially  self-sustaining  were  irrelevant,  and   in   any   event
    insubstantial.  The evidence pointed to an  additional  burden  on  the
    taxpayer.

19. It was not always unreasonable to anticipate that UK citizens including
    children might relocate elsewhere, but that was  a  matter  for  family
    choice not a requirement of the respondent.

20. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was not a complete statement  of  where
    the public interest might lie in  a  case  not  involving  deportation;
    there would still be a wider balancing exercise.  In any event that was
    not relevant to this case because it does not apply  in  a  refusal  of
    entry case.  Although section 55 of the 2009 Act required promotion  of
    the welfare of children in the UK that was not a trump card to overturn
    the minimum income requirements, on the authority of MM.

Reply for Claimants

21. Mr Byrne said that the case for the ECO fundamentally rested on drawing
    a distinction between expulsion and entry cases, and while that existed
    in the Rules, it could not properly arise in a proportionality exercise
    outside the Rules, on the authority in particular of Quila (although he
    accepted that that case was decided prior to the major amendment of the
    Rules in 2012).  There being no such distinction to  be  observed,  the
    proportionality balance clearly fell in favour of the claimants.

Discussion and Conclusions

22. I tend to doubt whether section 117B(6) is subject to  public  interest
    considerations outside its own terms, as Mrs O'Brien  contended.   That
    does not seem to be its plain reading.  The  point  may  remain  to  be
    resolved, but it does not bear on this case.

23. There is no good basis for reading "in country" provisions across  into
    "out of country" cases.  That would be a  far-reaching  attack  on  the
    whole scheme of the Rules.  In SM Lady Clark was  emphatically  against
    it.  While Mr Byrne suggested that might have been  because  the  legal
    foundation had not been laid, I do  not  think  that  he  succeeded  in
    laying any such foundation either.  The proposition is not supported by
    MS or by any other cases relating to the Rules as from July 2012.   The
    distinction is built into the statute.  Section 117B(6) is about  cases
    not requiring removal and by clear implication it is  not  about  cases
    requiring entry.

24. Quila was decided before the amendments of the Rules in July 2012.  Its
    effect is not as far-reaching as Mr Byrne contended.  If there  was  no
    major distinction between entry and removal cases previously (which may
    be doubtful, but  on  which  I  need  not  express  any  view)  such  a
    distinction is now drawn in statute, in the Rules, and in case law.

25. MM deals with the issue:

         XIV Issue Seven: Is there a separate ground of objection to the new
         MIR based on section 55 of the 2009 Act?

         162. Mr Drabble was correct to identify the two stages at which the
         duty imposed by section 55 on the Secretary of State arises; first,
         when the  new  rules  are  being  formulated  and,  secondly,  when
         individual decisions are being made. The  present  cases  are  only
         concerned with the first  stage.  Mr  Drabble  submitted  that  the
         Secretary of State was under a duty to ensure that  the  new  rules
         established a framework whereby the best interests of  a  child  in
         the UK would be capable of being considered when necessary  in  two
         particular classes of case. As noted above these are cases where  a
         child is in the UK as a citizen or has leave to remain and  a  non-
         EEA partner is attempting to obtain leave to enter  or  remain  and
         cases where a child is in the UK whose parent is a refugee  or  has
         been granted HP and the non-EEA partner wishes to join them in  the
         UK.

         163. I  accept  that  Mr  Drabble's  general  proposition  must  be
         correct, but in my view Mr Drabble's argument that the Secretary of
         State has  not  fulfilled  her  duty  is  not  sustainable.  First,
         paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that the provision  of  the
         family route "takes into account the need to safeguard and  promote
         the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which  indicates  that  the
         Secretary of State has had regard to the statutory duty.  Secondly,
         there is no legal requirement that the IRs should provide that  the
         best interests of the child should be determinative. Section 55  is
         not a "trump card" to be played whenever the interests of  a  child
         arise. Thus, thirdly, the new MIR are only a part  of  requirements
         set out in Appendix FM, but an important part. If a child in the UK
         is to be joined by a non-EEA partner under the "partner rules"  (as
         compared with those under E-LTRPT.2.3) then  it  is  reasonable  to
         require, for the child's best interests,  that  there  be  adequate
         financial provision for the unit of which the child will be a  part
         if the non-EEA partner joins it. If the financial requirements  are
         otherwise judged to be lawful, then, on the financial  front,  that
         must mean the section 55 duty has been discharged  in  framing  the
         relevant IR. Fourthly, the amended IRs specifically stipulate  that
         where the applicant has sole parental responsibility the welfare of
         children in the UK or fulfils the other requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3
         of Appendix FM,  the  new  MIR  are  not  applicable,  because  the
         applicant need  only  provide  evidence  that  they  will  be  able
         adequately  to  maintain  and  accommodate   themselves   and   any
         dependants in the UK without recourse to public funds. As  Blake  J
         pointed out at [116] these different provisions  reflect  a  policy
         that a minimum income requirement is inappropriate when  it  is  in
         the best interests of a child that a  parent  or  carer  should  be
         admitted to look after a child in the UK  and  there  are  adequate
         funds and  accommodation  for  that  purpose  (and  any  dependants
         joining the carer).

         164. These appeals are not dealing with individual cases where  the
         new MIR might produce a harsh result in relation to a child in  the
         UK. The way that  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"  provision  and
         Article 8 will work in those individual cases is not  for  decision
         now.

26. The present cases are not at the rule formulation but at the individual
    decision stage.   MM held that  the  financial  requirements  governing
    entry of non-EEA citizen spouses to the UK were not a  disproportionate
    interference with Article 8 rights.   The  Court  recognised  that  the
    financial requirements did constitute a significant  interference  with
    Article 8 rights, but found that the Rules struck a fair  balance  with
    which the Court was not entitled to interfere.  That  analysis  applies
    also to cases involving children.

27. Mr Byrne in his clearly constructed argument was careful not to pose  a
    challenge to the Rules themselves, but at bottom  the  appeals  by  the
    claimants could not succeed without setting the Rules aside  in  a  way
    which would apply to all such cases.  I find the  submissions  for  the
    respondent preferable.

28. The sponsors and their children depend entirely on state benefits.  The
    Rules for  entry  of  spouses  contemplate  cases  which  also  involve
    children, to which they apply additional financial  requirements.   The
    present cases are not rare but typical of situations  which  the  Rules
    seek to  govern.   There  is  nothing  significant  or  exceptional  to
    distinguish them from thousands of others where claimants wish to  join
    wives and children in the UK and where the minimum income  requirements
    of the Rules cannot be met.  The claimants have made no  good  arguable
    case that they have the right to enter the UK outside the  requirements
    of the Rules.

29. If the cases were to pass that intermediate test  then,  for  the  like
    reasons,  the  ECO's  decisions  have  not  been  shown  to   have   an
    unjustifiably harsh or disproportionate outcome.

30. The two determinations of the First-tier Tribunal have been set  aside,
    for the reasons given by UT Judge Dawson.   The  decisions  substituted
    are that both appeals, as brought by the claimants  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, are dismissed.

31. No anonymity directions have been requested or made.






           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           20 February 2015


