
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14395/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 9th January 2015            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 26th March 1994.

 2. The Appellant and his sister, U N A, applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    join their parents in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  family  reunion
    provisions contained in paragraph 352D(iii) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Appellant's parents were granted refugee status in the UK  after  a
    successful appeal in November 2012.

 3. Both applications were refused by the Respondent on 3rd June  2013  and
    there was an appeal hearing before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Colvin at Taylor House on 29th July 2014.  The Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8) and his sister's appeal was
    allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph  352D).   Both  the
    Appellant and his sister were granted anonymity and I direct that  this
    shall continue.

 4. There has been no challenge by the Respondent to the  decision  by  the
    First-tier Judge to allow the appeal by the Appellant's sister but  the
    Respondent's  representative  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision to allow the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.

 5. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  a  Designated  Judge  on  30th
    September 2014.  The Designated Judge who granted permission considered
    it arguable that the First-tier Judge erred in law  in  that  she  took
    account of  alleged  danger  to  the  Appellant  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, when recent country guidance indicated that this would not
    be the case, that she failed to follow the Razgar guidelines and factor
    in public interest when considering proportionality and, finally,  that
    she  failed  to  have  regard  to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. Thus the matter came before me for an  error  of  law  hearing  on  5th
    January 2015.  Representation was as mentioned above.

 7. I heard submissions from  both  representatives.   I  have  taken  into
    account all the documents which were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In addition I have taken into  account  the  Entry  Clearance  Officers
    Grounds of Appeal in support  of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal and a Rule 24 response drafted by Miss Jegarajah.  At the end of
    the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

 8. In submissions, Miss Johnstone replied upon the three grounds  set  out
    in the Entry Clearance Officer's Grounds of Appeal in  support  of  the
    application for permission.  The first ground submits that  the  First-
    tier Judge failed to have regard to the relevant country guidance  case
    of GJ and Others (Post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) in finding at paragraph 20 of the  determination  that  the
    Appellant may be at risk from the Sri Lankan authorities as a result of
    his father's  activities.   It  is  argued  that  the  risk  categories
    identified in GJ have not been addressed and therefore it was not  open
    to the First-tier Judge to make the finding which was made in  relation
    to current risk.

 9. The second ground submits that the First-tier Judge  failed  to  follow
    the  Razgar  guidance  in  her  assessment  of  proportionality.   Miss
    Johnstone pointed out that at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing  the
    Appellant was not a child.  He was  a  young  adult  with  no  form  of
    disability.

10. The third and final ground submits that the First-tier Judge failed  to
    have regard  to  public  interest  considerations  in  accordance  with
    Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Finally, the grounds submit that there was  no  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal of the second Appellant's  proficiency  in  the
    English language nor did the judge consider whether the Appellant would
    be financially independent upon entry to the UK.

11. In the light of  these  matters,  Miss  Johnstone  submitted  that  the
    decision by the First-tier Judge should be set aside and re-made.

12. For the Appellant, Miss Jegarajah referred to the original  Grounds  of
    Appeal which refer  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  parents  had
    recently  been  successful  in   their   asylum   appeal.    In   those
    circumstances, leaving a 19 year old to look  after  his  18  year  old
    sister, when the parents would have a well-founded fear of  persecution
    if they returned, is irrational.  The Appellant and  his  sister  would
    both face risk through association with their parents and ought  to  be
    granted entry clearance as a matter of urgency.  That was because  they
    were not safe in their home country.  The grounds  argued  that  it  is
    deeply irresponsible where a child is concerned (a child  applicant  is
    treated as a child  even  if  they  attain  their  majority  after  the
    application) to fail to have any regard  to  the  appeal  determination
    that outlines the history of the family.

13. Miss Jegarajah further argued that the  decision  under  appeal  is  in
    breach of Article 23 Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004 on
    minimum  standards  for  the  qualification  status  of  third  country
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who  otherwise
    need international protection and content of  the  protection  granted.
    With reference to maintaining family unit, the first principle set  out
    in the Directive is that member states shall ensure that  family  unity
    can be maintained.

14. Miss Jegarajah referred to paragraphs 30 and 32 of the determination in
    respect  of  the  appeal  by  the  Appellant's  parents.   This  is   a
    determination issued by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Gillespie  on
    27th November 2012 following an appeal hearing at Hatton Cross  on  9th
    November 2012.  The paragraphs referred to deal with the background  of
    the Appellant's parents and the matters which would put them at risk in
    Sri Lanka.  A copy of the determination is in the Respondent's  bundle.



15. Miss Jegarajah submitted that the Appellant's  parents  are  successful
    refugees.  Therefore their son and daughter are part  of  their  family
    and their situation must be considered as part  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.

16. Turning to Article 8, Miss Jegarajah referred to paragraph 16 of  Judge
    Colvin's determination.  She submitted that the Razgar methodology  has
    clearly been accepted even though Razgar is not expressly referred  to.
    The First-tier Judge  has  taken  into  account  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    guidance in Shazad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085  where
    it was held -

         "After applying the requirements of the Rules only if there may  be
         arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is
         it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them".

     This guidance follows and affirms  the  guidance  previously  given  in
    Gulshan.

17. Judge Colvin has applied this guidance in her findings relating to  the
    second Appellant which are at paragraph 20 of the  determination.   The
    judge found that there are grounds for considering Article 8 outside of
    the new Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances that are not sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.
    The main one is the fact  that  the  Appellant,  like  his  sister,  is
    effectively wishing to be reunited with his parents who are refugees in
    the UK and therefore the  principles  of  family  reunion  need  to  be
    recognised as part of his claim which is not the  situation  under  the
    new Rules as family reunion is not recognised per se.  These principles
    include the Article 8 rights of  all  the  members  of  the  family  to
    reunion when refugee status is conferred.  Another factor is  that  the
    Appellant may well be at some risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities  on
    account of his father's reasons for seeking asylum - namely as a wanted
    LTTE suspect in Sri Lanka.  The current risk to the Appellant's  father
    therefore tips the case into being exceptional on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant may also be at risk.  Another factor is that the  Appellant's
    parents cannot travel to Sri Lanka to visit him due  to  their  refugee
    status.

18. A further matter which, in the judge's view, made the Appellant's  case
    compelling and exceptional is the fact that he  was  only  18  when  he
    applied for entry clearance and, like his sister,  was  not  living  an
    independent life.  The fact that his sister is to be permitted to  join
    her parents is an additional factor that might  well  lead  to  further
    instability for the Appellant.  It was on this  basis  that  the  judge
    considered that it would be  disproportionate  to  interfere  with  the
    reunion rights of the family, including that of the Appellant.

19. I am entirely satisfied that the reference in the Respondent's  grounds
    to  English  language  ability  and  financial  independence  are   not
    material.  They did not form part of the original refusal and were only
    raised by the Respondent for the first  time  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  In any event, an educational certificate  (which
    is not challenged) has now been produced which  demonstrates  that  the
    Appellant has become proficient in the English language.

20. As the Rule 24 response drafted by Miss Jegarajah points out, the First-
    tier Judge took the issue of risk into account, but not in  determining
    persecutory risk, but in relation to Article 8 and the  proportionality
    assessment.  The application of Section 117A NIAA 2002 to  this  appeal
    is misconceived because the application predates  the  commencement  of
    the Act.

21. Having thought carefully about the submissions advanced for both sides,
    I have concluded that the First-tier Judge was  justified  in  allowing
    this appeal under Article 8 for the reasons which have been clearly set
    out in the determination.   The  determination  discloses  no  material
    error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I uphold the determination and dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Signed                              Date 8th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

