
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/14318/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (MOSCOW)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    None
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I refer to the appellant and respondent as they were known in the First-
    tier Tribunal albeit it is the Entry  Clearance  Office  (Moscow),  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal, who pursues this appeal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Russian Federation  who  had  applied
    for entry clearance as the parent of a child present in the  UK,  under
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  The application was refused on 8
    October 2014 and the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson ("the FTTJ") allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier  Tribunal  but  given
    the facts of this case, one is appropriate  now.  I  make  a  direction
    accordingly.

Background

 4. The appellant came to the UK as a visitor in August 2010. Whilst  here,
    she had a sexual relationship with a British man  who  was  married  to
    another woman. Following her return to Russia in  2011,  the  appellant
    discovered she was pregnant.  Her daughter was  born  in  May  2011  in
    Russia.  The child's father travelled to Russia  and  stayed  with  the
    appellant for about a week.  The appellant and her child were living in
    impoverished conditions. As a result the appellant and  the  father  of
    the child, who is British, decided that the child would have  a  better
    life with her father  and  his  wife  in  the  UK.   Father  and  child
    travelled to the UK in August 2012 and the child has lived  in  the  UK
    since that date.  The appellant has not seen  her  daughter  since  she
    left Russia to live in the UK but is in  daily  contact  with  her  via
    Skype.  She sends correspondence, parcels  and  money.   The  appellant
    wished to join her daughter in the UK because she misses her  but  does
    not want her daughter to live with her in Russia;  in  any  event,  the
    father of the child would not agree to the latter course. The father of
    the  child  supported  the  application  for  entry  clearance  by  the
    appellant.

 5. The application was refused because the appellant did  not  fulfil  the
    maintenance  and  accommodation  criteria  in  Appendix   FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant appealed against  the  decision  and,
    with the consent of the parties, the appeal was decided on the  papers.
    It was allowed on human rights grounds only.

 6. The respondent  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Mandalia on 24 September 2015 because, although the FTTJ
    had found the appellant did not satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix
    FM, the FTTJ had arguably given inadequate weight to the provisions  of
    the immigration rules when considering whether  there  were  compelling
    reasons to  consider  a  freestanding  Article  8  claim.  Furthermore,
    arguably the FTTJ had failed to give due consideration  to  the  public
    interest  considerations  as  required  by  s117B  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The DUTJ did not grant permission  to
    appeal on the second ground advanced by the respondent, concluding that
    this amounted to no more than a disagreement with the findings  of  the
    FTTJ at paragraphs 14 and 15 of the decision; these were  open  to  the
    FTTJ on the evidence.

The Hearing

 7. The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  was  on  the  papers  with  the
    consent of the parties. The appellant was not represented in the First-
    tier Tribunal and no representative attended before me. I was satisfied
    that the notice of hearing had been duly served and therefore proceeded
    with the hearing in the absence of representation for the appellant.

 8. I heard the oral submissions of Mr Duffy for the respondent. I reserved
    my decision at the end of the hearing and this I now give.

Submissions

 9. Mr Duffy submitted that the FTTJ should have looked through the lens of
    the Immigration Rules and given weight to the fact  the  appellant  did
    not fulfil the accommodation and maintenance criteria in  Appendix  FM.
    He accepted that the appellant's circumstances were  unusual.  However,
    they were not sufficiently compelling for consideration on human rights
    grounds outside the Rules. All relevant issues had been addressed  with
    reference to the Rules: the appellant was not a category of person  who
    could not satisfy the Rules at all.  Furthermore, the FTTJ  had  failed
    to have regard to the public interest factors in s117B of the 2002 Act;
    in particular he had given no weight to effective immigration control.

Discussion

10. I am satisfied the FTTJ made material errors of law in his findings. He
    found that the appellant did not meet the accommodation and maintenance
    criteria in Appendix FM. However, the FTTJ gives no reason for  finding
    (paragraph 18) that "this is one of those infrequent cases that  merits
    consideration under Article 8 outside of the  Immigration  Rules".   He
    should have identified why he considered that the circumstances of  the
    appellant were such that  they  had  not  been  fully  covered  by  the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules. Even if this  were  not  a  material
    error of law, which it is, lacking as it does any reasoning at all, the
    FTTJ's findings with regard to the proportionality of the  interference
    with the appellant's Article 8 rights are also wanting.   He  considers
    at paragraph 19 the "economic consequences of the appellant  coming  to
    the UK and the interest of the  wider  public  in  controlling  costs",
    weighing  this  against  the  "interests  of  the  appellant  and,   in
    particular, her daughter.   There  is  no  reference  at  all  in  this
    assessment to the public interest factors in  s117A-D.   Of  particular
    concern, is the lack of any reference to the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  (s117B(1))   or   the
    appellant's lack of financial  independence  (as  demonstrated  by  her
    inability to fulfil the maintenance criteria in the  Rules  (s117B(3)).
    For these reasons, the FTTJ made material errors of law in his findings
    and the decision cannot stand.

11. I preserve the findings of fact of the FTTJ as  regards  the  appellant
    and her child in the UK (paragraphs 14 - 16) and remake the decision.

12. There is no challenge to the findings of the FTTJ  that  the  appellant
    was  unable  to  demonstrate  she  fulfilled  the   accommodation   and
    maintenance criteria in Appendix FM.  Thus  the  appeal  was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules (albeit this was not specifically stated in
    the decision).

13. Appendix FM has been drafted to address those issues  of  relevance  in
    applications for entry clearance based on purported  interference  with
    one or more persons' human rights. The appellant  has  been  unable  to
    demonstrate she fulfils the maintenance and accommodation criteria  for
    entry clearance as a parent. I do not consider  her  circumstances  are
    such that the appeal  should  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Her  situation,  whilst  unusual,  falls  squarely  within  the
    circumstances covered by Appendix FM for the grant of  entry  clearance
    to the parent of a British child resident in  the  UK.   The  appellant
    gave her consent for the child to come to the UK  to  live  permanently
    with her father. The appellant has not  changed  her  mind  about  that
    arrangement but now wishes to live in the UK herself to be  nearer  her
    child.  She is employed in Russia as an English teacher and has amassed
    some savings. It is open to her  to  continue  living  and  working  in
    Russia until she is able to demonstrate she fulfils the maintenance and
    accommodation criteria in  Appendix  FM.   Whilst  this  lengthens  the
    separation of mother and child,  this  separation  was  deemed  by  the
    child's parents to be acceptable, given the benefits to  the  child  of
    living in the UK with her father.  Contact can be maintained,  as  now,
    with the child until the appellant is able to demonstrate  she  fulfils
    the accommodation and maintenance criteria in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Thus the parents of the child have had the best interests of the  child
    in mind in making their decision to relocate the child to the UK to  be
    with her father, recognising that this would involve the separation  of
    the child from her mother until she  fulfils  the  criteria  for  entry
    clearance.

14.  For  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  appellant's   situation   is
    appropriately covered by the Immigration Rules and  that  there  is  no
    need for consideration outside the Rules.  Her appeal on  human  rights
    grounds must fail.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    material error of law, as set out above.

16. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. That decision stands.

17. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds and remake it, dismissing the appeal.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award

The FTTJ made a fee award but, the appeal having now  been  dismissed  there
can be no fee award.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

