
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/14505/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MS REBECCA GUILLAMA VILLALOBOS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on  6  August
         2015 against the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Clemes who had allowed the Respondent's appeal against the  refusal
         of her application for entry clearance  as  a  domestic  worker  (a
         children's nanny) in a decision promulgated on  29  May  2015.  The
         appeal  was  determined  on  the  papers  as  the  Respondent   had
         requested.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of  the  Philippines,  born  on  28
         September 1969.  She  was  sponsored  by  her  employer  Mrs  Katie
         Richardson who planned to return to the United  Kingdom  from  Hong
         Kong.  The Entry Clearance Officer, Manila applied  paragraph  159A
         of the Immigration Rules.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not
         accept that Mrs Richardson would only  be  staying  in  the  United
         Kingdom for 6 months, nor that she was  normally  resident  outside
         the United Kingdom.  Judge Clemes was however  satisfied  from  the
         evidence (which included a letter  from  Mrs  Richardson's  husband
         which stated that he was travelling from Hong Kong to Saudi  Arabia
         where his family would join him) that Mrs Richardson  would  be  in
         the United Kingdom for only 6 months before joining  Dr  Richardson
         in Saudi Arabia.  The judge went on  to  allow  her  appeal  "as  a
         visitor".

    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted because the judge had stated at  [6]  of  his
         decision that the Respondent "would not be supported in the  United
         Kingdom by the Richardson family".  It was unclear which rules  the
         judge had applied.

    4.     Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.

    5.     There was no appearance by or on behalf of the  Respondent,  nor
         had there been any rule 24 response.  It was far  from  clear  that
         the appeal was defended or was of any interest to  the  Respondent.
         The tribunal decided that it should proceed in her absence and that
         it was fair to do so.

    Submissions - error of law

    6.     Mr Kandola for the Appellant relied on the grounds and the grant
         of permission to appeal.  The decision  was  inadequately  reasoned
         and was contradictory.  Possibly there  had  been  a  typographical
         error when the judge  stated  that  the  Respondent  would  not  be
         supported by her  employer  (which  was  the  whole  point  of  her
         application) but the judge had then referred to a  visit  to  which
         paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules applied.  The judge had given
         no consideration to the requirements of  paragraph  41  which  were
         different from paragraph 159A.  The decision and reasons should  be
         set aside and the appeal remade and dismissed.

    The error of law finding

    7.     The tribunal indicated its decision  at  the  hearing  that  the
         Secretary of State's appeal  would  be  allowed  and  reserved  its
         reasons which now follow.  Unfortunately the judge's  decision  was
         impossible to follow.  It may be  that  the  word  "not"  had  been
         inadvertently inserted into  the  first  sentence  of  [6]  of  the
         decision and reasons, but it was  still  impossible  to  understand
         which paragraph  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the  judge  had  been
         intending to apply or why, when  he  allowed  the  appeal.   It  is
         obvious that paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules which  was  then
         in force (now replaced by Appendix V) has  significantly  different
         provisions from paragraph 159A, one of which is  that  visitors  to
         the United Kingdom are not permitted to  work.   The  evidence  was
         that the Respondent was employed as a nanny and was travelling with
         her employer.  That confusion is sufficient to amount to  an  error
         of law, as Mr Kandola submitted.

    8.     The tribunal  finds  that  the  decision  and  reasons  contains
         material errors of law, such that it must be set aside and  remade.
         The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The fresh decision

    9.     The First-tier Tribunal's decision can only  be  remade  in  one
         way, that is, that the appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's
         decision made under paragraph 159A of the Immigration Rules must be
         dismissed.  It is also obvious that the Respondent had not  applied
         to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor under paragraph 41 of  the
         Immigration  Rules  nor  indeed  that  she  was  eligible  in  that
         capacity.

    10.    Paragraph  159A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  applies  to
         overseas domestic workers contains  stringent  provisions,  one  of
         which is that the worker will leave the United Kingdom at  the  end
         of 6 months. Insufficient evidence was provided to  show  that  the
         Respondent's employer was relocating to the  United  Kingdom  on  a
         temporary basis.  No visa for Saudi Arabia for the employer or  the
         Respondent had been provided, nor any proof that such  applications
         had been made, e.g., by means  of  evidence  from  Dr  Richardson's
         prospective employer.   The  letter  from  Dr  Richardson  dated  3
         December 2014, which was post decision, merely expressed  the  hope
         that the family's plans to live in Saudi Arabia would be  achieved.
         It indicated that the Saudi visas  could  be  problematic  for  his
         family.  It was, of course, open to the Respondent and her employer
         to make a fresh entry clearance application supported by sufficient
         evidence and quite possibly that has  already  happened  given  the
         date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  original  decision  and  the
         Entry Clearance Manager's review.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes is set aside and remade as
    follows:

    The appeal is DISMISSED




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




    TO THE RESPONDENT:
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
