

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/14576/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 30th September 2014                       |On 23rd January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA (NEW DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            FARZANA AHMED SHEWLY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossain, Chambers of MM Hossein


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is  a  national  of  Bangladesh  date  of  birth  25th
       December 1990. On the 13th August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
       R.A Jones) allowed her appeal against  refusal  to  grant  her  entry
       clearance as the spouse of a person present and settled  in  the  UK.
       The Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  now  has  permission  to  appeal
       against that decision.


    2. Although a number of issues were  raised  in  the  original  refusal,
       these were settled before the First-tier Tribunal appeal. As the HOPO
       on the day agreed (see paragraph 19 of the  determination)  the  only
       matter in issue before Judge R.A Jones was whether this was a genuine
       and subsisting marriage.  The ECO had taken the view that it was not,
       essentially because he perceived there  to  be  a  lack  of  evidence
       demonstrating 'intervening devotion' between the parties.


    3. In a careful and detailed determination  Judge  Jones  sets  out  the
       evidence, and the competing  submissions  made  by  each  party.  The
       Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Sponsor Mr  Hannan,  which  was
       found to be credible.  His evidence was supported by evidence such as
       phone cards and the fact that he had remained in Bangladesh with  his
       wife for some three months after they were  married  in  March  2012.
       Having taken all of that evidence into account, and  having  directed
       himself to the authorities of Naz (Subsisting Marriage  -standard  of
       proof) Pakistan (2012) and  Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -evidence)
       Sudan (2012) UKUT 00041 (IAC), the Judge allowed the appeal.


    4. The ECO now appeals that  decision  on  the  ground  that  the  Judge
       "failed to provide adequate reasons why the appellant and the sponsor
       are in a genuine and subsisting relationship".  Before me  Ms  Holmes
       very wisely said no more and relied on the grounds.


    5. It is not, contrary to what the ECO appears to be asserted  here,  an
       error of law to believe a witness. Unlike the ECO the Judge  had  the
       benefit of hearing oral evidence from the Sponsor and he was entitled
       to find him credible. As the current President of this  Tribunal  has
       recently noted in Nixon (permission to appeal: grounds)  [2014]  UKUT
       00368 (IAC) challenges to credibility findings will only  succeed  if
       an error of law is identified. In that case the SSHD alleged that the
       Judge had erred in accepting the evidence of witnesses:


          10.    The application for permission to appeal in the present
          case did not satisfy the requirements and standards rehearsed
          above. It made no attempt to specify the error/s of law said to
          have been committed by the FtT. It employed the vague language of
          "erred", without more. This was inadequate and unacceptable. In
          principle, an error of law may take a number of forms.
          Inexhaustively, these include a failure to have regard to material
          evidence; taking into account and being influenced by immaterial
          evidence; inadequate reasons; unfair procedure; misunderstanding
          or misconstruction of the law; disregarding a relevant statutory
          provision; failing to give effect to a binding decision of a
          superior court; and irrationality. It should not be difficult for
          those who compile applications for permission to appeal to do so
          in terms which specify clearly and coherently, with appropriate
          particulars, the error/s of law said to contaminate the decision
          under challenge. Terms such as "erred" or "erred in law" or "was
          wrong in law" or "misdirected itself in law" are unacceptable
          unless accompanied by a clear specification of the error/s of law
          alleged and suitable brief particulars. If the application for
          permission fails to satisfy this standard and the Judge concerned
          is unable to identify with confidence the error/s of law asserted,
          the appropriate course will be a refusal.

          ...

          12.    The nebulous terms of the application for permission to
          appeal in the present case are reflected in the grant of
          permission. The former had a contagious effect on the latter. The
          Judge granted permission, firstly, on the ground that the FtT had
          arguably erred in law in its assessment of the credibility of
          three particular witnesses: see the second ground of appeal
          reproduced in [2] above. It may be observed that it will very
          rarely be appropriate to grant permission to appeal on this kind
          of ground. Credibility assessments by first instance fact finding
          Tribunals will normally be challengeable only on the basis of
          irrationality (or, as it is sometimes inelegantly termed,
          perversity): Edwards - v - Bairstow [1956] AC 14. Judges should be
          very slow to grant permission on such a ground...."

          (my emphasis)

   6. This guidance echoes the findings  made  by  the  previous  President,
      Blake J, in Goudey: unless there is a particular reason to  doubt  the
      signed statements by a husband and  wife  that  they  intend  to  live
      together, it is likely that such declarations, supported  by  evidence
      such as phone cards, will be sufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of
      proof.   In the absence of any countervailing evidence  there  was  no
      need for the Judge to give particular reasons why he found this  young
      man to be credible and his evidence to support the signed statement of
      the Respondent, the phone cards and other evidence.


   7. Judge Jones was entitled to find, on the basis of the evidence  before
      him, that the Respondent had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof.  The
      determination contains no error of law and is upheld.


      Decisions


   8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of  law
      and it is upheld.


   9. In view of the delay caused by this appeal I direct that the ECO is to
      expedite consideration of this matter and to grant entry clearance  as
      soon as possible.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         30th September 2014
