


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: OA/14386/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 May 2016                                 |On 6 June 2016               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            jerome marvin thomas
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs G Wormington (mother and sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. After the hearing on 8 March 2016, I  decided  that  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of  Judge  Iqbal  promulgated  on  7  September  2016
    contains an error on a point of law and needed to  be  set  aside.   My
    reasons were set out in my decision that was issued on  6  April  2016.
    As it was necessary to  make  a  fresh  decision  in  relation  to  the
    original appeal, I arranged for the hearing to be resumed and that took
    place on 3 May 2016.

 2. Mrs Wormington attended the hearing with her husband  but  without  any
    legal representative.  They explained they had lost confidence in their
    previous representatives because of what had happened and the  guidance
    they had been given to rely  on  post-decision  evidence.   After  some
    detailed discussion, I explained that  I  had  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    because there was no  power  to  take  into  account  events  that  had
    happened after the date of decision (which  was  3  October  2014)  and
    which had not been foreseeable. The evidence relied on to  support  the
    appellant's contention that he needed to be in the care of  his  mother
    all post dated  the  date  of  decision  and  therefore  could  not  be
    considered irrespective of how compelling it might be.

 3. Naturally my decision  was  disappointing  to  Ms  Wormington  but  she
    understood the reasons and understood that it was open to  her  son  to
    make a fresh  application  based  on  his  current  circumstances.   Mr
    Wormington told me that they were aware of the  difficult  hurdle  they
    had to overcome, which was not helped by the  difficulties  in  getting
    medical evidence from Jamaica.

 4. For the sake of clarity, I confirm that there is no dispute that at the
    date of decision the appellant enjoyed family life with his mother, the
    sponsor despite living apart.  The evidence  provided  does  not  show,
    however, that his personal circumstances at that  time  outweighed  the
    public interest in maintaining effective immigration  controls  because
    at that time the appellant was being cared for  adequately  by  others.
    The fact that his care arrangements have changed and his condition  has
    deteriorated since the date of  decision  are  not  ones  that  can  be
    considered in this appeal and no findings are made on those matters.

Decision

 5. The decision and reasons statement of Judge Iqbal contained an error of
    law and is set aside.  I remake the decision  and  dismiss  the  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
