
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14957/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9th January 2015                  |On 21st January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                miss sobia bi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer, islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lugunju, promulgated on 18th August 2014, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 12th May 2014.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal  of  Miss  Sobia  Bi.   The  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer, subsequently applied for, and was granted permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 30th April 1995.
     She appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 23rd July 2013, refusing her application under  paragraph
    297 of HC 395, to join her father, the Sponsor, in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was that her father and mother had divorced.  She
    was living in the home of her father.  She was looked after on a day-to-
    day basis by her grandmother.  This was at the control and direction of
    her father in the UK.  Her mother did not have a role to  play  in  her
    maintenance.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge proceeded on the basis of the guidance given by the  Tribunal
    in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e)) Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   She  observed
    that the test to be applied is whether the parent who is said  to  have
    sole responsibility has control and direction over the child  including
    making  the  day-to-day  key  decisions  (paragraph  9).   The  judge's
    findings were that the Sponsor had made it very plain that he, as  head
    of the family, "makes the key and important  decisions  concerning  the
    Appellant's life and future, including who she will marry and what  job
    she will do.  As  he  cannot  be  physically  present,  he  exerts  his
    authority and influence from the UK through his mother" (paragraph 14).



Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of  application  state  that  the  judge,  failed  to  make
    material findings as to who has responsibility for  the  day-to-day  of
    the Appellant, and to resolve an anomaly in the  evidence  relating  to
    this issue.

 6. The Tribunal gave permission to appeal on 22nd September 2014.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before  me  on  9th  January  2015,  Mr  Neville  Smart,
    appearing as Home Office Presenting Officer, focused on ground  one  of
    the Grounds of Appeal, namely, the failure by  the  judge  to  properly
    resolve  the  issue  of  "sole  responsibility"  on  the  part  of  the
    sponsoring father.  Mr Smart explained that the  reason  why  this  was
    important was because the mother was still in the locality.  The  judge
    had misgivings about the evidence, and given that this was so, it could
    not be concluded that "sole responsibility" remained with  the  father,
    who was in the  United  Kingdom,  without  these  ambiguities  and  the
    evidence being first resolved.  For example, at  paragraph  10  of  the
    determination the judge refers to the fact that the Appellant's  mother
    has continued  to  refer  in  the  affidavit  written  by  her  to  the
    Appellant's father as "her husband" which "she prepared in April  2013"
    (paragraph 10).  Further, at paragraph 17 the  Sponsor  had  maintained
    that the Appellant does not have contact with her mother but the  judge
    concluded that, "I find it would be in very  unusual  circumstances  in
    which the mother can want divorce chooses not to have any contact  with
    her children, thus I  do  not  accept  this  aspect  of  the  Sponsor's
    evidence" (paragraph 17).  Also, the mother's affidavit refers  to  the
    same location in Pakistan as that  of  the  Appellant  child.   In  the
    Appellant's bundle also, there is (at page  13)  a  document  from  the
    government girl's high school, which again refers to the same  location
    for the  Appellant  child  as  for  the  mother.   In  fact,  the  visa
    application (at questions 19 to 21) gives exactly the same  address  by
    the Appellant when she makes the visa application as  the  address  for
    the mother.  Yet, the Appellant's father says that  after  he  divorced
    the Appellant's  mother  she  moved  out  of  the  address.   In  these
    circumstances, the judge  had  to  make  a  finding  as  to  where  the
    Appellant's mother actually lived.  She could have lived near enough to
    be able to provide day-to-day care for the Appellant.   In  that  case,
    the "sole responsibility" would not be with the  sponsoring  father  in
    the UK.

 8. For his part, Mr Vokes submitted that, whilst he would accept that  the
    mother also lived in "village Gianchoor" which was the same village  as
    the Appellant child, there was no evidence further  to  this  that  the
    Appellant herself could provide, and if it was the  Respondent's  case,
    that the mother was indeed living  with  the  child,  then  the  burden
    rested on the Respondent.  The Appellant's evidence, and  that  of  the
    sponsoring father, was that the mother had left the  family  home.   At
    question 23 of the visa application the question was "How long have you
    lived in this address" and the response had been "Since  birth".   This
    was the ancestral home of the Appellant's father.  What  was  in  issue
    was "sole responsibility".  In that event,  one  had  to  look  at  the
    evidence of the Sponsor.  The Sponsor states, "I am  also  Sponsor  for
    the day-to-day" care "through my mother .......my mother  also  helps".
    As to the mother at page 15  of  the  bundle,  the  mother  states  (at
    paragraph 3) that after  the  divorce,  the  children  were  under  her
    supervision, as she looked after them for a long time.

 9. If one now turns to the findings of the judge, the judge  observes  (at
    paragraph 10) that the mother "did  not  take  well  the  divorce"  and
    continued to refer to the Appellant's father  as  "her  husband".   The
    judge observes (at paragraph 14) that,  "As  he  cannot  be  physically
    present, he exerts his authority and influence from the United  Kingdom
    through his mother".  There was simply no  evidence  that  the  child's
    mother was exerting any responsibility.  The evidence was that  it  was
    the grandmother because the child's father was working through his  own
    mother.  At the same  time,  the  judge  did  not  accept  willy  nilly
    everything that was said by the Sponsor.  This is because (at paragraph
    17) the judge rejected any suggestion that the mother had absolutely no
    role to play in the Appellant's life.  She found that  there  would  be
    some contact by the mother with her child.

10. But the judge had then gone on to say that, "However,  whether  or  not
    the mother maintains contact with the  Appellant,  I  find  she  is  no
    longer responsible for her.  Her affidavit dated in  April  2013  could
    certainly be considered as confirmation of this  ..."  (paragraph  17).
    Mr Vokes drew my attention to the older Tribunal determination of  Omar
    Sumani (HX/70205/1998) which was a "starred"  decision  by  Mr  Justice
    Collins, in which he had stated that,

         "The reality is that it is quite impossible to set out  a  detailed
         checklist of what must be done in all cases.  It will in many cases
         be  quite  unnecessary  to  set  out  the  evidence   regarded   as
         irrelevant, indeed, very few judges  would  recognise  that  as  an
         exercise they carry out in  giving  judgments  following  a  trial.
         ....  The only guidance needed is that the conclusions reached must
         be justified and it must be clear  that  any  adverse  findings  in
         particular are based on evidence put before the Adjudicator or  the
         Tribunal and a proper explanation must be given  to  show  why  the
         conclusions on the issues  of  substance  have  been  reached  ..."
         (paragraph 10).

11. There was no further reply from Mr Smart.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007.   This  is  for
    the following reasons.  First, the judge properly  sets  out  the  case
    being put forward by the Appellant, which is  that  her  mother  is  no
    longer actually involved in  her  upbringing  because  the  mother  and
    father are divorced (see paragraph 10).  Second,  the  judge  concludes
    that, "I accept and have no reason to doubt the Sponsor's evidence that
    culturally on divorce the husband gets custody of the children".   This
    is the first reason going to how the responsibility would shift to  the
    father.

13. The second reason are letters from the Appellant's school and from  her
    doctor both of which confirm the Appellant's father is named  in  their
    records.  These institutions have contact with the father.   The  third
    reason given is that the school letter is dated postdecision,  but  the
    judge is satisfied that it appertains to matters that  predate  of  the
    decision.  The fourth reason given  is  that,  following  on  from  the
    cultural responsibility taken on by the father, it is  he  who  remains
    financially responsible for all his children  and  that,  "I  note  the
    money transfer receipts and letter  from  the  money  transfer  company
    contained in the  bundle  which  named  the  Sponsor"  (paragraph  12).
    Finally, the sponsoring father visits Pakistan and  this  evidence  was
    also before the judge (see paragraph 13).

14. As against this, there was an affidavit  produced  by  the  Appellant's
    grandmother, which "confirms that she supervises the  children  in  his
    absence as an adult presence is  required"  and  from  this  the  judge
    concludes that, "There is no question that the Sponsor meets  the  test
    in TD Yemen, in that, he has control and direction of  the  Appellant's
    life".  At the hearing before Judge Lugunju the  Respondent's  approach
    was to suggest "that the evidence tells a  different  story,  that  the
    Appellant actually lives with her mother" but the judge held  that,  "I
    do not find any support for  this  suggestion;  there  is  no  evidence
    before me that leads me to this conclusion" (paragraph 15).

15. In the circumstances, I find that the present approach is  to  re-argue
    the case that has already been properly determined by Judge Lugunju and
    there is simply no error of law.  It was for the judge to make findings
    of fact.  She did so on the basis of  the  evidence  presented.   Those
    findings were open for her to make.

Decision

16. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

17. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015
