

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/14171/2013



                                 THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                             |Determination Promulgated|
|On June 27, 2014                                 |On July 1, 2014          |
|                                                 |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR MG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chowdhury (Legal Representatrive)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as the respondent and Mr  MG
    as the appellant.


 2. The appellant, born January 18, 1972, is a citizen of Georgia. On March
    26, 2013 he applied for entry clearance as a spouse of a person settled
    in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM and article 8 ECHR.

 3. The respondent refused his application on June 11, 2013 on the  grounds
    she was neither satisfied:

     a. The marriage was genuine and subsisting
     b. The parties intended to live together as husband and wife
     c. The maintenance requirements of Appendix FM were met.

 4. On July 2, 2013 the appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  respondent  reviewed
    her decision on December 10, 2013 but upheld the original decision.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bennett
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  14,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 31, 2014 he allowed his appeal.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on April 8, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Heynes  on  May
    12, 2014 who found it was arguable that  the  FtTJ  had  erred  in  his
    approach to the human rights claim and had not given  adequate  reasons
    for finding the  child's  medical  condition  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances.

 7. The matter was listed before me on the above date and the  sponsor  was
    in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8. Ms Everett submitted the FtTJ had misdirected himself in paragraph [36]
    and she argued the FtTJ had concentrated too much on paragraph EX.1  of
    Appendix FM and the fact the appellant  could  not  benefit  from  this
    provision as it did not apply to entry clearance  cases.  She  accepted
    the  FtTJ  gave  reasons  for  considering  the  case  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules but in considering proportionality the FtTJ placed no
    weight on the fact:


     a. The appellant did not satisfy the maintenance requirements  of  the
        Rules.
     b. The status quo could have been maintained.
     c. The fact that the  appellant  spent  long  periods  away  from  the
        family.


    The reports submitted were dated and  there  was  no  reliable  medical
    evidence to support the appellant's case.


    In summary, MS Everett submitted the FtTJ erred in his approach to  the
    article 8 argument even though the ultimate decision,  if  carried  out
    properly, was the same.


 9. Mr Chowdhury submitted there was no error in law.  The  FtTJ  concluded
    the appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules and then set out all
    of the factors he felt were relevant to the  appeal  under  article  8.
    Whilst he may not have mentioned Razgar [2004] UKHL  00027  he  clearly
    had  the  test  in  mind  as  he   ultimately   found   it   would   be
    disproportionate to refuse the appellant entry. He found  the  fact  it
    was unreasonable and unduly harsh to require their British daughter  to
    go and live  in  Georgia  especially  as  she  had  health  issues.  He
    submitted if there was an error in approach it was not material.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. The appellant applied for entry clearance to join his wife and  spouse.
    From the evidence presented it seems they met in Georgia  in  1997  and
    began a relationship shortly afterwards. That relationship ended  after
    eight months and the appellant's wife subsequently came to live in  the
    United Kingdom on September 21, 1999 and  later  became  a  naturalised
    British citizen. In August  2004  the  appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom and they rekindled their  relationship  and  the  sponsor  gave
    birth to their daughter, D, on May 24, 2005. The appellant's leave  had
    expired in February 2005.  After that date and until he left the United
    Kingdom he was an overstayer.


11. On July 24, 2012 he left the United  Kingdom  and  returned  home.  The
    sponsor and their daughter travelled to Georgia on September  11,  2012
    but were unable to settle for the reasons contained in  paragraph  [14]
    of the sponsor's witness statement. The evidence submitted to the  FtTJ
    suggested the appellant spent large  periods  of  time  away  from  the
    family through work (illegal work) although there was  a  letter  dated
    December 20, 2013 that suggested  from  September  2008  the  appellant
    worked as a parent support group member in the Georgian  school  D  was
    attending at that time. The FtTJ referred  in  paragraphs  [23],  [24],
    [31] and [32] to various reports and letters.

12. It is against this background that the FtTJ considered the application.
    At paragraph  [25]  of  his  determination  the  FtTJ  found  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
    FM of the Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant's  wife  received  income
    support and so they  could  not  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and as this was an entry  clearance  application  the  FtTJ
    correctly found the appellant could not apply under paragraph EX.1.  He
    identified that this was a case that could be considered outside of the
    Immigration Rules if there were good  arguable  grounds.  He  concluded
    there were and today Ms Everett does not submit that he was wrong to do
    so despite the original grounds of appeal.

13. Having  established  that  article  8  applied  the  FtTJ  should  have
    considered the appeal having regard to the  principles  established  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027. His approach is contained between  paragraphs
    [27] and [36] of his determination.

14. What he did was to consider what would have happened if he had remained
    in the United Kingdom instead of returning. He concluded that if he had
    remained he would have succeeded in  his  application  under  paragraph
    EX.1 because a successful application under  that  Rule  overrides  the
    failure to meet the maintenance requirement and  the  fact  he  was  in
    breach of the Immigration Rules as an overstayer.  He  found  it  would
    have been unreasonable to expect D to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  At
    paragraph [35] of his determination he concluded-

         "... It does not follow from this  that  the  appellant  should  be
         granted entry clearance because a policy decision has  been  taken,
         which has had parliamentary approval, that Section EX.1 should only
         apply to applications made in this country.  It  is  not  for  this
         Tribunal to substitute its views about matters of policy which have
         been approved by parliament simply because it might have reached  a
         different view."

15. Having established this thought  process  the  FtTJ  then  reached  his
    conclusion in paragraph [36] of his determination.  The  FtTJ  did  not
    consider whether the interference was in accordance  with  the  law  or
    whether the interference was in pursuit of one of the  legitimate  aims
    set out in Article 8(2). He merely concluded that consideration of  him
    leaving on what he said was probably correct legal advice at  the  time
    counterbalanced the policy decision and refusing him entry would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's family life.


16. The FtTJ  should  have  started  his  article  8  assessment  with  the
    following findings:

     a. There was family life between the appellant, his wife and child.
     b. Refusing his application would mean they could not live together in
        the United Kingdom as a family.
     c. The refusal was in accordance with the law  because  he  could  not
        meet the requirements of paragraphs E-ECP  3.1  and  E-ECP  3.3  of
        Appendix FM.
     d. The interference was in pursuit of one of the legitimate  aims  set
        out in Article 8(2) namely the economic well being of the country.

17. The FtTJ failed to consider the matters set out in paragraph [16] above
    and in particular subsections (c) and (d). His whole conclusion centred
    around the fact he would have met paragraph  EX.1  and  as  Ms  Everett
    argued this was an error. The FtTJ failed to have  any  regard  in  his
    assessment of proportionality of  the  fact  the  appellant  lived  and
    worked here illegally for seven  years  or  that  the  sponsor  was  on
    benefits and they could not meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Rules.


18. I therefore find that the FtTJ materially  erred  in  his  approach  to
    article 8. Both representatives accepted that no further  evidence  was
    necessary and the submissions made to me  along  with  the  evidence  I
    already had would be sufficient to enable me to remake the decision.

    ASSESSMENT UNDER ARTICLE 8 ECHR

19. Ms Everett does not dispute that the appellant had a good arguable case
    that would enable me to consider his appeal outside of the  Immigration
    Rules. She disputed his appeal should be allowed under article 8 ECHR.


20. I considered the Razgar tests in paragraphs [15]  and  [16]  above  and
    that is my starting  point.  Having  reached  the  position  I  did  in
    paragraph  [16]  above  I  must  then  consider  proportionality.   The
    decisions of R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 appear to give the  Rules  greater
    weight rather than merely being a starting point for the  consideration
    of the proportionality of an interference with Article 8 rights.

21. The Court of Appeal made clear in Haleemudeen v The Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558 it  is  necessary  to  find
    "compelling circumstances" for going outside the Rules.

22. The assessment of proportionality is not a  pure  question  of  law  or
    fact. In Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1045 Carnwath LJ stated that the assessment of proportionality
    involves factual judgments which are often not easy, and  as  to  which
    different tribunals, without illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
    different conclusions on the same case.


23. I therefore have approached  the  issue  of  proportionality  from  the
    premise that the appellant did not satisfy the Immigration  Rules  when
    he applied for entry clearance. His application failed for  the  reason
    set out in paragraph [16(c)] above. These  factors,  according  to  the
    decisions of various Courts and Tribunals, are  more  than  a  starting
    point and are significant factors to take into account when considering
    proportionality. I also accept that  as  the  appellant's  wife  is  on
    benefits the admission of the appellant into the United  Kingdom  could
    affect the economic well being of the country. I must also have  regard
    to  the  importance  of  immigration  control  because  the   appellant
    overstayed in the United Kingdom for seven years and worked  illegally.
    He deliberately chose to remain here and work even though  he  knew  he
    had no right to remain and he had spoken to various legal advisors  and
    had even visited the Georgian Embassy to ascertain his legal position.

24.  Mr  Chowdhury  submitted  the  following  matters   outweighed   these
    arguments:

     a. Both the appellant's wife and D are British citizens  although  the
        appellant's became a naturalised  citizen  as  against  being  born
        British.
     b. D has lived almost all her life in the United Kingdom.
     c. D has significant ties to the United Kingdom as  evidenced  by  the
        papers in front of me.
     d. The appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
        wife.
     e. The appellant lived with his wife and child in the  United  Kingdom
        for large periods of time and took part in school activities.
     f. The appellant has demonstrated an ability to work and support  both
        himself and his family.

25. The Tribunal in MK (Best interests of child) [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC)
    set out the correct approach to take  where  there  are  children.  The
    Tribunal found at paragraphs [23] and [24]-


         "23. There is in our view a fourth point of principle that  can  be
         inferred from the Supreme Court's judgments in  ZH  (Tanzania).  As
         the use by Baroness Hale and Lord Hope of the  adjective  'overall'
         makes clear, the consideration of the best interests of  the  child
         involves a weighing up of various factors. Although the  conclusion
         of the best interests of the child  consideration  must  of  course
         provide a yes or no answer to the question,  'Is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child for the child and/or  the  parent(s)  facing
         expulsion/deportation  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom?',  the
         assessment cannot be reduced to that.  Key  features  of  the  best
         interests of the child consideration and its overall  balancing  of
         factors, especially those which count for and against an  expulsion
         decision,  must  be  kept  in  mind  when  turning  to  the   wider
         proportionality assessment of whether or not the  factors  relating
         to  the  importance  of  maintaining   immigration   control   etc.
         cumulatively reinforce or outweigh the best interests of the child,
         depending on what they have been found to be.?


         24. The need to keep in mind the 'overall' factors  making  up  the
         best interests of the child consideration must not  be  downplayed.
         Failure to do so may give rise to an error of law although,  as  AJ
         (India) makes clear, what matters is not so much the  form  of  the
         inquiry but rather whether there has been substantive consideration
         of the best interests of the child. The consideration  must  always
         be fact-sensitive and depending on its workings-out will affect the
         Article 8(2) proportionality assessment in different ways. If,  for
         example, all the factors weighed in the best interests of the child
         consideration point overwhelmingly in favour of  the  child  and/or
         relevant parent(s) remaining in the UK, that is very likely to mean
         that only very strong countervailing factors can outweigh  it.  If,
         at the other extreme, all the factors  of  relevance  to  the  best
         interests of the child consideration (save for the  child's  and/or
         parent(s) own claim that they want to remain) point  overwhelmingly
         to the child's interests being best served by  him  returning  with
         his parent(s) to his country of origin (or to one  of  his  parents
         being expelled leaving him to remain living here), then very little
         by way of countervailing  considerations  to  do  with  immigration
         control etc. may be necessary in order for  the  conclusion  to  be
         drawn that the decision appealed against was and is proportionate."

26. A useful summary of the learning on the "best interests" of children in
    the context of immigration is to be found in the determination of Azimi-
    Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]
    UKUT 197 (IAC):-


         "13.   It is not the case that the best interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:


        i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of  children  to
           be with both their parents and if both parents are being removed
           from the United Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so
           should dependent children  who  form  part  of  their  household
           unless there are reasons to the contrary.


       ii) It is generally in  the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

      iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
           can lead to development of social, cultural and educational ties
           that it would be inappropriate to disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
           compelling reason to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to  lengthy
           residence is not clear cut but past and  present  policies  have
           identified seven years as a relevant period.

       iv) Apart from the  terms  of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child than the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable.

        v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without  leave  or
           the reasonable expectation of leave to enter  or  remain,  while
           claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to
           private life deserving of respect in the absence of  exceptional
           factors. In any event, protection of the economic well being  of
           society amply justifies removal in such cases."


27. Even more recently, the Supreme Court has held as follows in Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74:-


         "24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated that,
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the  Congo.  But  other  things
         were not equal. They were not British citizens. They had  no  right
         to future education and health care in this country. They were part
         of a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an
         age when their emotional needs could only be fully met  within  the
         immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United
         Kingdom society would have been predominantly  in  the  context  of
         that family unit. Most significantly, the decision-maker  concluded
         that they could be removed to the Republic of Congo in the care  of
         their parents without serious detriment to their well-being ..."


28. Against the matters set out above in paragraph [23] Mr Chowdhury's main
    argument is that D has lived her whole life in the United Kingdom apart
    from a short period when she and her  mother  attempted  to  settle  in
    Georgia. She is a British citizen and  has  now  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for nine years save for  a  short  period  when  she  lived  in
    Georgia. D, although able to converse  in  Georgian,  clearly  has  her
    roots in the United Kingdom and preferred to speak English.  These  are
    factors I must take into account. There are school  and  other  reports
    and having considered the reports I accept D has had some  difficulties
    but the FtTJ recorded her asthma problems would  not  be  significantly
    greater in Georgia than they would be here if she chose to return there
    but the reports, with the exception of the school report, are dated.


29. The London Borough of Hounslow provided a statement  October  19,  2011
    into  her  special  educational  needs.   This   made   a   number   of
    recommendations including that she attend a mainstream school and  that
    she see an occupational therapist. Ealing Hospital  provided  a  report
    dated December 21, 2012  and  that  concluded  she  was  making  steady
    progress in  the  areas  addressed  by  Occupational  Therapy  and  was
    discharged from the service. There are  no  updated  reports  from  any
    organisation and the only recent letter from any  organisation  is  one
    dated March 12, 2013 from D's school that indicated she  has  presented
    with challenging behaviour. There is no reliable  evidence  to  suggest
    that this is due to her father living in Georgia.

30. I have therefore considered all of these matters and whilst I note  the
    arguments presented by Mr Chowdhury I have concluded that refusing  the
    appellant entry clearance would not be disproportionate. My reasons are
    as follows:-

     a. The appellant overstayed seven years and only left because  he  was
        advised he would be  unable  to  succeed  with  an  application  to
        remain. During his time here he worked illegally.  He  deliberately
        chose to remain here and was aware he had no status after  February
        2005.


     b. His application under the Immigration Rules failed and as case  law
        states that is an important point to take into consideration in the
        proportionality assessment.

     c. D is British and she is not being  required  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom.  Ideally,  both  her  parents  should  bring  her  up  but
        sometimes that is not always possible.

     d. The evidence is that she has spent lengthy periods apart  from  her
        father and it was the appellant's choice not to live full-time with
        his family.

     e. It has been said many times that being British is not a trump  card
        but merely one of the factors to take into account. D is not  being
        required to leave this country as she  can  remain  here  with  her
        mother until such time the appellant can  meet  the  Rules.  D  can
        continue to take advantage of all the United Kingdom has to offer.


     f. If the appellant met the Immigration Rules then he would of  course
        be admitted. The fact he did not meant I have to  consider  all  of
        the circumstances. An application under article 8 does not  mean  I
        ignore the negative aspects of the appeal.  I  have  to  take  into
        account all matters  including  the  economic  well  being  of  the
        country and the importance of immigration control.


31. For these reasons I dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


32. There is a material error of law.


33. I set aside the original decision and I remake the decision  I  dismiss
    the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.


34. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order has been made in the First-tier Tribunal and I extend that order.



Signed:                Dated: 01 July 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no alteration to the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
