
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/15051/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 February 2016                      |On 1 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            sellapackiam arumugam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Somal
    following consideration of the Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the
    Claimant's case on the papers at Stoke on 20 August 2015.  The Claimant
    is a national of Sri Lanka born on 20 January 1945.  An application was
    made for entry clearance for her to join her  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom as an adult dependant relative.  This application  was  refused
    on 21 October 2014 because the Respondent  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    balance  of  probabilities  that  the  Claimant  met  the  relationship
    requirements; nor that the Claimant required long-term personal care to
    perform every day tasks and could not obtain this level of care in  Sri
    Lanka nor were the financial requirements met. In her  entry  clearance
    application, the Claimant stated that she had no medical conditions and
    was capable of caring for herself on a daily basis such as washing  and
    dressing herself and preparing food.  She stated that her  husband  had
    passed away in July 2013.  She also stated that she was no longer  able
    to travel to the United Kingdom due to age and illness and she suffered
    from unipolar depressive illness.

 2. In the appeal bundle it was asserted that she  now  required  long-term
    personal care as she was suffering  great  weight  loss  and  was  also
    failing to eat properly.  She no longer undertook daily  activities  at
    home; there was no one to assist her; she was aged 70 and  lived  alone
    and she could not now travel independently to visit  her  sons  in  the
    United Kingdom.  There was a letter from Sivaraam Medicines and Surgery
    dated 23 November 2014 stating that the Claimant had been a patient  at
    the clinic for unipolar depressive illness for the last four years  and
    her illness was aggravated by the death of her husband.

 3. The appeal was reconsidered by an Entry Clearance Manager on  19  March
    2015 and in the light of additional evidence, the ECM  found  that  the
    financial requirement was arguably met but he upheld  the  decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer in respect of the other issues.

 4. In her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal found at [13] that the
    Claimant cannot meet the Immigration Rules.  She further found at  [14]
    that the Claimant has not  shown  that  due  to  her  age,  illness  or
    disability she requires long-term personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks and at [15] "I am not satisfied the Appellant requires  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks and  even  with  the  financial
    support from her Sponsor the required level of care is not  available".
    She further found  at  [16]  in  respect  of  further  evidence  as  to
    financial requirements that this was post decision evidence that  could
    and should have been sent with the application  and  so  could  not  be
    taken into consideration.

 5. The Judge then turned to consider Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights and found at [22]:

         "In all the circumstances, considering all of the evidence  in  the
         round and the compelling circumstances of this Appellant, I do  not
         consider it would be reasonable to exclude her from the UK so as to
         prevent her enjoying a family life with her sons, their  wives  and
         her grandchildren."

 6. In an application made,  in  time,  on  18  September  2015  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on
    the basis that, having found that the Claimant could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules, the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially misdirected
    herself in law in considering a freewheeling Article 8 assessment; that
    this was contrary to the decision in SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  387
    and it was clear that the inability of  the  Claimant  to  satisfy  the
    Rules is a weighty factor in assessing an Article 8  claim  outside  of
    the Rules; the Judge had failed to reconcile the factors in that aspect
    of the case and in particular within her own  decision  she  failed  to
    reconcile the factors relied upon by her in allowing the  appeal  under
    Article 8 with  her  conclusion  at  paragraph  15  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the Claimant  required  long-term  personal  care.   The
    grounds further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to
    have regard to the public interest statements codified in Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act, namely that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Easterman on 18 January 2016 on the basis that it  was  wholly  unclear
    how the family life the judge  found  had  been  established  had  been
    interfered with by the current decision; that no consideration  appears
    to have been given  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  right  to  control
    immigration nor to the fact  that  the  Claimant  failed  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules in the category in which she sought to come.

 8. The judge added a further point which is this: being an out of  country
    appeal it is unclear whether the judge's  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules  has  taken  place  against  the  background  of  the
    evidence of the position at the date of the ECO's decision  or  at  the
    time of the hearing.

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me the Secretary of State was represented by Mr T
    Wilding and the  Claimant  by  Ms  A  Benfield  of  Counsel.   I  heard
    submissions in some detail from both parties and I  also  was  provided
    with a copy of a Rule 24 response on behalf of the Claimant. I found at
    the hearing that the Judge erred materially in law for the reasons  set
    out by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   I
    consider that the Judge's findings are inadequate to  explain  why  she
    considered the appeal should be allowed with regard to Article 8 of the
    Human Rights Convention outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  particularly
    given her findings at [13] to [15] that the Claimant could not meet the
    Rules and on that basis it was incumbent upon the  judge  to  correctly
    direct herself in respect of the jurisprudence vis SS (Congo)  (op.cit)
    and to find that there were  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances
    that justified allowing the appeal outside the Rules.

10. In addition, although it is not incumbent upon the judge to set out the
    terms of Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 if the public  interest  factors
    are contained within her decision read as a whole, nowhere  within  the
    decision is the  public  interest  referred  to  as  a  factor  in  any
    assessment of proportionality.  For  these  reasons  I  find  that  the
    Judge's decision cannot stand because it is vitiated by material error.







Notice of Decision


11. I allow the appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer and remit the  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for an oral hearing on a de novo  basis
    before a Judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Somal.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

