

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
No: OA/15547/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
        Determination Promulgated
on 12 August 2014
                 on 26 August 2014

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BOMBAY


                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMED SHOAIB MALIK

Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr  Malik

                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The respondent, a citizen of India, applied for entry clearance as the
      partner of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  this  country.  That
      application was refused and an appeal against  the  decision  allowed.
      The entry clearance officer  concluded  that  the  sponsor  could  not
      provide the evidence demanded by Appendix  FM-SE  that  the  financial
      requirements of the rules were met. The judge accepted the evidence of
      the sponsor that the financial requirements of the rules could be met.


   2.  The  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that   Appendix   FM-SE   sets   out
      comprehensively what types of evidence are required,  and  one  matter
      that is demanded is bank statements that cover the same six months  as
      the pay slips that have been produced. With regard to  the  employment
      with Hafiz Foods these bank statements have not been produced.


   3.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had  not
      explained how the requirements of Appendix FM-SE  had  been  met.   Mr
      Malik accepts that the bank statements required by paragraph 2(c) have
      not been provided. He argues that as the sponsor was paid in cash they
      could not be provided. Mr Duffy points out that there would be nothing
      to stop the sponsor paying the money into the bank herself. Be that as
      it may, it seems to me that the requirement is,  on  the  face  of  it
      absolute.

   4. Mr Malik then argues that 2A(i) of the  appendix  gives  the  decision
      maker a discretion to grant an application  if  a  P60  has  not  been
      provided. Mr Malik says that there is a discretion there so why should
      there not be one here. This part of the appendix covers a very limited
      area and   is not one of the required documents. This gives no support
      for a general discretion to conclude that the requirements are met  in
      the absence of the specified documents.

   5. I conclude that the need for the required documents  is  absolute  and
      the judge erred in law in reaching the conclusion that the  respondent
      (through the sponsor) could meet the  financial  requirements  without
      producing the required evidence.

   6. It follows that the judge erred in law with regard to the  Immigration
      Rules and a decision must be substituted dismissing the appeal as  far
      as the rules are concerned. Mr Duffy accepts that the judge failed  to
      deal with article 8 and agrees that that matter must  be  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a decision. Whether the  findings  of  the
      judge of first instance can be relied on at that  hearing  will  be  a
      matter for the judge hearing the case to decide, bearing in mind  that
      these findings were made on an impermissible basis.


   7.  It follows that the original judge made an error of law  with  regard
      to the  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  a  decision  is
      substituted dismissing the appeal under the  rules.  The  question  of
      article 8 is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  decision  on
      that point.

The appeal is accordingly allowed to that extent




Designated  Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                15 August 2014



