
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Oa/15860/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2013                             |On 3rd September 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS SALINA GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Thomas, Counsel for SAM Solicitors, Sutton,
Surrey


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Entry Clearance  Officer  but
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  born  on  25  August  1999.   She
    appealed the decision of the respondent dated 6  August  2012  refusing
    her entry clearance to the United Kingdom with a view to settlement  as
    the child of a parent, in this case, her mother Mrs Kasi Ghale, who  is
    present and settled in the United Kingdom, under paragraph 297 of HC395
    as amended.  The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore on
    3 April 2013 and dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds in a determination promulgated on 9 April 2013.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and there was an error of law  hearing
    before me on 23 June 2013 at Field House.  I found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination and directed that the appeal
    be reheard on all issues.  My determination to this effect is dated  on
    10 July 2013.

 4. This is the 2nd stage hearing of the appeal on all issues.

 5. The Presenting Officer referred to the Article 8 issue relating to  the
    appellant's grandmother who presently cares for the appellant in Nepal.
     She has been issued with a visa entitling her to come to reside in the
    United Kingdom as the  widow  of  a  Gurkha  soldier.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the relevant date in this case is  the  date  of
    the decision so this issue may not be relevant, although  it  could  be
    relevant in a future application.  At the hearing on 23 June 2013 I had
    asked for further evidence about this to be produced for this  hearing.



 6. This matter has been referred to in the appellant's  skeleton  argument
    and I  asked  when  the  visa  application  had  been  granted  to  the
    appellant's grandmother.  I was told it had been  granted  between  the
    date of the application and the date of the decision.   Ms  Thomas  for
    the appellant submitted that this matter was raised in the  application
    and the sponsor's witness  statement,  which  is  in  the  respondent's
    bundle, also referred to this and so it was a  live  issue  before  the
    First-tier Judge.  Ms Thomas submitted that more evidence has now  been
    provided so that the full picture can be assessed at this hearing.  She
    submitted that this evidence is pertinent as it was foreseeable at  the
    date of the  decision.    She  submitted  that  this  might  have  been
    different, if subsequent to the application, this issue had been raised
    but that is not the case.

 7. The appellant's representative referred to her skeleton argument  which
    refers to 2 cases being TD, Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 and  Mundeba,  DRC
    [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC).  She apologised for  forgetting  to  bring  these
    cases to the court with her.

 8. I was handed up to date evidence of remittances since the date  of  the
    decision along with original phone cards.

 9. The sponsor took the stand and adopted her 3 witness statements,  being
    her statement which was provided with the application, which is in  the
    respondent's  bundle,  her  statement  dated  25  March  2013  and  her
    statement dated 12 August 2013.

10. Ms Thomas asked the sponsor Kasi Ghale, the mother  of  the  appellant,
    about her mother-in-law, (the grandmother the appellant is staying with
    in Nepal), coming to the United Kingdom.  She asked  what  arrangements
    had been made for Salina's care when this happens and the witness  said
    she has not found anyone to look after Salina.  Mrs Ghale was  referred
    to her second witness statement in which she mentions Laxmi Gurung  and
    Chandra Kala, in Nepal.  She was asked who they are and she  said  they
    are her cousins and are distantly related  to  her  but  they  are  not
    close.  She was asked if she has asked them to look after the appellant
    and she said she has not, as they both have a  lot  of  children,  some
    around Salina's age.  She was asked  why  they  could  not  look  after
    Salina.  She said that their financial situations are  not  strong  and
    she does not think Salina would like to live with them.

11. The sponsor was asked what her worries for the appellant  are  and  she
    said she has countless worries.  Salina is 14 and  if  she  has  no-one
    looking after her she could be raped, she could become a drug addict or
    she could be kidnapped.  She was asked if she has tried to persuade her
    mother-in-law to stay in Nepal to look after  the  appellant,  but  she
    said she has talked to her about this but her mother-in-law  said  that
    the appellant is a teenager and she is finding  it  difficult  to  look
    after her now.  She said she cannot ask her to stay in  Nepal  to  look
    after her daughter as she is entitled to come to  the  United  Kingdom.
    She has a visa based on her now deceased husband having been a  Gurkha.



12. The Presenting Officer questioned the witness asking her when she  last
    visited her daughter in Nepal. She said that was in December 2012.   It
    was put to her that she was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) on
    7 October 2010 so why had she not visited her daughter until then.  She
    said she had not had a passport.  She was asked why it took her 2 years
    to get a passport and she said she had not  realised  she  could  apply
    after one year of ILR, she had thought it was 2 years.  She  was  asked
    why she had not visited her recently if she is concerned about her  and
    she said she is planning to go to Nepal in October.

13. The sponsor was asked why she cannot go to  Nepal  to  look  after  the
    appellant.  She said that she can go back and give her love but that is
    all she can give her in Nepal.  She said that if the appellant comes to
    the United Kingdom, she can give  her  financial  support  and  a  good
    education through the State.

14. Mrs Ghale was asked about the money transfers from her to her mother-in-
    law and why they are after the date of decision of  August  2012.   She
    was asked how she sent money before that and she said there are  a  lot
    of Nepalese people in the United Kingdom and she  gave  them  money  to
    take to the appellant.  She said she had not known she needed proof  of
    this.

15. The Presenting Officer asked the sponsor why none of these  people  are
    in court today to support her claim and confirm that they took money to
    her mother-in-law in Nepal.  She said there were many people  involved.
    She was asked where she got  the  money  from  that  she  sent  through
    friends and if it was in her bank account but she said she used  to  do
    domestic work and get paid in cash so she gave these people cash.

16. The Presenting Officer was asked why there is  no  evidence  of  school
    reports or letters from the school about fees being paid before  August
    2012.  The sponsor said she used to get reports on  the  telephone  and
    her mother-in-law would go to the school in person to pay the fees.

17. The appellant's representative asked her about this  asking  where  her
    mother-in-law got the money from to pay the fees and she said she  sent
    it to her.

18. The Presenting Officer made his  submissions  relying  on  the  refusal
    letter of 6 August 2012.  He submitted that the issue in this  case  is
    sole responsibility and the problem is that there is a lack of evidence
    to prove the sponsor's claims.  The Presenting  Officer  admitted  that
    there was an error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination but
    submitted  that  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  to  prove   sole
    responsibility  to  the   required   standard   of   the   balance   of
    probabilities.

19. Mr Bramble submitted that he does not dispute the payments and letters,
    subsequent to the date of the decision but he  referred  to  the  total
    lack of evidence before the date of the decision.  He referred to there
    being no witnesses and no statements from anyone to say that  they  had
    taken money to the appellant from the sponsor  and  this  is  a  second
    stage hearing so the sponsor could have arranged this.  He referred  to
    the sponsor stating that she gave cash to the couriers, as she had been
    paid in cash but this does not help, as no bank statement can be  shown
    to confirm that she did this.   It  was  submitted  that  there  is  no
    evidence at all to show that money was paid to the school or  was  sent
    to the appellant or her grandmother for the appellant's needs in Nepal.



20. I was referred to the letter from Siddharthanagar  Municipality  Office
    which states that the appellant's father has been living in  India  and
    has remarried there and the  letter  from  Paschimanchle  English  High
    School in Nepal which states  that  the  appellant's  mother  has  been
    paying all the expenses for the appellant's studies.    The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that these are self-serving.  The information in them
    has been provided by the appellant's mother-in-law.  It  was  submitted
    there is no independent verification of either of these matters.

21. The sponsor has been to Nepal but there is still the question  of  sole
    responsibility and the shortage of reasons why she did  not  visit  her
    daughter as soon as she was granted ILR in the UK.  Today  the  sponsor
    has stated that she is concerned as her mother-in-law is coming to  the
    United Kingdom and the appellant will be left with no-one in Nepal.  It
    was submitted it is therefore strange that the sponsor has not gone out
    to Nepal to put things in place to help her daughter.

22. It was submitted that respondent is not satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that Kasi Ghale  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant.

23. With regard to Article 8 and the evidence relating to  the  appellant's
    grandmother's visa entitling her to come to the United Kingdom, it  was
    submitted that this was raised in the refusal letter and the  visa  was
    granted before the date of the decision.  It was submitted however that
    the Article 8 case is based  on  the  situation  at  the  date  of  the
    decision  and  at  that  time  the  appellant's  grandmother,  who   is
    responsible for her day to day care and has been since 2002, was  still
    in Nepal with the appellant, in fact  she  is  still  there  now.   The
    sponsor has only visited briefly and on the face of it the only support
    she has given her daughter is financial support and  there  is  even  a
    lack  of  evidence  about  this.   It  was  submitted  that  until  the
    appellant's grandmother comes to the United Kingdom the status quo does
    not change.

24. It was submitted that there is nothing to stop  the  sponsor  going  to
    Nepal to live with the appellant.  She is not a refugee in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The reason she states she  does  not  want  to  do  that,  is
    because her and her daughter's quality of life  will  not  be  as  good
    there as it will be in the United Kingdom.

25. With regard to proportionality, the balancing exercise has to be  based
    on the appellant's family life, the relationship of the appellant  with
    her grandmother and the relationship of the appellant with her  mother.
     The Presenting Officer submitted that the parties  cannot  succeed  in
    the balancing exercise because of the lack of evidence to  support  the
    appellant's claim.  The balancing exercise must tip in  favour  of  the
    respondent.

26. I was asked to dismiss the appeal under the Rules and on the Article  8
    issues.

27. Ms Thomas for the appellant  made  her  submissions  referring  to  her
    skeleton argument.  She submitted that with regard to the Rules she  is
    relying on paragraph 297(i)(e) and paragraph 297(i)(f).  These are  the
    paragraphs relating to sole responsibility and serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations making exclusion of a child undesirable.



28. The primary issue raised by the respondent is the absence of  evidence.
    I was asked to find that the sponsor is very straightforward and I  was
    asked  to  give  weight  to  the  letters  from  the  school  and   the
    Municipality.  Although some of the evidence post dates the decision it
    relates to the ongoing state of affairs.

29. It was submitted that it would be improper to find that  the  sponsor's
    influence over her child, the appellant,  has only  taken  place  after
    the date of the decision.  I was asked to give weight to the  sponsor's
    witness statements.  It is clear from  these  that  she  has  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant and I was referred to the said case of
    TD (Yemen).  I was  asked  to  find  that  the  sponsor  has  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant  and  has  been  responsible  for  the
    continuing control and direction  of  the  appellant  relating  to  the
    important decisions about  her  upbringing.   Clearly  the  appellant's
    grandmother has practically dealt with the day to day  decision  making
    for the appellant but her education, her health  care  and  her  social
    life have been dealt with by the sponsor.

30. With regard to the sponsor not immediately going to Nepal after she was
    granted ILR, it was submitted that she went 18 months  later  and  that
    once she was granted ILR she then had to  make  arrangements,  such  as
    saving  for  flights,  taking  time  off  work  and  getting  documents
    together.  It was submitted that the sponsor has kept in touch with her
    daughter regularly and has kept in touch with her school.  Recently she
    arranged for the appellant to get extra lessons, because she  had  been
    told she  falling behind.  It was submitted that the sponsor  has  been
    pro-active.

31. It was submitted that the sponsor  has  been  very  upset  during  this
    hearing and  is generally very upset because her daughter is  going  to
    be left on her own in Nepal.  It  was  submitted  that  this  is  where
    paragraph 297(i)(f) comes in. It was foreseeable that  the  appellant's
    grandmother would be coming to the United Kingdom and this   means  the
    appellant will be left in Nepal without any guidance.  It was submitted
    that she is only 14 years old and requires adult  guidance  and  I  was
    asked to find that the appellant's concern about her is justified.  The
    sponsor has put no arrangements in place for the appellant  and  it  is
    not clear how the appellant will manage if, for example, she takes  ill
    or whether she will even go to school as she  will  have  no  emotional
    support.  It  was  submitted  that  when  all  matters  are  considered
    cumulatively  there  are  serious  and  compelling  considerations  and
    paragraph 297(i)(f) has been satisfied.

32. With regard to the  Article  8  issue,  it  was  submitted  that  these
    compelling and compassionate considerations form an important  part  of
    the Article 8 claim.  I was again referred to the skeleton argument and
    the said case of Mundeba, relating to the best interests of the  child.
    The scope of the section 55 duty  extends  only  to  children  who  are
    within the United Kingdom, but the Tribunal states in  this  case  "The
    exercise of the duty by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  assess  the
    application under the Immigration Rules, as to whether there are family
    or other  considerations  making  the  child's  exclusion  undesirable,
    inevitably involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best
    interests require."  It was submitted that for a 14 year old girl to be
    left with no support  in  a  country  like  Nepal  must  be  looked  at
    sympathetically.  Although she and her mother have been  separated  for
    some time, her mother and her grandmother are her family.  She  is  now
    going to lose  the  physical  presence  of  her  grandmother.   It  was
    submitted that her grandmother has compensated to  an  extent  for  the
    fact that her  mother  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom.   When  her
    grandmother leaves Nepal there will be no physical  presence  with  the
    appellant.  All she will have will be visits and it was submitted  that
    the impact  of  the  appellant's  grandmother  leaving  Nepal  will  be
    significant.

33. It was submitted that the respondent has conceded that if the appellant
    comes to the United Kingdom she will be maintained with no recourse  to
    public funds.  Ms Thomas submitted that this appeal should  be  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules but if not,  Article  8  of  ECHR  must  be
    engaged.  I was asked to allow the appeal.
]
Determination

34. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    the balance of probabilities.

35. I have considered all the evidence on file, the oral evidence given  at
    the hearing, the submissions of both parties and the skeleton  argument
    of the Appellant's representative.

36. The relevant issues under the Rules are whether the  sponsoring  parent
    has sole responsibility for the appellant and whether there are serious
    or compelling family or other considerations which  make  exclusion  of
    the child undesirable.

37. In this case sole  responsibility  is  extremely  difficult  to  assess
    because of the lack of evidence provided.  I believe that  the  sponsor
    and the appellant are in touch with each other and that the sponsor  is
    also in touch with her mother-in-law who cares  for  the  appellant  in
    Nepal.  The letter from the school and the letter from the Municipality
    are however self-serving.  They relate what they have been told by  the
    appellant's grandmother.  The appellant has  been  separated  from  her
    mother since 2002.  The sponsor states that  she  sends  money  to  the
    appellant and her mother-in-law but the evidence about this is lacking.
     It was clear what was required to support this claim but  the  sponsor
    has not even produced witness statements from  people  who  she  states
    took money from her to the appellant in Nepal.  The evidence  that  has
    been  provided  post  dates  the  decision.   Sole  responsibility   is
    difficult to prove and in this case it has not been proven.  I find the
    sponsor to be credible but her witness statements are the only evidence
    of what she does for her daughter.

38. Paragraph 297 of the Rules has not been satisfied in all its aspects.

39.  With  regard  to  the  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations, I have noted the said case of Mundeba. When the child's
    welfare and best interests are considered it  is  clearly  not  in  the
    appellant's best interests that her grandmother leaves Nepal to come to
    the United Kingdom leaving her in Nepal with no-one to take care of her
    but at the date of the decision and at today's date, her grandmother is
    in Nepal taking care of the appellant.  The date of the decision is the
    applicable date.  The appellant's mother  has  stated  that  she  feels
    unable to ask her mother-in-law to continue to stay in  Nepal  to  look
    after the appellant.  That is  understandable.   When  her  grandmother
    leaves Nepal the appellant will be left without family support  but  at
    present she is still being looked  after  by  her  grandmother  and  at
    present this is what is in her best interests.  She  can  remain  there
    and her grandmother can continue to look after her.  If her grandmother
    leaves Nepal then the situation will be different as the appellant will
    then  be  left  in  a  situation  of  both   emotional   and   physical
    vulnerability.

40. The sponsor states that she intends to go to Nepal in October to  visit
    her daughter.  It is in October that her grandmother states she will be
    leaving Nepal.  At that time the appellant's mother can  either  remain
    in Nepal with her daughter or the appellant  can make a new application
    in the new circumstances in which she will find  herself.   At  present
    the appellant's family life is with her grandmother.  She does  have  a
    bond with her mother but they have been apart for 11 years.

41. I have considered the 5 steps narrated in the  case  of  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  Proportionality  has  to  be  dealt  with.   At  present  the
    appellant is living in Nepal with her grandmother and attending school.
     She is being properly cared for.  When the best interests of the child
    are considered, her best interests are for her to remain in Nepal  with
    her grandmother.  If she remains in Nepal there will be no interference
    with her family and private life.  It is only if her situation changes,
    which it is likely to do but may not, that it could be disproportionate
    for her to remain there. Her mother's evidence is that she will  be  in
    the United Kingdom and her grandmother  will  also  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

42. Based on the appellant's situation I find that the application does not
    meet the terms of the Immigration Rules and I find that  Article  8  of
    ECHR is not engaged.


                                  DECISION

43. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

44. I dismiss the human rights appeal.

45. Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed                                  Date 3rd September 2013


Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
