
IAC-AH--V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15998/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 NOVEMBER 2014                          |On 26 NOVEMBER 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                 MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

                          MISS NARMELA PARTAB SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adama-Adams (Counsel instructed by Rest Harrow)

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This matter comes before me to consider if there is a  material  error
      of law in the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Kanagaratnam)  determination
      promulgated on 24th July 2014 in which the appeal was dismissed  under
      the Immigration Rules.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Guyana and her date  of  birth  is  23rd
      March 1975. On 2nd July 2013 the Respondent  refused  her  application
      for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of the Rules.

Background

   3. The sponsor travelled to Guyana on 30th January 2013 and  married  the
      Appellant on 22nd February 2013. The Respondent considered that  there
      was little evidence of a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship;  the
      relationship was short and there was limited evidence of contact.  The
      Respondent considered the  current  application  on  its  own  merits,
      although reference was made to similarities with a  previous  marriage
      between the sponsor and another Guyanese national  which  resulted  in
      divorce proceedings after she was refused entry clearance on 10th  May
      2011.

   4. In a determination the  Tribunal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
      sponsor's evidence in general  was  credible  and  accepted  that  his
      intention was to live with his wife permanently  [13].   The  Tribunal
      found documentary evidence referred to as "letters  from  the  Baptist
      church and other sources produced post decision"  were  in  fact  post
      decision and declined to take  it  into  account.  The  Tribunal  made
      reference to section 85(5) Nationality Immigration & Asylum  2002  Act
      ("the 2002 Act").

   5. In assessing the intentions of the Appellant, the Tribunal had  regard
      to all of the evidence including the sponsor's evidence, and his claim
      that she (the Appellant) was a millionaire, that he sent to her  $2000
      to establish  that  he  was  in  a  relationship  with  her,  and  the
      photographs of the couple.  The Tribunal found  the  relationship  and
      acquaintance pre marriage to be short and a  letter  [unsigned]  dated
      27th March 2013 from the Appellant to be self-serving.   The  Tribunal
      placed weight on what it found to be an "almost  bizarre"  explanation
      from the sponsor for why his adult children did  not  attend  to  give
      evidence, when they had attended the wedding.  The  sponsor  explained
      that they would not be aware of the relationship between him  and  the
      Appellant. The Tribunal alluded to the existence of a 30 year age  gap
      between the Appellant and the sponsor  and  also  to  the  fact  of  a
      previous marriage that the sponsor had entered into lasting  9  months
      and ending in  divorce  in  January  2012,  just  before  the  current
      relationship began. The Tribunal found no  independent  evidence  from
      the Appellant to demonstrate her intentions to live with  the  sponsor
      permanently.

Grounds of appeal

   6. Ground 1 - the Tribunal misapplied section 85(5) 2002 Act  by  failing
      to take into account documentary evidence, letter from Baptist  church
      and other documents dated after the date of decision, found to be post
      decision. The documents  appertained  to circumstances in existence at
      the date of decision.

   7. Ground 2 - the Tribunal failed to make adequate  credibility  findings
      in respect of the sponsor's evidence. Reliance was placed  on  MK(duty
      to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641(IAC).

   8. Ground 3 - the Tribunal failed to make adequate findings in respect of
      crucial  documentary  evidence  even  though  referred   to   in   the
      determination, for example  money  remittance  evidence,  contact  and
      photographs.

   9. Ground 4 - the findings that the marriage was  short  and  the  letter
      self-serving were unsustainable findings without more.

Permission

  10. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on  6th
      October 2014 on all the grounds.

The hearing

  11. I heard submissions from Mr Adama-Adams and Mr Walker.  Mr Adama-Adams
      submitted that there were errors of law in the decision;  specifically
      the weight placed on  the  age  gap  of  30  years  and  the  negative
      inference drawn from the failure of the sponsor's  adult  children  to
      attend the First-tier hearing. I drew  to  his  attention  that  these
      issues did not form part of the grounds of appeal advanced. He  sought
      leave to amend his grounds of appeal, which I refused.  The  Appellant
      had  ample  opportunity  in  which  to  make  a  procedurally  correct
      application for leave to amend the grounds of appeal in advance of the
      hearing. It was too late to do so at this stage, and in  any  event  I
      was satisfied that the matters raised amounted  to  disagreement  with
      findings that the Tribunal was  entitled  to  make  on  the  available
      evidence. I had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      represented at the hearing but that the grounds were drafted by  legal
      representatives.

  12. Mr Adama-Adams relied on the second ground  of  appeal  and  submitted
      that  the  failure  to  make  adequate  credibility  findings  was   a
      significant error. The Appellant was not represented at  the  hearing.
      The sponsor attended the hearing and gave evidence.  He  claimed  that
      he had produced and given to the Judge some 8 cards which the Tribunal
      looked at and then returned to him. Mr Adama-Adams submitted that  the
      8 cards formed the post decision evidence referred  to  in  the  first
      ground of appeal and which  was  evidence  of  affection  between  the
      parties.

  13. Mr Walker responded that there had been a full review of  the  refusal
      by the Entry Clearance Manager who accepted the  marriage  was  lawful
      and that the financial requirements were met. There remained  concerns
      as to the genuineness of the marriage.  The  Tribunal  considered  all
      the evidence and made findings on  the  facts  in  paragraph  13.  The
      appeal  was  properly  dismissed  because  there  was  no  independent
      evidence of  the  Appellant's  intention  to  live  with  the  sponsor
      permanently. The Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
      previous marriage and the failure of the adult children to attend  the
      hearing. The decision made it clear that the documentary  evidence  in
      the bundle had been considered, some of which was post decision.

Discussion and decision

  14. The Tribunal listed at paragraph 3 of the decision all the documentary
      evidence considered which included bank statements,  telephone  cards,
      photographs, money transfer receipts, property document,  letter  from
      sponsor,  certificate  of  disillusionment  of  marriage  and  further
      correspondence. I am satisfied that the Tribunal had regard to all  of
      the listed documentary evidence. There was no submission  made  by  Mr
      Adama-Adams that the Tribunal failed to consider any other  documents,
      crucial or otherwise as advanced in ground three. I find no  error  of
      law in this regard.

  15. I now consider the issue of the post  decision  evidence  advanced  in
      ground one. The Tribunal's decision referred to  "a  letter  from  the
      Baptist church and letters from other sources", which it  declined  to
      take into account as post decision evidence. Mr  Adama-Adams  conceded
      that the letter from the Baptist church was not  material.  There  was
      some vagueness not only in the decision but also  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal as to what documents were produced that  were  not  taken  into
      account.  Mr Adama-Adams produced 8 cards which he stated were  handed
      up to the Tribunal at the hearing and then handed back to the sponsor.
      He submitted that these were the documents that the Tribunal  declined
      to take into account as post decision evidence. I found  no  reference
      to 8 cards in the decision and furthermore the documents identified as
      post decision in the grounds of appeal are the letter from the Baptist
      church and other documents dated after the refusal.

  16. I was not satisfied that  any  documents  claimed  not  to  have  been
      admitted  as  post  decision,  were  identified  or   specified   with
      sufficient particularity in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and/or  at  the
      hearing before me. Mr Adama-Adams introduced the 8 cards which had not
      hitherto been mentioned.

  17.  Notwithstanding, I take into  account  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      represented before the First-tier Tribunal and the lack of specificity
      in the Tribunal  decision  as  to  the  documents  found  to  be  post
      decision. I find that  the  Tribunal  did  not  consider  whether  the
      documents appertained to circumstances as at  the  date  of  decision,
      which was an error of law.  It falls to me to consider whether or  not
      that was a material error of law.

  18. I am satisfied that the Tribunal considered all of the evidence in the
      round and  reached  proper  findings  and  conclusions  together  with
      reasons in support that were within the range of findings that it  was
      permissible to make on the evidence. It is  clear  from  the  decision
      that what the Tribunal found lacking was any independent  evidence  of
      the  Appellant's  intentions.  The  Tribunal  accepted  the  sponsor's
      intentions were genuine but considered  that  the  letter  dated  27th
      March 2013 from the Appellant  was  not  sufficient  without  more  to
      establish the Appellant's intentions.  That together with the negative
      finding regarding the sponsor's explanation as to why his  four  adult
      children did not  attend  the  hearing  (of  which  there  can  be  no
      criticism having regard to the available evidence), the  finding  that
      the acquaintance between the parties was short  and  the  similarities
      with the previous marriage, amounted to proper findings and reasons to
      support the conclusion made. Ground 4 has no merit.   Even  if  the  8
      cards and the letter from the Baptist  church  had  been  admitted  in
      evidence, I find no basis on which it can be shown  that  the  outcome
      would have  been  different.  The  Tribunal's  clear  and  sustainable
      conclusion  was  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  as  to  the
      intentions  of  the  Appellant.  I  find  no  material  error  of  law
      disclosed.

  19.  As  to  the  argument  in  ground  two  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
      specifically make a  findings as to the credibility of  the  sponsor's
      evidence, I am satisfied that the Tribunal made  sufficient  reference
      to his evidence  in the decision and  found  him  to  be  genuine  and
      believable other than the bizarre explanation as to the failure of the
      children to attend the hearing.   As above,  the  Tribunal  found  the
      evidence lacking as to the Appellant's intentions  not  those  of  the
      sponsor. I find no error of law disclosed.

Notice of Decision

  20.  I find no material error of law.  The determination shall stand.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 25.11.2014

Judge GA BLACK
DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 25.11.2014

Judge GA BLACK
DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
