

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15054/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 February 2016                      |On 7 March 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS NASNEEN KAUSAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Naeem Mohammed (sponsor)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO").  For  ease
       of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-
       Tier Tribunal albeit that the ECO is technically  the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The ECO appeals against a decision of First-
       Tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on  14  September  2015  ("the
       Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   ECO's
       decision dated 28 October 2014 refusing her  entry  clearance  as  a
       spouse under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM to the Immigration
       Rules ("the Rules").


    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She was represented at  the
       hearing by Mr Mohammed, her husband and sponsor.   They  married  in
       Pakistan on 1 October 2009.  The ECO took issue in the decision with
       the genuineness of the relationship.   The  Judge  in  the  Decision
       accepted that the relationship is genuine, in reliance in particular
       on the fact that she and Mr Mohammed  now  have  a  child  together.
       There is no challenge to that finding.  The only issue which remains
       therefore is whether the Appellant and her husband are able to  meet
       the financial requirements of the Rules.  The Judge made  a  finding
       that they could.  The Judge also appears to find that Article 8 ECHR
       is breached by the ECO's decision although  the  Respondent  submits
       (and I accept) that the finding is somewhat  opaque  and  devoid  of
       reasoning.

    3. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Astle on 19 January 2016 on the basis that the Judge failed to
       make findings as to how the Appellant met the  Rules  when  she  had
       failed to provide the evidence specified by the Rules  and  also  on
       the basis that there is no clear finding or reasoning as to  Article
       8 ECHR.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the Judge made
       an error of law in the Decision.


    Grounds of appeal and submissions


    4. Ms Everett relied on the Respondent's written  grounds.   The  first
       ground is that the Judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  the
       finding at [28]  of  the  Decision  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
       requirements of the Rules.  The second ground is that  this  finding
       was not open to the Judge given the Appellant's failure  to  provide
       the evidence specified under the Rules and the  Judge's  failure  to
       explain  on  what  basis  the  Respondent  should   have   exercised
       discretion in this case.  The paragraphs of the Rules specifying the
       evidence which is to be produced to satisfy the requirements of  the
       particular rule are as much  a  part  of  the  Rules  as  what  that
       evidence is required  to  show.  This  ground  also  challenges  the
       Judge's apparent finding that  Article  8  and  section  55  of  the
       Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  ("section   55")
       amounted  to  the  reasons  for  the  Respondent  to  exercise   her
       discretion under the Rules.  The Respondent submits that this is not
       a permissible approach.  If the Judge  intended  to  find  that  the
       Appellant should succeed based on Article 8 and section 55, he would
       need  to  so  find  on  the  basis  of  there   being   "exceptional
       circumstances".  Judge  Astle  did  not  grant  permission  for  the
       Respondent to argue that the Judge was not entitled to take  account
       of section 55 notwithstanding that the Appellant and  Mr  Mohammed's
       child is resident abroad.  Ms Everett accepted that, notwithstanding
       that section 55 has no direct application to children who are not in
       the UK, guidance to ECOs is to apply the spirit of that guidance.


    5. I enquired of Mr Mohammed whether he  had  produced  any  additional
       evidence in relation to his financial circumstances at  the  hearing
       before the Judge.  He confirmed that he had not as he  had  expected
       that the Respondent would be able to check  his  circumstances.   He
       produced to me however a letter from HMRC  dated  26  November  2014
       which set out his earnings for the tax years ending 5 April 2014 and
       5 April 2015.  He confirmed (and  Ms  Everett  accepted)  that  this
       document was also before Judge Majid.  However, Ms Everett submitted
       that this would still be insufficient evidence to satisfy the Rules.
        I explained to Mr Mohammed what evidence the Rules required him  to
       produce, particularly in relation to  the  periods  covered  by  the
       evidence.  He very fairly conceded that he  had  not  produced  that
       evidence but said that he would be able to do so if given more time.



    6. Ms Everett submitted that if I were to  find  an  error  of  law,  I
       should remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal given the lack of
       factual findings in the Decision.  She  accepted  that  the  finding
       that the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Mohammed  is
       genuine should in that event be preserved.


    Discussion and conclusions


    7. I set out below the relevant part of Appendix FM as it stood both at
       the date of the hearing before the Judge and now.





           "APPENDIX FM






           Section EC-P: Entry clearance as a partner

           EC-P.1.1. The requirements to be met for entry clearance as a
      partner are that-
                 (a) the applicant must be outside the UK;
                 (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for
                 entry clearance as a partner;
                 (c) the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of
                 the grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability-entry clearance;
                 and
                 (d) the applicant must meet all of the requirements of
                 Section E-ECP: Eligibility for entry clearance as a
                 partner.





           Section E-ECP: Eligibility for entry clearance as a partner

           E-ECP.1.1. To meet the eligibility requirements for entry
           clearance as a partner all of the requirements in paragraphs E-
           ECP.2.1. to 4.2. must be met.





           Financial requirements

           E-ECP.3.1. The applicant must provide specified evidence, from
           the sources listed in paragraph E-ECP.3.2., of-
                 (a) a specified gross annual income of at least-
                 (i) �18,600;
                 .............
           E-ECP.3.2. When determining whether the financial requirement in
           paragraph EECP. 3.1. is met only the following sources will be
           taken into account-
                 (a) income of the partner from specified employment or self-
                 employment, which, in respect of a partner returning to the
                 UK with the applicant, can include specified employment or
                 self-employment overseas and in the UK;
                 (b) specified pension income of the applicant and partner;
                 (c) any specified maternity allowance or bereavement
                 benefit received by the partner in the UK or any specified
                 payment relating to service in HM Forces received by the
                 applicant or partner;
                 (d) other specified income of the applicant and partner;
              and
                 (e) specified savings of the applicant and partner.


           Appendix FM-SE





           Family Members - Specified Evidence

           A. This Appendix sets out the specified evidence applicants need
              to provide to meet the requirements of rules contained in
              Appendix FM and, where those requirements are also contained
              in other rules, including Appendix Armed Forces, and unless
              otherwise stated, the specified evidence applicants need to
              provide to meet the requirements of those rules.





           Evidence of Financial Requirements under Appendix FM

           A1. To meet the financial requirement under paragraphs E-
           ECP.3.1.....of Appendix FM, the applicant must meet:
              (a) The level of financial requirement applicable to the
              application under Appendix FM; and
              (b) The requirements specified in Appendix FM and this
           Appendix as to:
              (i) The permitted sources of income and savings;
              (ii) The time periods and permitted combinations of sources
              applicable to each permitted source relied upon; and
              (iii) The evidence required for each permitted source relied
              upon.


           1.    In relation to evidencing the financial requirements in
           Appendix FM the following general provisions shall apply:
           ...............
                 (l) Where this Appendix requires the applicant to provide
                 specified evidence relating to a period which ends with the
                 date of application, that evidence, or the most recently
                 dated part of it, must be dated no earlier than 28 days
                 before the date of application.
           ...........


           2.    In respect of salaried employment in the UK ...... all of
           the following evidence must be provided:
              (a) Payslips covering:
                 (i) a period of 6 months prior to the date of application
                 if the person has been employed by their current employer
                 for at least 6 months (and where paragraph 13(b) of this
                 Appendix does not apply); or
                 (ii) any period of salaried employment in the period of 12
                 months prior to the date of application if the person has
                 been employed by their current employer for less than 6
                 months (or at least 6 months but the person does not rely
                 on paragraph 13(a) of this Appendix), or in the financial
                 year(s) relied upon by a self-employed person.
              (b) A letter from the employer(s) who issued the payslips at
              paragraph 2(a) confirming:
                 (i) the person's employment and gross annual salary;
                 (ii) the length of their employment;
                 (iii) the period over which they have been or were paid the
                 level of salary relied upon in the application; and
                 (iv) the type of employment (permanent, fixed-term contract
              or agency).
              (c) Personal bank statements corresponding to the same
              period(s) as the payslips at paragraph 2(a), showing that the
              salary has been paid into an account in the name of the
              person or in the name of the person and their partner
              jointly. "
       [my emphasis]
    8. There can be no dispute that the Respondent is entitled to  set  out
       in the Rules both the  requirements  to  be  met  and  the  evidence
       required to meet the relevant test  (see  R(on  the  application  of
       Alvi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  UKSC  33;
       Mandalia v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKSC
       59).  As the latter authority makes clear however  the  requirements
       to provide specified evidence are subject to a  discretion  to  call
       for evidence where it is  not  produced  in  the  right  form.   The
       Supreme Court in that case was considering a  policy  which  is  now
       replaced by the Rules.   The relevant rule in relation to  specified
       evidence in this case is at "D" of Appendix FM-SE.   The  Judge  did
       not however decide that the ECO should have exercised discretion  to
       call for further documents and  nor  did  he  have  before  him  the
       documents which were missing with the Appellant's application.  I do
       not therefore need to consider this further.


    9. The Judge at [10] of the Decision appears to have misread the  ECM's
       statement in response to the appeal.  He  appears  to  have  thought
       that the ECM was impermissibly  seeking  to  fetter  the  Tribunal's
       decision to look at evidence post-dating the decision.  That is  not
       the way in which I read that document.  The point being made by  the
       ECM quite correctly identified that the Appellant  and  her  sponsor
       were  alerted  to  the  documents  which  were  missing  with  their
       application  and  given  the  opportunity  to  provide   those   for
       consideration on review of the decision.  However,  they  failed  to
       provide those.  The ECM rightly pointed out that the Tribunal  could
       only take account of evidence provided to both parties to the appeal
       and  that  if  the  Appellant  submitted  further   documents,   the
       Respondent ought to be given the opportunity prior  to  the  hearing
       date to review the decision.  As a matter of fairness that  must  be
       right and that is something which the Appellant's sponsor  needs  to
       ensure is done if the appeal is to be re-heard.

   10. The Appellant submitted with her  application  the  documents  which
       appear in the Tribunal's bundle and which consist of the following:-
           . A letter from HC&MS and Zaks Cleaning Company setting  out  the
             Appellant's sponsor's employment with those  companies.   Those
             letters do not set out  the  Appellant's  sponsor's  period  of
             employment with the companies nor  the  period  for  which  the
             salary specified in the letter has been  paid  but  it  may  be
             that, coupled with  pay  slips  and  bank  statements  for  the
             relevant period, the Respondent would accept those  letters  as
             substantially conforming with the requirements;
           . Payslips from both companies for the pay periods from May  2013
             to November 2013.  The application in this case was made on  20
             April 2014.  As the ECO notes, therefore,  these  documents  do
             not cover the necessary period.  They cover a six month  period
             but significantly prior to the period leading  up  to  28  days
             before the application was made.  They would need to be for the
             pay periods September 2013  to March 2014 or  October  2013  to
             April 2014;
           . Bank statements for the same period as the pay  slips.   Again,
             as the ECO notes, those cover a six month period  but  they  do
             not cover the relevant six month period.


   11. I do not need in my reasoning to go beyond  pointing  out  that  the
       Judge made no reference  in  the  Decision  to  what  documents  the
       Appellant and her sponsor provided with the application nor why  the
       ECO considered those insufficient and why he considered they were in
       fact sufficient.  At [13], the Judge said the following:-
      "[13]      As I have said  before,  the  income  of  the  Appellant's
           sponsor should have been looked at in  a  discretionary  manner.
           The sponsor (not realising that the burden of proof was on  him)
           offered the ECO to check his income from the HMRC  but  the  ECO
           remained technically fidel  to  the  technical  burden  on  him.
           Insufficiency of maintenance was not  raised  as  a  reason  for
           refusal and, therefore, I did not allow the  Presenting  Officer
           to go onto that route - I do remember that any new issue  cannot
           be raised if it is totally absent in the Refusal Letter.  I must
           say that my conclusion that  the  wage  slips  are  genuine  was
           confirmed by the HMRC by the new documents handed  over  by  the
           sponsor on the date of hearing.  Also one has to  bear  in  mind
           that in this case,  as  it  is  confirmed  by  the  Registration
           Certificate displayed in the Appellant's  bundle,  we  are  also
           dealing with  an  18  month  old  British  child  and  his  best
           interests."
       It is in fact inaccurate  to  say  that  the  ECO  did  not  dispute
       sufficiency of maintenance.  The ECO's decision makes clear that the
       refusal is on the basis that the Appellant  failed  to  provide  the
       evidence required  to  show  that  her  sponsor  had  available  the
       specified gross  income.   Whilst  that  was  on  the  basis  of  an
       evidential  dispute,  it  still  amounts  to  a  decision  that  the
       Appellant's sponsor did not meet the minimum income threshold.


   12. In the above citation and at [11] of the Decision the  Judge  points
       to the ECO's discretion which, as I note  at  [8]  above,  evidently
       exists.  However, the Judge clearly erred both in finding  that  the
       rule requiring specified evidence  to  be  produced  amounted  to  a
       "technical" legal requirement and in finding that the ECO could have
       avoided this by making enquiries of HMRC  for  himself  rather  than
       requiring the Appellant to submit the  correct  documents.   As  the
       Supreme Court found in Mandalia whilst Courts  and  Tribunals  might
       disagree with the way in which the Rules are framed  and  find  them
       unnecessarily complex, it is not for individual  Judges  to  rewrite
       Rules which have Parliamentary approval.  That  is  the  error  into
       which this Judge fell.


   13. I have considered whether it could be said that the error of law  is
       not material.  This might arise either  from  consideration  of  the
       additional evidence produced in the form of the HMRC  letter  or  on
       the basis of the Judge's treatment of the case under Article 8.   In
       relation to the HMRC letter whilst it is  the  case  that  the  HMRC
       letter refers to income in the year to 5 April 2014  (which  roughly
       equates to the period immediately before the application) and whilst
       that shows that the Appellant's sponsor  (just)  meets  the  minimum
       threshold for the year in question, this is not enough to show  that
       the Appellant could meet the Rules nor indeed that the  sponsor  was
       earning that income at the relevant time.  It might be the case  for
       example that the Appellant's sponsor earned considerably more at the
       start of the tax year than in the final six months which might cause
       his income to fall below the required  threshold.   In  relation  to
       Article 8, I accept the Respondent's submission  that  there  is  no
       clear finding articulated that the refusal of entry clearance  would
       breach Article 8 and, even if there  were,  the  Decision  does  not
       disclose any reasoning taking into account the public  interest  for
       example in the Appellant and her sponsor  being  able  to  meet  the
       Rules in relation to the sponsor's income.


   14. I am therefore satisfied that the Decision contains a material error
       of law in relation to the finding that the Appellant could meet  the
       Rules, in particular paragraph A1.2  which  is  cited  above.    The
       Appellant's sponsor would be well advised  to  read  also  paragraph
       A1.1 to ensure that the evidence which he wishes to produce  to  the
       Respondent to satisfy him that the Appellant can meet the  financial
       requirements is in the correct form and covers the correct period.

   15. I therefore set the Decision aside.  I agree with  Ms  Everett  that
       the appropriate course is to  remit  the  appeal  in  light  of  the
       absence of factual findings and reasoning.   The  finding  that  the
       Appellant  and  her  sponsor  are  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship is preserved. It will be for the Appellant  to  provide
       additional documents to satisfy the evidential requirement regarding
       his income.  I have set out the  relevant  Rules  at  [7]  above  to
       assist him in identifying the documents which he needs to provide.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.
I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing with the direction that it be heard by another Judge  of  the
First-Tier Tribunal.   The finding that the Appellant and  her  sponsor  are
in a genuine and subsisting relationship is preserved.
Signed           [pic] Date     29 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
