
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15192/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 27th January 2016                     |             On 22nd February 2016  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               nasira yasmeen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd June 2015.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 22nd January 1993.   She
    applied to come to the UK as a spouse but was refused  entry  clearance
    on 14th October 2014 on the grounds that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was not satisfied that she could meet the financial requirements of the
    Immigration Rules and she had not provided the specified  evidence  for
    the specified period as stated in Appendix FM/SE.

 3. The judge recorded that it was not in contention that the Appellant had
    not provided the specified evidence in that the Sponsor  did  not  have
    personal bank statements for the same twelve month period  as  the  tax
    return he had provided as required by the Rules.   She  also  commented
    that the amounts paid into the bank account did not correspond with the
    net profit shown on the Sponsor's profit and loss account  and  he  had
    not provided evidence that his  national  insurance  contributions  had
    been paid.  On the other hand she had no reason to doubt the  Sponsor's
    credibility and no reason to conclude that he did not have  the  annual
    income stated which was in excess of the amount needed to  satisfy  the
    Rules.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge
    had made a mistake  so  far  as  the  national  insurance  contribution
    payments were concerned, that it was not reasonable to  expect  all  of
    the money to have been deposited in the bank  and  that  generally  her
    reasoning was insufficient.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf  who  said
    that the Appellant had not been appropriately informed why  her  appeal
    had been dismissed.

 6. On 6th November 2015  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Findings and Conclusions

 7. The Sponsor is right  when  he  says  that  the  Judge  had  overlooked
    evidence that the national insurance contributions had been paid.  They
    clearly were and the receipt is in the bundle.

 8. He also said that he had to pay for fuel and repairs for his  taxi  and
    Ms Pettersen acknowledged that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
    daily banking of all of the fares taken.  Evidence from  an  accountant
    could be provided to explain what money was  expended  on  work-related
    expenses such as fuel and what was banked as income.

 9. The problem for the Appellant is that he did not open a  personal  bank
    account until December 2012.  The tax return which he produced was  for
    the year 2012-2013,  i.e.  to  the  year  ending  5th  April  2013  and
    accordingly he only had four months'  worth  of  bank  statements  from
    December 2012 to April 2013.

10. At the time he made his application in March 2014 the return  for  that
    tax year had not been made, and whilst he had the bank  statements  for
    2013-2014 he did not have the relevant tax return.

11. Accordingly the judge was right to  say  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided all of the specified  evidence;  her  Sponsor  was  not  in  a
    position to do so and the appeal therefore had to fail.

12. Therefore, although there is a mistake in this  determination  relating
    to the national insurance contributions, and although the comment about
    the lack of consistency between the accounts and the  amounts  paid  in
    the bank statements are not a proper reflection of the entirety of  the
    evidence, the decision of the Judge will stand  because  the  Appellant
    was not in a  position  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  specified
    evidence provisions of the Rules. The Sponsor does  now  have  the  tax
    returns and the bank statements for the same year and the proper course
    is for him to  make  another  application  ensuring  that  all  of  the
    specified evidence is provided.

Notice of Decision


13. The judge did not err in law.  Her  decision  stands.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



