
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/15107/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 18th May 2015                        |On 29th June 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                 HAFIZA BIBI
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel instructed by TM Fortis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  16th  January
      1989. She appeals with permission the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge M.  Davies  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision of the 27th June 2013 to  refuse  to  issue  her  with  entry
      clearance as the spouse of a person present and settled in the  United
      Kingdom.







      Background and Matters in Issue

   2. The Sponsor is a Mr Sajjad Ali,  an  Afghani  who  is  now  a  British
      national. Mr Ali arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2001  and  claimed
      asylum.  In the course of that claim he declared that he  was  married
      with three children.  He was refused asylum but remained in the UK and
      eventually gained indefinite leave under the 'legacy' programme.

   3. In 2011 he travelled to Pakistan  and  married  the  Appellant,  whose
      origins are from Afghanistan  but  is  now  resident  in  Quetta  with
      Pakistani nationality. She made an application for entry clearance  as
      a spouse.  In support of that application the Appellant submitted what
      purported to be a divorce certificate relating to Mr Ali and his first
      wife. On the 16th August 2011 the application was  refused.   The  ECO
      acknowledged the divorce certificate but since it had not been  issued
      by the Union Council was not satisfied that it demonstrated  a  lawful
      dissolution of marriage; as such the Sponsor was still married to  his
      first wife and was not free to marry the Appellant. The ECO considered
      that the marriage contracted on the 16th August 2011 was not valid.

   4. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the evidence  for  the  Appellant
      took an entirely new turn. In a statement dated 7th September 2011  Mr
      Ali said the following:

         "I did not tell the truth when I made a statement in support of  my
         claim [for asylum] in September 2001. I said  I  was  married  with
         three children on the advice of another Afghani who said  it  would
         assist my case. It did nothing of the sort. It was  a  very  stupid
         thing to do but I was na�ve at the time.

         I was granted ILR under the legacy provisions in 2010 and took  the
         opportunity to travel to Pakistan to marry. Recalling  what  I  had
         said nine years earlier, I felt trapped. Out of fear for my  wife's
         situation and frankly not knowing what to do, I eventually  decided
         to try and resolve the problem by approaching  an  Imam  in  Quetta
         through an agent.

         The objective was to secure a document purporting  to  be  from  my
         "wife" stating she divorced me. The name Fatima Ali was made up.  I
         was single when I arrived. I  have  not  married  anyone  else  but
         Hafiza Bibi.  I have no children"

   5. The Appellant herself made a  statement  stating  that  prior  to  the
      marriage she had been informed by Mr Ali that he had  previously  lied
      to the British authorities about having a family. She  was  upset,  as
      was her father, but as they satisfied themselves that he had never  in
      fact been married, they proceeded with the marriage. She knew that  he
      had obtained some kind of "legal document" which he said  would  "sort
      it all out" but  she  did  not  know  that  it  was  a  false  divorce
      certificate.

   6. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frankish) took an extremely dim view of
      all this. In his determination dated 23rd February 2012 Judge Frankish
      had to navigate his "way through a veritable morass of lies", which he
      numbered as 1) the  Sponsor  making  an  unfounded  asylum  claim,  2)
      claiming to be married, 3) obtaining a fake document,  4)  having  the
      fake document attested by an Imam, 5) presenting the fake document  to
      the Respondent and 6) persuading the Appellant  to  collude  with  the
      deception.   He found that the Appellant had clearly  known  that  the
      VAF  contained  deception,  having  had  regard  to  the  inconsistent
      evidence presented before him. The  Appellant  claims  to  have  known
      about the problem prior to her marriage, whereas  the  Sponsor's  oral
      evidence was that she knew nothing about it until he completed the VAF
      on her behalf. Needless to say, Judge Frankish dismissed  the  appeal.
      He did not consider Article 8 to be engaged.

   7. The Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.

   8. In March 2013 the Appellant made a new application.  The  ECO  refused
      it with reference to paragraphs EC-P.1.1(c) and S-EC.1.5  of  Appendix
      FM, the material part of which reads:

         'S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive
         to the public good because, for example, the applicant's conduct
         (including convictions which do not fall within paragraph S-
         EC.1.4.), character, associations, or other reasons, make it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance.'

      The ECO was  further  not  satisfied  that  this  was  a  genuine  and
      subsisting marriage.

   9. The appeal came before Judge Davies.  The Appellant's  case  was  that
      she and her husband were very sorry for the lie  previously  told  but
      they had now told the truth and that they  should  be  allowed  to  be
      together as this was a genuine marriage. It was advanced on her behalf
      that Pakistan was not safe for Hazara Afghans like her and her husband
      and that they would not be able to live together in Pakistan.

  10. Judge Davies found that  the  Sponsor  and  Appellant  had  both  lied
      previously, and that the evidence about when the Appellant knew of the
      deception continued to be inconsistent. Judge Davies  did  not  accept
      the Appellant or Sponsor to be credible, and on that basis found  that
      they were not in a genuine or subsisting relationship.    He  did  not
      accept that there were any protection issues relating to Pakistan.  As
      to Article 8 Dr Thorndike for the Appellant conceded that she did  not
      meet the requirements of the Rules. Judge Davies did not consider that
      the facts merited consideration of Article 8 "outside of the Rules".

  11. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in making
      credibility findings based on errors of fact, failing to take relevant
      evidence into account and  reaching  a  decision  that  was,  overall,
      perverse.  The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.

      Error of Law

  12. Following a hearing  in  August  2014,  at  which  the  Appellant  was
      represented by Dr Thorndike and the Respondent by Mr McVeety, I  found
      there to be an error of law such that the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal must be set aside. My reasons were as follows.

  13. The grounds of appeal take issue with Judge Davies' finding  that  the
      Appellant knew about  the  deception  in  respect  of  the  2011  visa
      application. There is nothing in this.  There may be errors of fact in
      the way that the evidence is recorded in the determination but I  have
      read the evidence as it developed  before  Judge  Frankish  and  Judge
      Davies and it is quite clear that the Appellant and Sponsor have given
      wholly inconsistent evidence from the outset about what she  knew  and
      when.   Both Judges found that she knew about the deception  when  she
      made the application and there is nothing in  the  decision,  evidence
      nor grounds of appeal that leads me to interfere with that finding.  I
      proceed on the basis that the Appellant was aware of the deception  in
      her 2011 VAF.

  14. The finding that this is not a genuine and subsisting marriage is  not
      however sustainable. Paragraph 23 of the determination states  "taking
      into account the credibility of both the Appellant and  Sponsor  I  do
      not accept that they are in a genuine and subsisting  marriage".  This
      fails to take relevant matters into account. There was evidence before
      the First-tier Tribunal of telephone contact between the  pair.  There
      was evidence of enduring association in  that  the  Sponsor  has  been
      trying to get her into the country for over three  years.  There  were
      detailed witness statements and photographs of the  parties  together.
      It is accepted that they have entered into a marriage.   None of  that
      evidence was considered. I therefore set that finding aside.   On  the
      evidence before me I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
      this is a genuine marriage and that the  parties  do  intend  to  live
      together.

  15. The real issue in this appeal is whether the Appellant's  conduct  has
      been such that she should be refused entry as Mr Ali's spouse.  At the
      hearing I pointed out to the parties that this determination gives  no
      consideration  to  the  central  ground  for  refusal,  the  mandatory
      rejection under paragraph S-EC.1.5.  As I set out above that paragraph
      provides that applications  must  be  refused  where  the  applicant's
      presence would not be "conducive to the public good".  I  enquired  as
      to whether there was any guidance,  specifically  in  the  context  of
      Appendix FM, on what that actually meant. Neither Mr  McVeety  nor  Dr
      Thorndike was able to assist but agreed  that  I  could  look  at  any
      relevant policy guidance or instructions  post-hearing.  I  have  done
      that, and have been unable to identify any such material  which  might
      assist me in determining  what  kind  of  conduct  this  provision  is
      directed at.

  16. From looking at the preceding parts of the section, it might  be  said
      that the kind of behaviour liable to attract a mandatory refusal would
      be very serious indeed: for instance S-EC.1.2 pertains to subjects who
      have a deportation order in force against them;  paragraphs  S-EC.1.3-
      1.4 are concerned with criminal convictions; S-EC.1.5 with  those  who
      have caused "serious harm" to others.  This  would  suggest  that  the
      suitability requirements are aimed at those who have  contravened  our
      laws in a serious way. Conversely S-EC.1.6 mandates refusal where  the
      applicant has failed without  good  reason  to  attend  an  interview,
      suggesting a rather less  serious  threshold  for  engagement  of  the
      suitability criteria.

  17. The difference for this Appellant must  surely  be  that  if  she  had
      failed on this occasion because she had not attended an interview, one
      presumes that this  would  not  be  cited  against  her  in  a  future
      application: it is however certain that in this instance, paragraph S-
      EC.1.5 will surely be raised in response to any  further  application.
      As I pointed out to the parties,  this  is  very  different  from  the
      previous framework under the Rules. If a party used  deception  in  an
      application for entry clearance as a spouse under paragraph 281 of the
      Rules, he or she would be refused with reference to paragraph 320(7A).
      However any future application would not be tainted  by  the  previous
      application,  since  the  then  Rules   specifically   precluded   the
      Respondent from relying upon 320(7B) in  spouse  applications.    This
      was, one presumes, in recognition of the obligation under Article 8.

  18. This determination does not address any of these issues. There  is  no
      direction on what "conducive to the public good" might  mean  in  this
      context, nor any specific findings that the test has been met on these
      facts.   These omissions go  to  the  heart  of  the  appeal  and  the
      decision in the appeal must be re-made to that extent.

      The Re-Made Decision

  19. Following the error of law decision I directed  that  at  the  resumed
      hearing the parties should serve skeleton arguments,  authorities  and
      supporting documents (ie  policy  statements  etc)  dealing  with  the
      following matters:

       i) Does the burden of proof lie on the Respondent to  show  that  the
          Appellant's exclusion is conducive to the public good?

      ii) Does the Appellant's conduct in this case merit  refusal  on  this
          ground?

     iii) Does the Appellant have any (arguable) residual Article 8 case  if
          the answer to ii) above is yes?

  20. It is a great pity that by the time the matter  was  relisted  in  May
      nobody had served a skeleton, authorities or any  relevant  supporting
      documents in accordance with my directions. In addition the case could
      not proceed until 3.45 because Ms Faryl was otherwise engaged.

  21. Issue (i) was resolved by  consent.  Mr  Harrison  accepted  that  the
      burden of proof lay on the Respondent to  show  that  the  Appellant's
      exclusion was justified on the grounds that it was 'conducive  to  the
      public good'.  This is consistent with the burden  always  falling  on
      the Respondent in respect of paragraph 320 of the Rules:  JC  (Part  9
      HC395, burden  of  proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT  00027.   As  for  the
      standard, it was at the higher end of the spectrum  of  a  balance  of
      probabilities, as confirmed in JC:

         "13. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, we consider that
         what the Immigration Appeal Tribunal said in Olufosoye  [1992]  Imm
         AR 141 still holds good: "insofar as the justification consists  of
         deception or other criminal conduct the standard of proof  will  be
         at the higher end of the spectrum of balance of  probability"  (see
         also R v IAT ex parte Nadeem Tahir  [1989]  Imm  AR  98  CA).  This
         approach reflects that of the House of Lords in R  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department ex p.Khawaja  [1984]  AC  74  and  is
         consistent with subsequent case law (see e.g.  Bishop [2002]  UKIAT
         05532). In  R (AN &  Anor)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1605  Richards  LJ  stated  at  [62]:
         "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the  balance
         of probabilities, it is flexible in its application. In particular,
         the  more  serious  the  allegation  or  the   more   serious   the
         consequences if the allegation is proven, the stronger must be  the
         evidence before a court will find  the  allegation  proved  on  the
         balance of probabilities".

  22. Mr Harrison further accepted that bar  this  suitability  requirement,
      all the other substantive requirements of the Rules  (as  set  out  in
      Appendix FM) were met.

  23. In respect of the second question  the  parties  were  less  sure.  Mr
      Harrison produced an internal Home Office document  entitled  'General
      Grounds for Refusals RFL:03' but none of the guidance therein appeared
      relevant to this case.  Ms Faryl had nothing to say beyond relying  on
      a skeleton prepared by Dr Thorndike for the previous hearing, in which
      it is pointed out that the consequences of mandatory refusal are  very
      serious and submissions made  as  to  why  the  Appellant's  exclusion
      cannot be said to be 'conducive  to  the  public  good'.  The  reasons
      given are that "nobody has been harmed by the submission  of  a  false
      document";  the deception related  wholly  to  her  sponsor's  earlier
      conduct and not to the validity of her marriage;   the  deception  was
      revealed by the Sponsor entirely voluntarily and had he  not  done  so
      the Respondent would have been none  the  wiser;  both  Appellant  and
      Sponsor are deeply  remorseful,  genuinely  in  love  and  would  face
      serious obstacles  in  trying  to  establish  themselves  together  in
      Pakistan. He is without any permission to live  in  Pakistan,  has  no
      connections there and she is  living  in  conflict-ridden  Balochistan
      where Shi'a Hazaras are subject to attack by Sunni extremists.

  24. The term "conducive to the public good" has, in  the  pre-Appendix  FM
      past,  been  interpreted  to  require  fairly  serious   reasons   for
      exclusion.  For example, persons have  been  refused  entry  clearance
      where the Secretary of State  has  personally  deemed  their  presence
      "socially harmful" by virtue of their toxic political views[1],  where
      serious criminality such as drug importation has been involved[2],  in
      the interests of national security[3] or foreign policy[4],  or  where
      public policy demands it so[5].   It has consistently been  held  that
      the discretion of the Entry Clearance Officer to apply this ground for
      refusal is a wide one[6]. It is not however a provision  which  should
      be applied for trivial reasons. It should be borne in mind that  there
      are a number of other entirely discretionary (as opposed to mandatory)
      grounds for refusal which can be invoked instead.  It  has  been  held
      that a relevant consideration would be whether the conduct,  character
      or associations concerned would justify deportation[7].

  25. What then, if any, difference is there in the application of  the  new
      scheme?  As I noted in my 'error of law' consideration,  paragraph  S-
      EC.1.5 does not appear to contemplate a potential violation of Article
      8 where a genuine and subsisting marriage is involved, unlike the  old
      320(7A)/320(7B) scheme which would have  previously  applied  in  this
      instance.   The parties had been unable to find any Home Office policy
      documents setting out the current guidance on what "conducive  to  the
      public good" might mean as far as the Respondent is concerned.  At the
      hearing a simple Google search managed to unearth quite a few.

  26. The document  entitled  'Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family
      Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0a:  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
      Parent): 5-Year Routes' notes that the 'general grounds  for  refusal'
      set out in part 9 of the Immigration Rules do not, for the most  part,
      apply to applicants under Appendix FM, whose admissibility to  the  UK
      is considered under the 'suitability' criteria. Those sub-sections  of
      paragraph 320 which do continue to  apply  to  persons  seeking  entry
      clearance as partners are (3) failure to  produce  identity  document,
      (10) passport not recognised by the UK, and (11) where  the  applicant
      has contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intentions of  the
      Immigration Rules for instance by using false  representations  in  an
      application for entry clearance.  Paragraph 320(11) is a discretionary
      ground for refusal, and it would appear from this guidance that it  is
      one which the Entry Clearance Officer in this case could at least have
      considered.

  27. Where consideration is to be given to exclusion on  conducive  grounds
      the reader is referred to the  paper  entitled  'General  grounds  for
      refusal Section 1 of 5:  about  this  guidance,  general  grounds  for
      refusal and checks'  in which (at page 100) the following guidance  is
      given to decision-makers:

          This page explains what the Immigration Rules say about when
          exclusion is conducive to the public good, which is a general
          ground for refusal.

          What the rules require

          If it is conducive to the public good not to admit a person to the
          UK because of their character, conduct or associations you must
          consider refusing entry or leave to remain.

          Such a person may include:

            . a member of a proscribed group

            . a person suspected of war crimes or crimes against humanity

            . a person whose presence is undesirable because of their
              character, conduct or associations

            . a person whose presence might lead to an infringement of UK
              law or a breach of public order

  28. It will be  observed  that  this  admittedly  non-exhaustive  list  of
      examples does not include a previous reliance on a false document, and
      that the kind of conduct required to  properly  invoke  the  provision
      appear to be at the extreme end of the spectrum of misconduct. I  have
      also had regard to the "General grounds for refusal Section  2  of  5:
      Considering entry clearance". This advises Entry Clearance Officers to
      check for evidence of:

            . adverse behaviour (using deception, false representation,
              fraud, forgery, non- disclosure of material facts or failure
              to cooperate)

            . non conduciveness, adverse character, conduct or associations
              (criminal history, deportation order, travel ban, exclusion,
              non-conducive to public good, a threat to national security)

            . adverse immigration history (overstaying, breaching
              conditions, illegal entrant, using deception in an
              application)

            . adverse health (medical reasons)

      Again, a distinction is drawn between false representation, which here
      falls  under  the  heading  "adverse  behaviour"  rather  than   "non-
      conduciveness" which covers matters such as  national  security.   The
      broader term "conduct  character  or  associations"  is  not  defined,
      although at page 21 of the 'Immigration Directorate Instruction Family
      Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0a:  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
      Parent): 5-Year  Routes'  it  is  noted  in  this  context  that  "the
      applicant can meet the suitability requirements even  where  there  is
      some criminality".

  29. Perhaps most apposite  of  all  is  the  internal  policy  instruction
      document  entitled  'When  can  I  refuse  on  character,  conduct  or
      associations?' published in November 2013.  The  titular  question  is
      answered:

          'Paragraphs 320(19) and  S-EC.1.5.  provide  for  a  discretionary
          refusal of entry clearance  on  account  of  a  person's  conduct,
          character or associations. ECOs must be  aware  that  there  maybe
          more than one factor which would lead  to  the  application  being
          refused on character, conduct or  associations  grounds.  While  a
          person does not necessarily need  to  have  been  convicted  of  a
          criminal offence, the key to establishing refusal in this category
          will be the existence of reliable evidence  necessary  to  support
          the decision that the person's behaviour calls into question their
          character and/or conduct and/or associations such that it makes it
          undesirable to grant them entry clearance.

          A non-exhaustive list could include:

          Low-level criminal activity.  Association  with  known  criminals.
          Involvement  with   gangs.   Pending   prosecutions.   Extradition
          requests.   public   order   risks.   Prescribed    organisations.
          Unacceptable behaviours. Subject to  a  travel  ban.  War  crimes.
          Article  1F  of  the  refugee  convention.  Deliberate   debiting.
          Proceeds  of  crime  and   finances   of   questionable   origins.
          Corruption. Relations between the UK and elsewhere.  Assisting  in
          the invasion (sic) of  the  immigration  control.  Hiring  illegal
          workers. Engaging in deceitful  or  dishonest  dealings  with  Her
          Majesty's Government.'

      And further:

          Examples of the types of cases where refusal under 320(19) may  be
          appropriate include:

            . where a person's admission could adversely affect the conduct
              of foreign policy;

            . where the person's admission would be contrary to
              internationally agreed travel restrictions (for example, UN
              sanctions or EU measures) but the relevant resolution or
              common position has not been designated under the Immigration
              (designation of travel bans) order 2000. If it has been
              designated under the order, section 8B(1)(b) of the 1971 Act
              must be used to refuse LTE;

            . the person is a threat to national security;

            . there is reliable evidence the person has been involved in or
              otherwise associated with war crimes or crimes against
              humanity. It is not necessary for them to have been charged
              or convicted a person's admission might lead to an
              infringement of UK law or a breach of public order;

            . a person's admission might lead to an offence being committed
              by someone else, for example, extreme views that if expressed
              may result in civil unrest resulting in an infringement of UK
              law.

          When determining if a refusal under 320(19) is warranted  the  ECO
          must also take into account any human rights  grounds  and  ensure
          that the refusal is both proportionate and reasonable.

  30. None of this caselaw  or  guidance  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
      circumstances in this case are ones which could properly lead to  this
      wife of a British national, who otherwise meets all  the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules, being  excluded  on  the  grounds  that  her
      conduct, character or associations makes it undesirable to grant entry
      clearance.  The conduct relied upon is confined to the fact  that  she
      knowingly signed a VAF containing false representations to the  effect
      that her husband had previously been married and divorced. In fact  he
      was never married at all.   Whilst  I  wholly  reject  Dr  Thorndike's
      submission that there was 'no harm done' by this  attempted  deception
      the Entry Clearance Officer does appear to have failed  to  take  into
      account all of the relevant factors,  including  i)  that  this  is  a
      genuine marriage ii) that the attempted deception was only unveiled by
      the Sponsor and Appellant and but for their candour might  never  have
      come to light iii) the procurement of the false document  was  by  the
      Sponsor and not her.  In his submissions at the 'error of  law'  stage
      Dr Thorndike asked me to give some  weight  to  the  fact  that  as  a
      relatively uneducated Hazara woman living in Balochistan the Appellant
      may not have been in a position to argue with her  new  husband  -  or
      indeed father - about whether she should sign the VAF.

  31. Deception and other  forms  of  interference  with  the  operation  of
      immigration control are  serious  matters.  The  production  of  false
      documents is capable of undermining the entire system and a great deal
      of taxpayers money is deployed in the detection and prevention of such
      fraud. I have given substantial weight to that fact.   However  having
      considered all of the circumstances in this case I  am  not  satisfied
      that  the  Respondent  has  shown  the  Appellant's  exclusion  to  be
      conclusive to the public good.  The poor conduct was confined  to  one
      instance  of  attempted  deception,  which  was  admitted  before  the
      Tribunal. This is a genuine marriage  and  that  one  instance,  in  a
      previous application, cannot justify refusal to grant entry clearance.

      Decisions

  32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  and
      it is set aside.

  33. I re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
      Immigration Rules.

  34. I was not asked to make a direction as to anonymity and on the facts I
      see no reason to do so.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              15th June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] R (ono Farrakhan) v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 606 (Nation of Islam leader)
[2] Villone v SSHD [1979-80] Imm AR 23 (drugs discovered in baggage on
arrival)
[3] GI v SSHD [2011] EWHC 1875 (Admin) (SIAC case involving allegations of
links of Islamic extremists)
[4] Lord Carlile & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
EWHC 617 (Admin) (exclusion of Iranian dissident on the grounds that Iran
may take retribution if the ban was lifted)
[5] R v IAT (ex parte Ajaib Singh) [1978] Imm AR 59 (a man seeking entry to
marry a 14 year old girl)
[6] See for instance Ivlev, R (on the application of) v Entry Clearance
Officer, New York [2013] EWHC 1162 (Admin) at 59
[7] Olufosoye v SSHD [1992] Imm AR 141, R v ex parte Cheema [1982] Imm AR
124, CA.

