
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15988/2013
     OA/15990/2013
     OA/15989/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2014                              |On 18 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                    MRS MAHIDEEN FAREENA KAREEM ILYAS (1)
                      MR NAJAH HASSAN KAREEM ILYAS (2)
                    MISS NAJEELA HASMIN KAREEM ILYAS (3)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Home Office Presenting Officer

            DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the above-named respondent  against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellants' appeals against her
    decision to refuse to grant them entry clearance.  I will refer to  the
    respondent  by  her  designation   before   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    notwithstanding that she is in fact the appellant before this Tribunal.
     The appellants will also be referred to by  their  designation  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellants are all Sri Lankan nationals related to the  sponsor  as
    follows:

    .    The first appellant ("Mrs Ilyas" (also known as  "Ilias")  is  the
         mother of the second and third appellants ("Najah",  her  son,  and
         "Najeela", her daughter) and the wife of the sponsor;
    .     The sponsor is Kareem Ilyas, a  British  citizen  who  permanently
      resides in the   UK, who is the first appellant's husband.

3.   The appellants appealed against the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer Chennai ("ECO") to refuse entry clearance to the appellants as,
    respectively, the spouse and the dependent children of the sponsor.

4.   That appeal  came  before  Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Eban  ("the
    Immigration Judge") sitting at Richmond Magistrates' Court  on  16  May
    2014.  Having considered the evidence the Immigration  Judge  concluded
    that the appellants' appeals succeeded under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR") notwithstanding  their  failure  to
    meet all the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

5.   It is against that decision that the respondent subsequently  appealed.



The Appeal Before the Upper Tribunal

6.   By her notice of appeal, dated  28  May  2014,  the  respondent  sought
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a  material  error  of  law   in   its
    determination.  The grounds state that Mrs Ilyas had previously applied
    for visit visas using a false identity on no less  than  six  occasions
    which severely damaged her credibility and character.  The  deceit  had
    the potential of damaging respect for the Immigration Rules.  Secondly,
    there was nothing compelling or exceptional about the circumstances the
    appellants found themselves in.  They could maintain their relationship
    with the Sponsor by staying in regular contact with him by any  one  of
    the modern means of communication available.  There were no  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules for allowing  the
    appellants entry to the UK under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The First-tier
    Tribunal had not followed the correct approach as  set  out  in  recent
    case law, namely, Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC
    720 (Admin).  Additionally, the  respondent  was  entitled  to  make  a
    decision in the economic interests of the country and the appeal  ought
    to have been dismissed in the interests of justice and fairness.

7.   The application for permission to appeal was  considered  by  Judge  of
    First-tier Tribunal P J G White who found  an  arguable  error  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 6 June 2014.   Judge  White  was
    satisfied that the Immigration Judge had arguably  failed  to  properly
    consider the guidance in the case of Gulshan, to which no reference had
    been made in the determination.  He was satisfied that all grounds were
    arguable.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

8.   At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Whitwell explained that Article 8 was covered  by  the  Rules  and  the
    Immigration Judge had demonstrated at paragraph 20 of his determination
    that he was "alive" to  that  issue.   He  explained  that  exceptional
    circumstances allowed the respondent  to  exercise  her  discretion  in
    favour  of  the  applicants  where  the  Rules  or  the  guidance  were
    satisfied.   However,  recent  case  law   made   it   clear   that   a
    proportionality appraisal is to be conducted within  the  framework  of
    the Rules because they had been drafted to reflect the  obligations  on
    the respondent including those under Article 8.  Mr Whitwell went on to
    explain that there may be circumstances not recognised by the Rules but
    those circumstances would be likely to be exceptional.  In the  present
    case   there  was  no  suitable  finding  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination  which  enabled  the  reader  to  identify   what   those
    exceptional circumstances were.  It was a serious misdirection  on  the
    law to go beyond the requirements  of  the  Rules  and  make  a  "free-
    wheeling" Article 8 assessment without adequate  justification.  In  Mr
    Whitwell's submission the circumstances of the  present  case  did  not
    justify such an assessment.  Secondly, it was  argued  by  Mr  Whitwell
    that the public interest was ignored by the Immigration Judge.  It  was
    the Sponsor's choice to come to the UK  and  there  were  a  number  of
    negative factors impacting on the assessment in the case of Mrs  Ilyas.
    These factors tended to suggest that  in  any  event  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate in all the circumstances.

9.   Mr Burrett on the other  hand  considered  Gulshan  to  be  of  limited
    application.  That case was decided  on  its  own  facts  and  did  not
    represent guidance for other cases.  It was submitted  that  the  Rules
    may constitute a complete code  in  an  appropriate  case,  such  as  a
    deportation appeal.  However, this was not a deportation case.   I  was
    referred to the case of MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 but not provided with  a
    copy.  In particular, I was referred to paragraphs 128 and 129 of  that
    case, which, after the hearing, I was able to refer to.   According  to
    those paragraphs, in deportation cases  the  new  Rules  represented  a
    "comprehensive code" as to  the  criteria  to  apply  where  a  foreign
    criminal seeks to remain in the UK on the grounds that  his  Article  8
    rights would be infringed, but in other cases it is primarily  for  the
    fact-finder to determine whether there are grounds for  granting  leave
    to remain outside the Rules.  I note that the cases referred  to  there
    are leave to remain cases, rather than entry  clearance  cases,  but  I
    will consider whether that is important later  in  this  determination.
    The case of Nagre was thought not to add anything to the  debate,  save
    for the statement that if a particular person is outside the Rules  and
    he has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the
    Rules, that he has an arguable case that there may be good grounds  for
    granting leave to remain on that basis.

10.  The Immigration Judge had  fully  considered  Article  8  and  found  a
    family life to have been established.  The sponsor had children  (Najah
    born on 31st May 1994 and Najeelah  born  on  4th  August  1997).   The
    parties had met and Mrs Ilyas and her children had been  maintained  by
    the Sponsor.  There were false documents referred to by the ECO but the
    judge weighing all factors  together  concluded  that  these  were  not
    important.  The thrust of the submission on behalf  of  the  respondent
    before the Upper Tribunal was that  the  decision  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal was not contrary to the reasoning in MM, which  in  any  event
    was largely irrelevant to the facts of this case.   The  judge,  having
    considered the Rules in  the  context  of  the  appellants'  individual
    circumstances, had concluded  that  Article  8  was  met.  This  was  a
    decision he was entitled to come to in all the circumstances.

11.  Mr Whitwell relied on a  case  called  Halamudeen  but  was  unable  to
    provide a copy.  The Immigration Rules were, in his submission, the end
    point for consideration of applications such as these.

12.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  will  give
    after the discussion below.

Discussion

13.  Article 8 has been at the centre of a number  of  recent  cases  before
    the Upper Tribunal and Court of Appeal.  Mr Burrett relied on the  case
    of MM.  In that case Blake J was found by the Court of Appeal  to  have
    been wrong to decide that the maintenance requirements set by  the  new
    Immigration Rules were too high so as to amount  to  a  breach  of  the
    various appellants' Article 8  rights.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
    introduced the new Rules in good faith under parliamentary power.  They
    had been implemented in a non-discriminatory way and it  was  a  proper
    executive  decision  to  set  the  appropriate  level  for  maintenance
    requirements.  The new Immigration Rules  represented  a  comprehensive
    code in relation to the matter before the court.  It was only in a case
    where the Immigration Rules did not represent a composite code that  it
    was appropriate for a court or Tribunal to embark  on  a  free-standing
    proportionality assessment.

14.  Although Mr Burrett criticised the frequent reference to  the  case  of
    Gulshan by representatives for the respondent, it  was  a  decision  of
    Cranston J and Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor to which weight ought to  be
    attached. In that case the Tribunal decided that the Immigration  Rules
    ought to be the starting point.  They were critical of the approach  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in that the judge  had  embarked  on  a  "free-
    wheeling" Article 8 analysis without finding first that the family life
    aspect of the claim was not adequately  reflected  in  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In that case, it had  been  the  respondent's  conclusion  that
    there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  private  or  family  life
    continuing even if further leave to  remain  was  refused.   There  was
    nothing in the circumstances of  the  case  which  were  compelling  or
    insufficiently recognised by those Rules.  The case was described as  a
    "run of the mill case".  It is noteworthy that Mrs Gulshan was  in  the
    UK, albeit that she had family members in Pakistan.   The  Sponsor  had
    come to the UK as  a  visitor  but  overstayed.   He  had  subsequently
    applied for indefinite leave to remain and  finally  became  a  British
    citizen.  The family visits had to come to an end because the appellant
    reached the upper age limit that was allowed by the Immigration  Rules.
    There was, in the view of the Upper Tribunal, nothing  to  prevent  the
    Sponsor  returning  to  Pakistan  for  visits  and  although  that  was
    inconvenient it was not in any way disproportionate for the  respondent
    to decide the case on that basis.  The submission that the question was
    merely one of "reasonableness" was rejected.  This was not the  correct
    starting position.

15.  In MF Nigeria the Court of Appeal dealt with  the  new  Rules  as  they
    applied to foreign criminals and pointed out that a two stage  approach
    was required.  The Immigration Judge in that case  was  found  to  have
    departed from the two stage approach and exceptional circumstances were
    required with unjustifiably harsh consequences before it  was  possible
    to depart from the requirements of the Rules.

16.  Finally, Shahzad [2014] UKUT 00085 concerned  the  new  Rules  balanced
    against the public interest, including the economic well-being  of  the
    UK.  The post-July 2012 Rules were found to be a complete code and  the
    lack of strong or compelling circumstances on the facts  of  that  case
    did not justify departure from their requirements.

17.   Turning  to  the  appeal  in  hand,  Mrs  Ilyas  was  found  to   have
    deliberately used deception in support of her applications for entry to
    the UK for family visits.  The  persistent  use  of  a  false  name  to
    facilitate entry to the UK was described by the Immigration Judge as an
    "aggravating  circumstance"  envisaged  by  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules so as to justify refusal.  Plainly, she did not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules therefore.

18.  The Immigration Judge then went on to  embark  on  a  "proportionality"
    assessment but that should have been carried out within  the  framework
    of the new Rules.  A  number  of  the  factors  he  refers  to  are  of
    questionable relevance, such as the fact that the sponsor  desired  the
    appellants to have the "same  opportunities  in  the  UK  that  he  had
    enjoyed" (paragraph 23(15) of the determination).  With respect, it was
    not open to the appellants to choose which country  to  exercise  their
    family life in, a point the Immigration Judge himself made at paragraph
    23 of his determination.  The decision  as  to  whether  they  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  was  the  respondent's  and  the
    weight to be attached to  such  matters  as  the  desirability  of  the
    appellants being afforded better opportunities in life was limited.

19.   Having  found  that  the  appellant  had  exercised  deception  it  is
    difficult to think of a case in which the  right  to  respect  for  the
    Immigration Rules was more likely to be  diminished  if  the  appellant
    succeeded solely on Article 8 grounds.  It was  a  consequence  of  Mrs
    Ilyas's conduct that family visits were no longer able  to  take  place
    and that should have been a factor carrying a great deal of weight.   I
    find it inappropriate  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  for  the
    Immigration Judge  to  have  embarked  on  a  free-standing  Article  8
    analysis without any regard to the reason why the Rules were there  and
    why they needed to be respected.  There is an inadequate recognition in
    the  determination  of  the  respondent's  need  to  enforce  effective
    immigration  control  into  the  UK.   In  circumstances  where   clear
    deception had been used it appears  to  this  Tribunal  to  be  a  case
    strongly justifying refusal of entry clearance.

20.   The  Immigration  Judge  did  not  refer  expressly  to  Gulshan   and
    furthermore appears not to have adequately summarised recent case  law.
    The  true  test  is  effectively   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances justifying a  departure  from  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules. There appear to have  been  no  such  exceptional  circumstances
    here.

My Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
such that the decision requires to be set aside.  I substitute the  decision
of this Tribunal which is to dismiss  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
entry clearance.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

