
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/15673/2014
     oa/15675/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th September 2016                   |On 17th October 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        Tasneem [K] (First appellant)
                     [M A] (a minor) (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Chaudhery, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was  born
    on 9th July 1968.  The second Appellant was born on [ ] and is her son.
     The first Appellant had applied for entry clearance as a partner under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  Her application  was  considered
    under paragraph EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM.  Her application  was  refused
    by Notice of Refusal dated 13th November 2014.   The  Second  Appellant
    had applied for entry clearance as a  child  under  Appendix  FM.   His
    Notice  of  Refusal  was  also  dated  13th  November  2014.    It   is
    acknowledged by the Secretary of State and  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representative that the appeals of the second Appellant rise  and  fall
    on those of  the  first  Appellant.   For  the  purpose  of  continuity
    throughout the appeal process unless  otherwise  specifically  required
    all references hereinafter are made to the first Appellant.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese sitting at Taylor
    House on 5th February 2016.  By a decision and reasons dated 1st  March
    2016 the Appellants' appeals were dismissed under the Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 1st March  2016.
    On 3rd August 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Davies considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had not applied the correct standard and burden of proof
    to the evidence that was before him.  He noted that it was  clear  that
    where the Respondent alleged a false document had been utilised by  the
    Appellants that the burden of proving that that is the  case  was  upon
    the Respondent on the balance of probability and that it  was  possible
    that the judge  had  not  applied  that  burden  and  standard  to  the
    evidence.

 4. On 24th August 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Secretary of State noted that the  documents
    in question were clearly reported by their purported originators to  be
    invalid.  The response noted there was a document  verification  report
    produced by the Entry Clearance Officer to that  effect  and  that  the
    initial  burden  on  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  clearly  been
    discharged.  It was contended therefore that the burden  hence  shifted
    on the Appellants to show if there  was  an  innocent  explanation  and
    nothing further of any substance was  produced  by  the  Appellants  to
    discharge the burden which had shifted upon them.  The Rule 24 response
    pointed out that there was only one  pertinent  standard  of  proof  in
    cases of similar nature and that was on the balance of probabilities.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Chaudhery.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Ms Ahmad.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Chaudhery relies on  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  submitting  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  wrongly  shifted  the  burden  of  proof  onto  the
    Appellant rather than the Respondent  and  that  whilst  the  Appellant
    tried her best to establish her case by providing further evidence  the
    Respondent continued to  rely  on  the  same  verification  report  the
    content of which it was contended was nothing but hearsay evidence.  It
    was submitted  that  the  Respondent  could  not  provide  any  further
    independent report to establish that the document submitted  was  false
    and that the judge had adopted a wrong legal  test  and  therefore  the
    determination was erroneous.

 7. In response Ms Ahmad takes me to the  decision  at  paragraph  5  which
    states

         "The Appellant brings this appeal and therefore bears the burden of
         proof.  The Appellant must satisfy this  burden  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities."

    She submits this is a  generic  paragraph  and  is  not  a  description
    regarding the  analysis  of  the  document  verification  report.   She
    submits that that is addressed at paragraph 12 of  the  decision  where
    the judge has fully examined the evidence and shown that the judge  was
    fully aware as to where the burden of proof lies.

 8. Mr Chaudhery responds stating that if  the  analysis  in  the  Rule  24
    response is correct then the question is "was the judge satisfied  that
    the burden had been discharged by the Respondent" and  queries  whether
    the document verification report is enough.  He submits that the DVR is
    self-contradictory and should not have been  considered  and  that  the
    judge should have drawn a different inference.

 9. In brief response Ms Ahmad points out that the judge  was  entitled  to
    make the findings that he did, that  he  had  considered  the  document
    verification report and that the decision should stand.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. I start by reminding myself that I am not rehearing the issue I am only
    determining whether or not there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  important  aspect
    relates to the assessment of the document verification  report  and  as
    said by Judge Abebrese in the First-tier Tribunal it goes to the  heart
    of the issue in the appeal.  It is clear that the judge has given  very
    full  and  thorough  consideration  of  the  verification  report   and
    concluded that the document provided was  incomplete  and  invalid  and
    that this was based upon  the  current  practice  in  relation  to  the
    issuing of such documents by the authorities.  The judge has then  gone
    on to consider the arguments that were put  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representative and made  findings  on  balance  that  the  verification
    report should stand  as  it  shows  the  document  was  incomplete  and
    invalid.

13. These  were  findings  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make.   The
    submissions made by Mr Chaudhery, however valiant they may  be,  merely
    go to disagreement with the assessment and conclusions reached  by  the
    judge.  As long as the  judge  followed  the  correct  process,  and  I
    conclude that he has done, the decision cannot contain a material error
    of law.

14. I am not specifically addressed by either Ms Ahmad or Mr Chaudhery with
    regard to the appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  but  for  the  sake  of
    completeness I do note paragraph 11 of the Grounds of  Appeal  seek  to
    address this matter.   I  am  however  satisfied  that  the  judge  has
    considered the proper process under Article 8, the approach set down in
    Razgar and thereafter gone on to consider the  application  of  Section
    117B of the Immigration Act 2014.  Albeit that the findings  are  brief
    they are sustainable and do not disclose a material error of law.

15. Overall I do acknowledge the findings are restricted to two  paragraphs
    but they do both address the main issues that were  extant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge has given reasons for his  decision  as
    set out above and they are sustainable.  There is nothing to show  that
    the judge has misinterpreted the direct standard and  burden  of  proof
    and to rely on paragraph 5, which I am quite satisfied as Ms Ahmad  has
    submitted is a generic paragraph, does not disclose any material  error
    of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.  In such  circumstances  the
    decision overall discloses no material error of  law.   The  judge  has
    considered the correct burden of proof.  The  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Chaudhery amount to no more than disagreement and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained and the Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 17th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 17th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
