
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16691/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2014                   |On 14 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                         KEVIN STEVEN QUINDE COLCHA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Thoree, Thoree and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination promulgated on 22 May 2014 by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Prior) dismissing the appellant's appeal
    against a decision made by the Secretary of State to refuse  him  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom in order to join and  settle  with  his
    mother and his stepfather.  Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Levin) but after the filing of "Grounds  for
    Reconsideration" it was granted by the Upper Tribunal (Judge Kekic).

 2. At the time when the application was made the appellant  was  14  years
    old.  He had lived all  his  life  in  Ecuador.  He  is  an  Ecuadorean
    national. His application was based upon his mother's marriage  to  her
    husband, who is a person present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His mother has discretionary leave to remain.

 3. There is a tragic history, in that the appellant  was  conceived  as  a
    result of the rape of his mother when she was only 12 years old.  As  a
    result of that he never knew his biological father, and his father  had
    no part to play in his upbringing.  The Tribunal accepted the  evidence
    in that regard and made fact-findings about  it  in  the  determination
    (paragraph 8).

 4. The sole issue that forms the basis of the appeal before  us  today  is
    whether there was an error of law that influenced the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant's  mother  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for his upbringing and care.  That was a matter which it
    was necessary for him to prove on  the  balance  of  probabilities.  As
    recorded in paragraph 14 of the  determination  it  was  common  ground
    between the parties that this was the only issue in the appeal.

 5. The leading authority on the meaning of "sole  responsibility"  is  the
    case of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049.  It is clear that this authority
    was considered by the First-tier Tribunal; specific reference  is  made
    to it in paragraph 17 of the determination.

 6. At this stage it is pertinent for us to refer to some of  the  passages
    in TD (Yemen) which have a bearing on the issue we have  to  decide  in
    this appeal, namely whether or not the determination  that  the  mother
    did not have sole responsibility was tainted by the First-tier Tribunal
    adopting too high a test or standard.

 7. The test is set out in paragraph 27 of TD (Yemen) as follows:

         "What is apparent ... is the need to establish "responsibility" for
         the child's upbringing in the sense of decision making, control and
         obligation towards the child which must lie  exclusively  with  the
         parent.  Financial support, even exclusive financial support,  will
         not necessarily  mean  that  the  person  providing  it  has  "sole
         responsibility" for the child.  It is a factor  but  no  more  than
         that."

 8. Further on in the decision in paragraphs  50  and  51  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal said this:

         "The touchstone of "sole responsibility" is the continuing  control
         and direction by the parent in the UK in respect of the  "important
         decisions" about the child's upbringing. The fact  that  day-to-day
         decision-making for a child - such as "getting the child to  school
         safely and on time, or putting the child to bed, or seeing what  it
         has for breakfast, or that it  cleans  its  teeth,  or  has  enough
         clothing, and so forth" (Ramos, per Dillon LJ at p.151) rests  with
         the  carers  abroad  is  not  conclusive  of  the  issue  of  "sole
         responsibility".  However if the UK based parent  has  allowed  the
         carer abroad to make some  "important  decisions"  in  the  child's
         upbringing then it may readily be said that the responsibility  for
         the child has become "shared".

         In reaching a decision on what is a fact-rich issue it is important
         to take account of evidence of any contact between the  parent  and
         the carer in respect of important decisions to be taken  about  the
         child   and   its   upbringing.    The   availability   of   modern
         communications technology may reduce the impact of  distance  alone
         on a UK parent's ability to be  consulted  (and  therefore  decide)
         about the child's upbringing in another country.  The  length,  and
         cause, of the separation of a parent and child and the reasons  for
         its continuation may shed some light on  the  role  played  by  the
         carer abroad.  Likewise it may be helpful to look at the  financial
         support provided by the parent and, in particular, its absence  may
         be very telling."

 9. In approaching the question of sole responsibility, which  as  the  AIT
    stressed is a "fact-rich" issue,  the  Tribunal  first  considered  the
    question of where the appellant had been living. It then turned to  the
    case of TD (Yemen) from  which  we  have  already  quoted  the  salient
    passages, and said that it was satisfied from the documentary  evidence
    (to which it referred) that there were remittances by the mother to the
    child which amounted to some financial support of the  appellant.   The
    Tribunal also made this positive finding: "testimony identified  to  my
    satisfaction  recipients  whose  identities  were  questioned  by   the
    respondent and the  Entry  Clearance  Manager"  (paragraph  17).  Those
    recipients were the partner of  the  appellant's  grandmother  and  the
    great- step-aunt of the appellant, who were his carers.

10. The Tribunal next went  on  to  find  that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  education   and   educational
    progress, apart from two untranslated documents (paragraph 18).

11. Paragraph 19 is important.  The Tribunal there considered the  evidence
    given by the stepfather and the mother in respect of the  contact  that
    they  had  with  the  appellant   in   Ecuador,   and   their   alleged
    responsibility for the appellant's education.  There was a finding that
    the mother's evidence in relation to why there were no pre-2013  visits
    was "unsatisfactory".  The Tribunal referred to the mother being  asked
    why she had no school reports or evidence of school fees being paid  as
    evidence of her interest in the appellant's education, and  noted  that
    she provided no answer to those questions. The paragraph  continues  as
    follows:

         "The sponsor, in testimony, claimed to  take  all  major  decisions
         about the appellant's education and schooling,  yet  there  was  no
         evidence of  any  kind  that  suggested  to  me  that  the  sponsor
         monitored, or kept  in  touch  with,  the  appellant's  educational
         progress."

12. Read in context, what the Tribunal was saying there was  that  although
    the mother  had  claimed  that  she  took  major  decisions  about  the
    appellant's education and schooling, it was  not  satisfied  with  that
    bare assertion, in the absence of any  other  evidence  to  support  or
    corroborate it. If what the mother claimed was  correct,  the  Tribunal
    would have expected some evidence that she was paying regard to how her
    son was getting on at school, for example, but there was none.

13. The Tribunal then referred in paragraph 20 to the only specific example
    produced in evidence of the mother ostensibly taking a  major  decision
    in relation to the appellant's life, and pointed out that that evidence
    post-dated the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  was  self-
    serving.

14. One then comes to the paragraph which is at the heart of  this  appeal,
    paragraph 21:

         "The statements of the sponsor, the stepfather and the  appellant's
         grandmother all spoke of the sponsor being consulted in relation to
         important decisions affecting the appellant. I am bound to  observe
         that the verb consult usually conveys the meaning  of  consultation
         with third parties but a decision not to be taken  by  those  third
         parties. At most I interpret  that  evidence  as  indicating  joint
         decision-making rather than sole decision-making on the part of the
         sponsor."

15. On behalf of the  appellant  Mr  Thoree  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    elevated the word "consult" to a meaning that it does not bear  in  the
    Oxford  English  Dictionary.   The  word  "consult"   means   to   seek
    information or advice from somebody.  It does  not  necessarily  convey
    any information about  who  makes  the  decision  at  the  end  of  the
    consultation.  Consultation is simply taking their views into  account.
    We agree that this is what  the  word  "consult"  means.  However,  the
    second sentence of paragraph 21  goes  no  further  than  to  make  the
    perfectly fair point that when the word "consult" is used  in  everyday
    speech, it usually indicates that the person being consulted  does  not
    take the decision;  rather,  the  person  doing  the  consulting  does.
    Evidence of consultation is not evidence that the mother was  the  sole
    decision-maker.

16. On the basis of the alleged error in paragraph 21 Mr  Thoree  submitted
    that the Tribunal was applying too high a standard in assessing whether
    the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing. The
    carers would not be consulting  the  mother  if  they  could  make  the
    relevant decisions without reference to her.  He  also  contended  that
    there was too much weight  placed  by  the  judge  on  the  absence  of
    evidence in relation to school records and consultation in relation  to
    the appellant's education.

17. In our judgment, on a proper reading, there is no error, and  what  was
    said in paragraph 21 is no  foundation  for  the  submission  that  the
    Tribunal applied a higher test than the balance of  probabilities.  The
    Tribunal was entitled to  regard  the  evidence  of  "consultation"  as
    falling short of  what  was  required.  The  relevant  test  for  "sole
    responsibility" does not turn on whether the parent is consulted by the
    carers (in the sense of seeking his or her views and taking  them  into
    account) but on who makes the important  decisions.  That  was  exactly
    what the Tribunal was  saying.  If  one  looks  in  particular  at  the
    passages at paragraphs 50 and 51 of TD  (Yemen)  quoted  above,  it  is
    clear that the touchstone of  sole  responsibility  is  the  continuing
    control and direction by the  parent  in  the  UK  in  respect  of  the
    important decisions about the child's upbringing.   That  is  what  the
    First-tier Tribunal found was lacking on the evidence adduced before it
    (including, in particular, the evidence in respect of his education).

18. It seems obvious to us that the point that the First-tier Tribunal  was
    making in paragraph 21, albeit perhaps not as clearly as it might  have
    done, was that the evidence of consultation did not establish that  the
    important decisions that were being taken about the child and about the
    child's upbringing were being made by  the  sponsor,  or  (taking  that
    evidence at its highest) by the sponsor alone. It is not enough to take
    into account the wishes of the mother, and it is  not  enough  to  make
    those important decisions jointly with her. The evidence suggested that
    those who had the responsibility for caring for the child  abroad  were
    taking important decisions  that  went  above  and  beyond  such  minor
    matters as getting him to school safely or making sure that he  cleaned
    his teeth or making sure that he was properly fed.  Therefore all  that
    there was left was some evidence of financial support, which TD (Yemen)
    makes clear will not suffice, in and  of  itself,  to  make  out  "sole
    responsibility".  We are not persuaded that  the  Tribunal  placed  too
    great a reliance on the absence of school records. This was one of  the
    many factual pieces of information that was weighed in the  balance  in
    reaching a highly fact-sensitive decision.

19. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Whitwell submitted that some of
    the  considerations  that  came  into  play  when  finding  that   sole
    responsibility was not made out, also tied in to the question  of  what
    was in the child's best interests and thus there was no failure by  the
    Tribunal to have regard to the best interests of the child  as  alleged
    in paragraph 13 of the "grounds  for  reconsideration".    Mr  Whitwell
    pointed out that at the time of the decision by the Secretary of  State
    the appellant was a teenager  who  was  living  in  a  family  unit  in
    Ecuador, which was the only country he has ever known since his  birth,
    and therefore there was no real reason  for  supposing  that  his  best
    interests lay in relocation from that country to  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is a great deal of  force  in  those  submissions.  However,  the
    decision that was made by the Tribunal really turned on the question of
    sole responsibility, which it was common ground was the only live issue
    before it. Thus the question of where the best interests of  the  child
    lay, though relevant, was not material to the determination.

20. In our judgment, when paragraph 21 of the determination is  read  as  a
    whole and put in context, it is clear that far from applying too high a
    standard, the Tribunal was actually applying its mind very  clearly  to
    the decision in TD (Yemen) and  asking  itself  the  correct  question,
    namely, does the mother make the important decisions about this  child,
    or is it a matter for the people who are looking after him in  Ecuador?
    The Tribunal was not satisfied that it was the mother alone.  That  was
    a finding that it was entitled to reach  on  the  evidence  before  it.
    There was no error of law, let alone a material error of  law,  in  the
    determination on this or any other ground  stated  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

21. For the reasons stated we find that there was no material error of  law
    on any of the grounds stated. This appeal is therefore dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed  [pic]Date  13 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]Date: 13 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews


