
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16350/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                       |                Decision & Reasons   |
|On 26 June 2015                        |Promulgated                          |
|                                       |On 28 September 2015                 |
|                                       |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer - rabat
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               OUAFAA SALBAOUI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Scullion, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Entry Clearance Officer ("the
    ECO").  However, for ease of reference I refer to the parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Morocco born on 19  November  1980.
    On 12 April 2013 she made an  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.  That application was refused by the ECO in a decision dated 28
    June 2013.  With reference to Appendix FM the ECO concluded that  there
    was a lack of clarity surrounding the sponsor's  marital  status.   The
    ECO was not satisfied that  under  UK  law  the  sponsor  was  free  to
    contract a marriage to the appellant.  Thus, there were  doubts  as  to
    the validity  of  the  marriage.   The  application  was  refused  with
    reference to paragraphs EC-P.1.1(d) and E-ECP.2.7 of Appendix FM.

 3. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S. Gillespie on 25 September  2014.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. In his determination Judge Gillespie noted  at  [6]  two  matters  that
    arose post-decision.  The first was that the sponsor's  first  marriage
    had apparently been dissolved according to  a  divorce  decree  in  the
    Family Division of the city of Kacem in Morocco on 8  July  2014.   The
    second was that the appellant had given birth  to  a  daughter,  A,  in
    Belfast on 24 November  2013.   Her  daughter  was  granted  a  British
    passport on 28 January 2014.

 5. Judge Gillespie referred to evidence of divorce proceedings between the
    sponsor and his first wife in France, although  the  evidence  did  not
    establish that those divorce proceedings had in fact been brought to  a
    conclusion.

 6. At [13], having considered the documents in relation  to  the  Moroccan
    divorce proceedings the judge ultimately concluded that  the  sponsor's
    first marriage has been dissolved.  However, at [14] he  also  referred
    to the fact that the appellant and the sponsor purported to contract  a
    marriage on 21 May 2011, before the dissolution of the sponsor's  first
    marriage.  Thus, it was found that the appellant is not able to satisfy
    the Immigration Rules because the sponsor  was  still  married  to  his
    first wife at the time of the appellant's application.

 7. Furthermore, it was recognised by the First-tier Judge that because the
    divorce post-dated the ECO's decision, that evidence could not be taken
    into account under the Immigration  Rules,  in  respect  of  which  the
    appellant was unable to succeed.

 8. He then went on to consider Article 8 on a freestanding  basis,  citing
    the decision in Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Hayat
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.  He stated that the  principles  in  Chikwamba  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  40  are  not
    confined to settlement cases, but that unless the likelihood  of  being
    granted entry clearance is very strong, Chikwamba does  not  come  into
    play.

 9. At [16] it was concluded that the sponsor had been separated  from  his
    wife and daughter since shortly after his daughter's birth, apart  from
    when he visited them in Morocco.  He referred  to  the  sponsor  having
    indefinite leave to remain and carrying on a business.  He  found  that
    there would be a strong likelihood  of  the  appellant  being  able  to
    satisfy the ECO  on  a  fresh  application  that  the  sponsor's  first
    marriage was dissolved, although stating that there was still an  issue
    as to whether the 2011 marriage was valid given the later  dissolution.
    At [17], referring to the "interests" of the appellant's  daughter  who
    he found was going to be separated  from  her  father  "for  many  more
    months", it was concluded that that separation was not in  the  child's
    "interests".  Thus, he  concluded  that  continued  separation  was  an
    unjustified interference with the Article 8 rights of the  family,  and
    in particular the child.

    The grounds and submissions

10. The respondent's grounds assert that the  First-tier  Judge  misapplied
    the Chikwamba principle in that  this  was  an  application  for  entry
    clearance where the appellant would not have to leave the UK to make  a
    fresh application.  Thus, there would be no disruption  to  the  status
    quo.

11. In addition, the First-tier Judge's decision fails to take into account
    that the child is a British citizen and would be entitled to enter  the
    UK at any time to join her father should the family wish.

12. Furthermore, the conclusion that the appellant's daughter is  going  to
    be separated from her father for many months is not  supported  by  any
    reasons with reference to any evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is asserted in  the  grounds  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  93%  of
    settlement applications  from  Rabat  are  concluded  within  60  days.
    Furthermore, the decision fails to take into account that  the  sponsor
    went to Morocco every two months to see his wife and child, as recorded
    at [11] of the determination.

13. Finally, it is asserted that the First-tier Judge's decision in  effect
    applies Article 8 as a general  dispensing  power  where  the  original
    application failed for want of a valid marriage.

14. In submissions Mr Matthews relied on those grounds.  More particularly,
    he submitted that the First-tier Judge had wrongly taken  into  account
    matters which had arisen after the date of the  decision,  whereas  the
    appeal was governed by Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  At the date of the  decision  on  28
    June 2013 their child had not been born and neither had  their  divorce
    taken place.  Even under Article 8, the  decision  in  AS  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL  32  applies  to
    prevent reliance on evidence which is not evidence of the circumstances
    obtaining at the date of the decision.

15. Reliance on Hayat and Chikwamba was misguided, in that the principle in
    those cases does not apply to entry clearance appeals.  The remedy  for
    a person in the appellant's situation is to reapply under the Rules.

16. On behalf of the appellant Mr Scullion relied on the skeleton argument.
     Although the appellant's  child  was  born  after  the  decision,  the
    appellant was pregnant at the time of the decision.  The sponsor  would
    even now be able to give evidence as to how  the  separation  from  his
    wife and child has affected his life.  He is unable to make  a  further
    application because he is required to pay  the  bill  for  his  child's
    birth.

17. The appellant and the sponsor have now remarried.  Although the divorce
    and remarriage took place after the decision, the decision in Chikwamba
    does apply.  As was stated in that  case,  the  facts  risk  "elevating
    policy to dogma".

    My conclusions

18. The First-tier Judge recognised that the  appellant  was  not  able  to
    succeed under the Immigration Rules  having  regard  to  the  issue  in
    relation to the validity of the marriage between the appellant and  the
    sponsor.  At [13] he expressed his agreement with  the  submissions  on
    behalf of the respondent that for that reason the appellant  could  not
    succeed in his appeal under the Rules.

19. However, I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge did fall  into  error
    in taking into account the fact of the birth of the appellant's  child,
    considering that as a relevant factor under Article 8 of the ECHR.

20. I do not consider that in all cases the fact of an appellant  expecting
    a child would always be irrelevant when considering s.85A of  the  2002
    Act.  However in this case, at the date of the decision,  assuming  the
    child was born to term, the appellant would have been about four months
    pregnant at the date of the decision.  The decision was taken about two
    and a half months after the application.  Aside from the fact that  the
    ECO was not aware of the appellant's pregnancy and there is nothing  to
    indicate that the appellant drew it to the ECO's  attention,  I  cannot
    see how on the facts of this appeal A's birth  five  months  after  the
    date of the decision could be said to be relevant to the  circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision.  In  as  much  as  under  the
    Immigration Rules the judge was prevented from taking  that  fact  into
    account, following AS (Somalia) he was prevented from  taking  it  into
    account under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The restriction applied  as  much
    to the Article 8 ground of appeal as it did to  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

21. The same applies in terms of the sponsor's divorce, which only  appears
    to have been finalised in July 2014, over a year after the date of  the
    decision.

22. Furthermore, I  agree  with  the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to the effect that the principle in Chikwamba does not apply
    to entry  clearance  appeals.   The  point  in  Chikwamba,  as  further
    explained in Hayat concerns the requirement,  purely  on  a  procedural
    basis, for an appellant in the UK to leave the UK simply to  apply  for
    entry clearance from abroad.  In this case the appellant is not in  the
    UK and is seeking entry clearance.  The principle has no application to
    such a case.  It  is  not  simply  a  procedural  requirement  for  the
    appellant to make an application for  entry  clearance;  she  needs  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.

23. Although  at  [16]  the  judge  concluded  that  there  was  a  "strong
    likelihood" of the appellant being able to satisfy the ECO on  a  fresh
    application that her husband's first marriage was dissolved, that  says
    nothing about the other requirements of the Immigration Rules.

24. Furthermore,  there  was  no  evidential  foundation  for  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant's daughter would be  separated  from  her
    father "for many more months".

25. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge  erred
    in law.  The errors of law are such as to require the  decision  to  be
    set aside.

26. In proceeding to re-make  the  decision,  there  is  no  reason  to  do
    anything other than re-make the decision on the basis of  the  evidence
    that was before the First-tier  Tribunal,  or  more  particularly,  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal as it related  to  the
    circumstances obtaining at the date of the decision.  As I have already
    indicated, neither the fact of the birth of the appellant's child,  nor
    the fact of the divorce between the sponsor and first wife  (or,  as  I
    was  informed  at  the  hearing,  the  appellant  and   the   sponsor's
    remarriage) are relevant in this appeal.

27. I note what is said in the appellant's skeleton argument at  [9]  about
    the medical report of Dr Carole Cairns in relation to  the  appellant's
    daughter 'A'. Although the skeleton argument suggests that she has been
     diagnosed with sickle cell disease and beta  thalassaemia,  in  actual
    fact the report states that she is  a  carrier  for  those  conditions,
    albeit that this will understandably be very worrying for both parents.
     However, again this is evidence which post-dates the decision  and  is
    not evidence of the circumstances obtaining at that time.

28. Notwithstanding what is advanced in the  skeleton  argument  about  the
    circumstances as they are now; the illness of A, the sponsor's and  the
    appellant's marital status or the effect of separation on  the  family,
    this is not evidence that can be taken into account.

29. Similarly, despite the arguments advanced in terms of the applicability
    of Chikwamba, the principle in that case  has  no  application  to  the
    circumstances of this appeal.

30. The appellant was not at the date of the  decision  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, as set out in  the  respondent's
    decision refusing entry clearance.  The only outcome is for this appeal
    to be dismissed both under the Rules and with reference to Article 8 of
    the ECHR.

    Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and
    the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and with  reference
    to Article 8 of the ECHR.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/09/15
