
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/16813/2012
                                                               OA/16820/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                       sujan Gurung - first Appellant
                      Prerana Gurung - second appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Howells of Counsel instructed by N C Brothers &
Co   Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Courtney (the judge) promulgated on 10th March 2014.

 2. The Appellants are sisters, and are female citizens of Nepal born  11th
    January 1986 and 8th January 1988 respectively.  They applied for entry
    clearance to join their father who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom,
    having previously served in the Brigade of Gurkhas.

 3. The applications were refused on 7th August  2012  the  Respondent  not
    accepting that the Appellants satisfied the Immigration  Rules  or  the
    Secretary of State's policy in relation to  the  dependants  of  former
    Gurkha soldiers.  The Respondent took the view that the Appellants  had
    used deception in  their  application  and  therefore  in  addition  to
    refusing the application under paragraph 317 of the Immigration  Rules,
    it was also refused with reference to paragraph 320(7A).

 4. The Respondent considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) and concluded that refusal of  entry
    clearance would not breach Article 8.

 5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Their appeals were
    heard together by the judge on 26th February 2014.  It was  made  clear
    to the judge that the Appellants appealed only in relation to Article 8
    of the 1950 Convention.  The judge heard evidence from the Sponsor, and
    dismissed the appeals.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge had committed  three  errors
    of law which are set out below;

         "(a) Failing to consider his finding that the  Sponsor  permanently
             settled in the UK on 3rd  March  2013  (he  had  been  granted
             indefinite leave to remain on 17th December 2009) when finding
             that the father's intentions were unclear as at  the  date  of
             the decision to refuse.  The former  is  capable  of  shedding
             light on the earlier intention and thus  ought  to  have  been
             taken into consideration on DR (ECO:  Post-Decision  Evidence)
             Morocco [2005] UKIAT 38: [2005] Imm.A.R. 2005 principles;

         (b)  Failing to find interference with the family life between  the
             Appellants and their father.  The  old  Abdulaziz  distinction
             between entry clearance and  leave  to  remain  cases  was  no
             longer a good one; see MM v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWHC 1900 per  Blake  J  at  [96]  to  [104]
             applying R (On the application of Qulia) v Secretary of  State
             for the  Home  Department  [2011]  UKSC  45  [2012]  1AC  621.
             Therefore, there was an interference with the Sponsor's desire
             and/or ability to settle in the UK with  his  dependent  adult
             children;

         (c)  Failing to place any weight on the historical injustice caused
             to Gurkhas and their families, when assessing proportionality.
              This ground will be developed below."

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White who
    was satisfied that the grounds and determination disclosed an  arguable
    error of law.

 8. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

 9. Mr Howells relied and expanded upon the grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.   In  relation  to  the  historic
    injustice, Mr Howells pointed out that the Sponsor in  paragraph  6  of
    his witness statement dated 20th February 2014  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, had stated;

         "If I had been permitted I would lie (sic) to have settled  in  the
         UK when I left the army, as my family would have had a better  life
         there.  I would have found decent job there and my  children  would
         have received good, high standard education."

10. The Sponsor retired from the army in March 1995.  Mr Howells  submitted
    this should have been taken into account, and referred me to paragraphs
    40-42 of Regina (Gurung and others)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8  and
    paragraphs 4 and 5 of the head note to Ghising and others  [2013]  UKUT
    00567 (IAC).

11. Mr Howells submitted that  the  judge  did  not  reject  the  Sponsor's
    evidence that he would have settled in the United Kingdom in 1995.

12. It was accepted that the judge had found that paragraph 320(7A) of  the
    Immigration Rules applied at paragraphs 19 and 20 of the  determination
    but it was submitted that this was on a narrow basis and therefore  the
    weight to be attached to such a refusal should be adjusted accordingly.
     The only deception that the judge found  against  the  Appellants  was
    that they had made false statements in their  telephone  interviews  on
    6th June 2012, when they claimed that the  Sponsor  at  that  time  was
    living in the United Kingdom which was untrue.   Mr  Howells  submitted
    that the weight to be attached to the historic injustice outweighed the
    weight to be attached to  the  refusal  under  paragraph  320(7A)  when
    proportionality was assessed.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. Mr Parkinson referred to paragraph 41 of Gurung which  referred  to  an
    applicant dependent child of a Gurkha who  is  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He pointed out that at the date of refusal  the  Sponsor  was
    not settled in the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor  was  living  in  Nepal
    with both the Appellants.

14. Mr Parkinson submitted that the judge was entitled to find  that  there
    was doubt, at the date of refusal, as to whether the  Sponsor  intended
    to settle in the United Kingdom.  He had  been  granted  the  right  to
    settle in the United Kingdom in 2009, but he had  not  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom until 3rd March 2013.

15. I was asked to conclude that the judge was  entitled  to  place  weight
    upon the fact that paragraph 320(7A) applied  because  both  Appellants
    had  lied  in  their  telephone  interview  in  connection  with  their
    applications for entry clearance.  They had deliberately  attempted  to
    deceive the interviewing officer, and this should be given  substantial
    weight when proportionality was being assessed.

16. Mr Parkinson submitted that the fact that in 2013 the Sponsor chose  to
    settle in the United Kingdom, was not indicative that he  had  intended
    to settle in the United Kingdom at a far earlier  stage.   The  Sponsor
    had asserted in his witness statement that he would have liked to  have
    settled in the United Kingdom when he left the army in 1995,  but  this
    assertion was not supported by any evidence.

17. Overall, I was asked to conclude that the judge had not erred  in  law,
    and therefore the determination should stand.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. Dealing with the first ground of appeal, I conclude that the judge  did
    not err in finding that at the date of refusal, which  was  7th  August
    2012, (which was the relevant  date  as  this  was  an  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance) it had not been  proved  that  the  Sponsor
    intended to settle in the United Kingdom.

20. The judge was entitled to take into account that the Sponsor  had  been
    granted permission to settle in the United  Kingdom  on  17th  December
    2009 but did not do so.  The evidence before the judge  indicated  that
    the Sponsor activated his visa in February 2011 and  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom but only stayed one month before returning to Nepal.

21. I do not accept that the fact that the  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom to settle on 3rd March 2013, proved that he had that  intention
    on the date of  the  decision  to  refuse.   The  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled  to  find  that  the  Sponsor's  intentions  in  relation   to
    settlement were unclear as at the date of the decision to refuse.

22. In relation to the second ground of appeal I do not find that the judge
    erred in deciding that the refusal of entry clearance did not interfere
    with the family life between the Sponsor and the Appellants as at  that
    time they were living together in Nepal.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    find that at that time it had not been proved that the Sponsor intended
    to settle in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  had  to  consider  the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of refusal.  In any  event,  the
    judge did accept that refusal of entry clearance interfered with family
    life between the Appellants and their mother and younger  siblings  who
    were in the United Kingdom at that time,  and  therefore  proceeded  to
    consider proportionality.

23. The third ground of appeal relates to the historic injustice in  Gurkha
    cases.  Mr Howells has set out  the  law  in  brief,  in  his  skeleton
    argument at paragraphs 8 and 10, where he  sets  out  paragraph  42  of
    Gurung, and head note 4 of Ghising and others.

24. In my view the judge did not err in law, and in paragraph  23  set  out
    paragraphs 59 and 60 of Ghising and others, which confirms  that  where
    Article 8 is engaged and the fact that but for the historic  wrong  the
    Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is  established,
    this would ordinarily determine  the  outcome  of  the  proportionality
    assessment in an Appellant's favour.

25. In my view the judge was entitled to find that it had not  been  proved
    that but for the historic wrong the Sponsor would have settled  in  the
    United Kingdom when his now adult children  would  have  been  able  to
    accompany him as children under 18.  I accept that the judge had before
    him the Sponsor's witness statement in which he claimed that  he  would
    have settled in the United Kingdom when he left the army in 1995 if  he
    could have done.  It is true that this evidence  was  not  specifically
    rejected by the judge, but the judge was entitled to place what  weight
    he deemed appropriate on the  evidence.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that at the date of refusal, it had not been proved  that  the
    Sponsor intended to settle in the United  Kingdom.   It  had  not  been
    proved that but for the historic wrong, the Sponsor would have  settled
    in the United Kingdom when his children were under the age of 18 years.
     The Sponsor was granted leave to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    December 2009 but did not avail himself of that  opportunity,  and  did
    not eventually settle in the United Kingdom until March 2013.

26. In addition the judge was entitled to place weight upon the  fact  that
    both Appellants had lied in their  entry  clearance  interviews,  which
    invoked paragraph 320(7A).

27. Although it is possible that a different judge  might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion, the findings made by the judge were open  to  him
    on the evidence, and adequate and sustainable reasons  were  given  for
    those findings.  The grounds and submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants do not disclose an error of law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall








