
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/16537/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2015                       |On 26 January 2015        |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              Ms FATMATA KAMARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Kamara, sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta on 15 December 2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid who
           had allowed the Respondent's appeal against the refusal  of  her
           application for entry clearance  as  a  dependant  spouse  under
           Appendix FM the Immigration Rules and also under Article 8  ECHR
           in a determination promulgated on 24 October 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Sierra Leone,  born  on  24  May
           1982, currently resident  there.   She  had  applied  for  entry
           clearance for settlement under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
           Rules as the wife of Mr Ibrahim Kamara ("Mr Kamara"), a national
           of Sierra Leone with ILR, on 8 May 2013.   The  Entry  Clearance
           Officer did not accept that the marital relationship was genuine
           and subsisting.  The specified documents proving  the  sponsor's
           claimed income had not  been  submitted  with  the  application.
           Adequacy of accommodation without recourse to public  funds  was
           not proven.  By implication refusal did not amount to  a  breach
           of Article 8 ECHR.  The application was refused on 19 July 2013.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Secretary of State was granted because, inter  alia,  the  judge
           had not resolved conflicts in the evidence,  had  not  addressed
           compliance with Appendix FM adequately, had taken  into  account
           irrelevant considerations and  had  erred  in  his  approach  to
           Article 8 ECHR family life.


      4.    Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.  It
           was directed that the appeal would be reheard immediately in the
           event that a material error of law was found.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Ms Everett for the Appellant (the Secretary of State)  indicated
           that she relied on the grounds and the grant  of  permission  to
           appeal.   The   determination   was   wholly   inadequate.   The
           determination should be set aside, and the  appeal  reheard  and
           dismissed.


      6.    Mr Kamara, the Respondent's sponsor, was not in  a  position  to
           assist the tribunal on the legal issues which arose.  Mr  Kamara
           had requested the tribunal to consider additional  evidence  but
           the tribunal ruled that any such evidence would have to form the
           basis of a fresh entry clearance application and did not  go  to
           the issue of whether there had been a material error of law.




      The error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal gave its decision at the hearing that the Secretary
           of State's appeal would be allowed  and  briefly  explained  its
           reasons and stated that detailed reasons would  be  given  which
           now follow.  Ms Everett's submissions were correct.   The  judge
           had erred in a number of ways.  First and  foremost,  the  judge
           had failed to apply the provisions of Appendix  FM.   The  Entry
           Clearance Officer had pointed out in the notice of refusal  that
           the specified documents concerning the sponsor's income had  not
           been produced.  Nor had the sponsor produced  evidence  that  he
           had been meeting  the  rental  commitment  of  the  property  he
           occupied at the date of the application (there was no suggestion
           that any other property would be available at the  date  of  the
           Appellant's  proposed  entry)  or  that  there  was  consent  to
           occupation by the Appellant.  The judge made no proper  findings
           on either matter,  but  rather  embarked  on  wholly  irrelevant
           matters: see [10] of the determination.


      8.    A particular deficiency of the  determination  was  the  judge's
           consideration of the subsistence of  the  marital  relationship.
           That had been the  subject  of  clear  challenge  by  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer and was  a  critical  issue  in  view  of  the
           admitted long separation of the spouses.  The judge  reached  no
           clear finding on that issue and failed to identify any  relevant
           evidence concerning the intentions of  the  parties,  let  alone
           explaining what weight  he  gave  to  any  such  evidence.   The
           determination was silent on the  point.   That  was  a  material
           error of law.


      9.    The judge's approach to Article 8 ECHR was wholly  mistaken  and
           he recited several paragraphs of outdated  law,  apparently  cut
           and pasted from other determinations of  the  same  judge.   The
           judge failed to identify any reason why it was not proportionate
           for the Appellant to make a fresh entry  clearance  application,
           addressing  the  defects  and  deficiencies   of   the   present
           application.  The Article 8 ECHR decision of the Entry Clearance
           Officer had no effect on  the  current  degree  of  family  life
           enjoyed by  the  Appellant  and  sponsor.   Nor  did  the  judge
           consider whether the Appellant and sponsor's family  life  could
           reasonably be enjoyed  in  Sierra  Leone.   These  were  further
           material errors of law.


      10.   Accordingly, for all of these reasons, the tribunal  finds  that
           the determination must be set aside and remade.   The  Secretary
           of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




      The fresh decision


      11.   In this part of the determination for  convenience  and  clarity
           the tribunal will refer to the parties by their original  titles
           in the First-tier Tribunal.  There was no need for  any  further
           evidence for the original decision to be remade, and no need for
           any further submissions.


      12.   Insufficient  evidence  had  been  produced  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal to show that the Appellant and  sponsor's  relationship
           was  genuine  and  subsisting.   There  was  no  persuasive   or
           satisfactory evidence of intervening devotion.   Quite  possibly
           such evidence exists  and  can  be  obtained,  but  it  was  not
           provided.  There was little  more  than  bare  assertions  which
           attract little weight.


      13.   There can be no  doubt  that  the  documentary  requirements  of
           Appendix FM were not satisfied.   The  sponsor  had  produced  a
           miscellany of documents concerning his employments which  failed
           to cover the period of time specified in the  Immigration  Rules
           and failed to correspond to  his  bank  statements.   The  Entry
           Clearance Officer had correctly pointed that out in the  refusal
           notice.  Insufficient steps were taken by the Appellant and  the
           sponsor to rectify the problem.


      14.   As to accommodation, the only evidence before the  tribunal  was
           an undated tenancy agreement for an unidentified  address  which
           at Clause 4 "Use of the Property" expressly stated (4.1) "not to
           let any other person live at the Property or any  part  thereof"
           and (4.2) "to use the property as a  single  private  dwelling".
           There was no satisfactory evidence of the payment of rent.   The
           tribunal finds that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  show  that
           adequate accommodation  was  available  to  her  in  the  United
           Kingdom without recourse to public funds.


      15.   Thus the Appellant was  unable  to  show  that  her  application
           satisfied Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  her  appeal
           must be dismissed.  It is plain that the level  of  family  life
           between the Appellant and the sponsor is relatively weak as they
           have not lived together for many years  but,  more  importantly,
           that the refusal decision does not create an interference as  it
           simply maintains the status quo, i.e., the  existing  situation.
           The appeal under Article 8 ECHR must also be dismissed.


      16.   It will be up to the  Appellant  and  her  sponsor  to  consider
           making a fresh entry clearance if  they  wish  to  pursue  their
           family life in the United Kingdom rather than in Sierra Leone.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid is set aside  and  remade  as
follows:

      The appeal is DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
