
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16375/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                NAZIA ARSHAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Amjad Malik Solicitors who did not attend
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by  the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Roberts and First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated
    on 25 July 2014  which  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a
    refusal of entry clearance application made on 10  March  2011  as  the
    spouse of Arshad Mahmood a British citizen. .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  25  December  1980  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.

 4. There is a lengthy and complex history to this case.

 5. The Appellant married Mr Mahmood in 2005 in Pakistan. She came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 20.1.2007 with limited leave as  a  spouse  and  that
    leave was extended until 27.4.2012.

 6. In October 2010 she returned to Pakistan  with  Mr  Mahmood  where  her
    relationship with him broke down and he returned alone  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. The Appellant claims that she gave birth to  Mr  Mahmood's  child  ,  a
    daughter, on 24 .4.2011. Mr Mahmood does not accept  paternity  of  the
    child.  He  also  asserts  that  their   marriage   has   broken   down
    irretrievably and in due course he would divorce her.

 8. On 10.3.2011 the Appellant made an application for entry clearance as a
    returning resident and as Mr Mahmoods spouse on the  basis  they  would
    reconcile. The application was refused on 14.6.2011 .The refusal letter
    gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant did not qualify as a returning resident  as  she  did
         not have indefinite leave to remain.

      b) In relation to paragraph 284 the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the
         marriage was subsisting.

 9. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ince and he  dismissed
    the appeal. On 17 January 2013 that decision was set aside on the basis
    that there was an error of law. The matter was remitted to  the  First-
    tier for rehearing at a date to  be  fixed  after  6  months  to  allow
    negotiations to continue as  to  the  marriage,  possible  divorce  and
    paternity.

10. On 16 January 2014 her Honour Judge Penna sitting in the  County  court
    dismissed the application for a parentage order under  the  Family  Law
    Act on the basis that the  Appellant  and  her  child  were  habitually
    resident in Pakistan and not domiciled in the United Kingdom.

The Judge's Decision

11. The rehearing therefore came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Roberts  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup,, Judge Pickup writing  the  decision.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision. The Judges found :

      a) Mr Mahmood refused to attend court in answer to a witness summons.

      b) The Tribunal was therefore left with Mr Mahmood's accounts  in  his
         affidavit of 14.11.2011 and his letter of 24.4.2014 to the Tribunal
         which had been seen by counsel  (paragraph  15)  that  he  did  not
         accept paternity of the child.

      c) It was accepted that the Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
         Rules either as a returning resident or spouse.

      d) Although sympathetic to the Appellant  's  predicament  they  found
         that the Appellant could not succeed under Article  8  outside  the
         Rules(paragraph 24-38)

      e) The tribunal took  into  account  that  the  marriage  between  the
         Appellant and her husband had broken down and this was the basis on
         which she had previously been granted leave.

      f) They could not make a finding that the Appellant's  child  born  in
         April 2011 was the child of Mr Mahmood as  although  they  remained
         married  throughout  he  denied  paternity   and   there   was   no
         satisfactory evidence of paternity. (paragraph 26)

      g) They considered the alternative situation if the Appellant's  child
         was a British citizen (paragraph 28)

      h) They found that there was no family life between the Appellant  and
         mr Mahmood or with her brother Mr Ahmed.

      i) They considered whether even if they accepted that there was family
         life capable of supporting the application there were  sufficiently
         compelling circumstances so as to justify the grant of leave  under
         Article 8 outside the Rules on  the  basis  that  the  decision  to
         refuse entry clearance  is  unjustifiably  harsh  by  reference  to
         caselaw.

      j) They reminded themselves that the Appellant could not meet Appendix
         FM or paragraph 276ADE.

      k) They took into account that the  Appellant  had  a  stillborn  baby
         buried in the Uk whose grave she wished to visit but found that she
         would be able to do that with entry clearance as a visitor.

      l) The applied the guidance in  Razgar  and  found  the  decision  was
         proportionate (paragraph 38).

12. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing :

      a) The Tribunal took into account a letter received by the Tribunal on
         24.4.2014 which neither the Appellant nor her  representatives  had
         seen and taking it into account was a procedural irregularity.

      b) The tribunal gave undue weight to the affidavit of  14.12.2011  and
         the letter of 24 April 2014: given his failure to attend  court  in
         response to a summons no weight  should  have  been  given  to  his
         letter and affidavit.

      c) The tribunal failed to consider the presumption of legitimacy  when
         considering the paternity and nationality of the child.

      d) The assessment of proportionality and exceptional circumstances was
         flawed.

      e) The tribunal should have allowed the  appeal  as  this  would  have
         allowed paternity and British Citizenship to be established.

13. On 23 October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Renton  refused  permission  to
    appeal. The application was renewed on 29 October 2014.

14. On 19 February 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman sted  that  it  would
    have been an error for the panel to  base  its  decision  on  a  letter
    received from a third party and not communicated to the parties but the
    grounds were 'seriously misleading' in that paragraph  15  states  that
    the Appellant's counsel received and considered a copy of  the  letter.
    However permission was granted on the basis of the third ground  as  he
    suggested  that  the  question  of  which  legal  system  governed  the
    paternity question was enough to call for debate.

15. The Appellant did not attend the  appeal  and  those  representing  her
    indicated that they wished the matter  decided  on  the  basis  of  the
    papers submitted which included a skeleton argument.

16. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

      a) He challenged  the  merit  of  grounds  which  were  deceptive  and
         misleading.

      b) To assert that no weight can be placed on a document in the absence
         of oral evidence was not sustainable: the matter of the  weight  to
         attach to such evidence was a matter for the judge.

      c) This courts function was to deal with Immigration cases not  settle
         paternity issues.

      d) The Appellant did not need to be in the United Kingdom  to  resolve
         her marriage and the paternity of her child as court  hearings  can
         be conducted from abroad.

      e) The matter had come before the family Court and they had refused to
         make an order of paternity and it was not a matter for  this  court
         to resolve.

      f) To suggest that the Appellant had been abandoned  in  Pakistan  was
         also misleading as the Appellant was a  Pakistani  national  living
         with her family.

Finding on Material Error

17. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

18. This was a rehearing of an appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance
    by the Appellant whose marriage to a British citizen  had  broken  down
    while she was living in Pakistan. While there she had  given  birth  to
    child whose paternity was denied by her husband.

19. The grounds and skeleton argument appear to accept that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  either  as  a
    returning resident or as a spouse and could only ever  succeed  on  the
    basis of Article 8 outside the Rules.

20. I find that the suggestion that there was an procedural irregularity in
    the Judges taking into account the contents of a letter dated 24  April
    2014 from Mr Mahmood when the Appellant and her Representatives had not
    seen it or been given an opportunity to be heard  in  relation  to  the
    letter was indeed 'seriously misleading'. The decision makes  clear  at
    paragraph 15 that Ms Patel, counsel who represented the Appellant, both
    saw and considered the letter in issue. She had the opportunity to make
    an application for an adjournment and  did  not  do  so.  She  had  the
    opportunity to make submissions to the Judges about the contents of the
    letter and the weight that should be attached to it.

21. The argument that too much weight was given to the affidavit and letter
    which were not supported by oral evidence has not merit: it is  not  an
    arguable error of law for an  Immigration  Judge  to  give  too  little
    weight or too  much  weight  to  a  evidence  unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.

22. In relation to the argument that the Tribunal  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the presumption of  legitimacy  I  note  firstly  that
    while arguments were advanced before the Judge as to the presumption of
    legitimacy in British Law there was no attempt to argue that  the  same
    applied to a child born and habitually  resident  in  Pakistan  as  the
    result of a marriage in Pakistan. I am also satisfied firstly that  the
    court had noted in setting out the undisputed facts of the case that  a
    specialist Tribunal had already been asked to make  a  declaration  for
    parentage but refused to do so on the basis that the Appellant and  her
    child were habitually resident in Pakistan and  not  domiciled  in  the
    United Kingdom and the application was dismissed.(paragraph 14) In  the
    absence of clear evidence it was open to the Judges  to  conclude  that
    this tribunal was not the place for the issue to be resolved.

23. I am satisfied moreover that the Tribunal considered  the  matter  both
    from the perspective that the child was not  the  child  of  a  British
    citizen (paragraph 27) and that she was (paragraph 28-29) and concluded
    that neither was a reason for 'pursuing paternity  proceedings  against
    Mr Mahmood through' the back door' of immigration control.'  This was a
    finding open to them.

24. In relation to the assessment of proportionality I  am  satisfied  that
    the Judges applied the correct test in considering whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances and that test was endorsed more  recently  the
    Court of Appeal in SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 stated in paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

25. Those who represent the Appellant are unable to  point  to  any  factor
    that the Judges ignored in their detailed analysis of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and thus I am satisfied that the grounds  are  simply  an
    attempt to challenge the weight attributed the various arguments placed
    before them in relation to the proportionality assessment.  They  argue
    in the grounds that it is 'in the interests of  justice  to  allow  the
    appeal, which would then allow paternity and thus  British  Citizenship
    to be established.' The tribunal took this argument  into  account  and
    dismissed it as a compelling reason for a grant of  leave  outside  the
    Rules(paragraph 29)

26. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

27. I was therefore satisfied that the Tribunal's determination  when  read
    as a whole set out findings  that  were  sustainable  and  sufficiently
    detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

28. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judges determination should stand.

DECISION

29. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 31.8.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
