

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16089/2014
                                                               OA/16117/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd June 2016                              |On 3rd June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MARIE ANGELA ORS
                                MR ETHEM ORS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. I Jarvis; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Walsh; Instructed by Morgan HAS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a  decision
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker promulgated  on  29th  September
       2015 in which  he  allowed  the  appeals  against  the  respondent's
       decisions of 18th November 2014 to refuse the applications  made  by
       Mrs Marie Ors and her son Ethem Ors for entry clearance as a partner
       and child under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


    2. The appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer, and the respondents  to
       this appeal are Mrs Marie Ors and Mr Ethem Ors.  However for ease  of
       reference, in the course of this decision I shall adopt the  parties'
       status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall  refer  to
       Mrs Marie Ors and Mr Ethem Ors  as  the  appellants,  and  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer as the respondent.


    3. By way of background, Mrs Marie Ors applied for entry clearance under
       paragraph EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  Her son,
       Ethem Ors applied for entry clearance  under  paragraph  EC-C.1.1  of
       Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. The applications  were  refused
       for the reasons set out in a  Refusal  of  Entry  Clearance  decision
       dated 18th November 2014 served upon each of the appellants.  Broadly
       put, the respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellants  met  the
       income threshold requirement by reference to the  related  evidential
       requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE.  The respondent set  out  the
       evidential requirements and concluded that not all of  the  specified
       evidence had been provided in support of the application.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker


    4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out at paragraphs [1] to [4],  the
       background.  At paragraphs [5] to [11]  he  sets  out  the  relevant
       burden and standard of proof. At paragraph [11], the Judge states:


           "The circumstances relating to the claims under the ECHR are  to
           be assessed as at the hearing  date.  I  may  consider  evidence
           about any matter which I think relevant to the substance of  the
           decisions, including evidence which concerns  a  matter  arising
           after the date of the decision (NIAA 2002, Section 85(4))."


    5. At paragraph [12] of the decision, the Judge sets out a  summary  of
       the  reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for  the  refusal  of  the
       applications.  The Judge's findings are to be  found  at  paragraphs
       [22] to [27] of  the  decision.   The  Judge  found  the  appellants
       sponsor to be credible and consistent,  and  having  considered  the
       evidence before him, the Judge found  at  paragraph  [27]  that  the
       sponsor's income is as claimed and  is  evidenced  by  the  P60  and
       payment of income tax.


    6. The findings made by the Judge in that paragraph are far from clear.
        It seems that the Judge accepts that the evidential requirements in
       Appendix FM-SE are not met, but finds that the sponsor's  income  is
       in excess of the income threshold set out in Appendix FM. The  Judge
       went on at paragraph [28] to state:


           "I therefore accept that  the  Sponsor  has  met  the  financial
           requirements of paragraph E-ECP.3.3."


    7.  The Judge therefore allowed the appeal under the immigration  rules
       and did not consider the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


 The grounds of appeal


    8. The respondent advances one ground of appeal.   That is, it was  not
       open to the Judge to  make  a  finding  that  the  income  threshold
       requirement is met under the immigration rules in the absence of the
       specified evidence.  The Judge failed to consider  the  matters  set
       out in the decision of the respondent identifying the absence of the
       specified evidence set out in paragraph 9 of Appendix FM-SE.


    9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lever
       on 11th April 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider  whether
       or not the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker involved the
       making of a material  error  of  law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
       decision.


   10. Before me, Mr Jarvis submits that Appendix FM-SE expressly sets  out
       the specified evidence that an applicant needs to  provide  to  meet
       the requirements of Appendix FM.   He  submits  that  the  appellant
       relied upon the sponsor's income from employment and/or shares in  a
       limited company based in the UK, in which the sponsor is a  director
       and shareholder, and thus the evidence set out at paragraphs 9(b) to
       (d) was required in support of the application.   He submits that in
       reaching  his  decision,  the  Judge  failed  to  focus   upon   the
       requirements of Appendix FM-SE  and  made  his  decision  simply  by
       reference to his own view that the  income  requirements  were  met,
       having had regard to the sponsor's P60 for the tax year  ending  5th
       April 2015.  Mr Jarvis submits that the  Judge  erred  in  taking  a
       personal  view  without  having  proper  regard  to  the  evidential
       requirements that are expressly set out in Appendix FM-SE.


   11. Although not a ground set out in the respondent's grounds of appeal,
       Mr Jarvis also submitted that the Judge erred at paragraph  [11]  of
       the decision that the claims under the ECHR are to be assessed as at
       the hearing date.  Whilst it is perfectly clear from the decision of
       the House of Lords in AS (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32 that consideration
       of Article 8 in respect of an out of country entry clearance  appeal
       is to occur at the date of the decision and  not  the  date  of  the
       hearing, the Judge allowed the appeal under  the  immigration  rules
       without any consideration of the claim under the ECHR.


   12.  Mr  Walsh  rightly  in  my  view,  conceded  that  the   evidential
       requirements  set  out  in  Appendix  FM-SE  were  not  met  by  the
       appellants.    By  way  of  illustration,  he  accepted   that   the
       appellants had failed to provide the Company Tax  Return  CT600  for
       the last full financial year and evidence this has been  filed  with
       HMRC, or the corporate/business bank statements covering the same 12-
       month period as  the  Company  Tax  Return  CT600.   Similarly,  the
       appellants had  not  provided  a  current  appointment  report  from
       Companies House as required by paragraph 9(b)(vi) of Appendix  FM-SE
       or one of the documents set out at paragraph 9(b)(vii)  of  Appendix
       FM-SE.  As to the dividends received  by  the  appellant,  Mr  Walsh
       accepted that the appellants had not provided all of  the  documents
       set out at paragraph 9(d) of Appendix FM-SE.


   13. Mr Walsh submits that notwithstanding the absence  of  some  of  the
       documentary evidence required by Appendix FM-SE, the Judge had found
       the  sponsor  to  be  a  credible  witness  and  had  exercised  his
       discretion in reaching the finding that the sponsor's income  is  as
       claimed and that the appellants have met the financial requirements.


 Discussion


   14. It is useful to begin by setting out  the  relevant  requirements  of
       Appendix FM-SE:


         Evidence of Financial Requirements under Appendix FM


         A1. To meet the financial requirement under paragraphs  E-ECP.3.1.,
         E-LTRP.3.1.,  E-ECC.2.1.  and  E-LTRC.2.1.  of  Appendix  FM,   the
         applicant must meet:


               .       (a) The level of financial requirement applicable  to
                 the application under Appendix FM; and


               .       (b) The requirements specified  in  Appendix  FM  and
                 this Appendix as to:


                     .        (i)  The  permitted  sources  of  income   and
                       savings;


                  (ii)  The  time  periods  and  permitted  combinations  of
sources                            applicable  to  each   permitted   source
relied upon; and


                       (iii) The evidence required for each permitted source
         relied upon.


   15. In my judgement the Judge erred by  not  adequately  considering  the
       evidential requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   The  Judge  erred  in
       allowing the appeal having concluded that the substantive maintenance
       requirement was met simply  by  reference  to  his  analysis  of  the
       evidence before him as to the sponsor's income.


   16. I reject the submission made by Mr Walsh that  it  was  open  to  the
       Judge, having found that the sponsor was a credible witness,  in  the
       exercise of discretion, to find that the  financial  requirements  of
       the immigration rules are met. In considering whether the  appellants
       could succeed under the immigration rules the Judge  failed  to  make
       any reference to the relevant parts of Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE
       of Immigration Rules either directly or in substance.


   17. The Judge was aware that the respondent had refused the  applications
       because the evidence required  under  Appendix  FM-SE  had  not  been
       provided with the application.  The Judge notes, in summary form, the
       reasons for refusal at paragraph [12] of his decision.   However,  in
       his findings at paragraph [22] to [27] of the decision, he  does  not
       refer to any of the evidential requirements set out in  Appendix  FM-
       SE.  It was important for the Judge to do  so  because  to  meet  the
       level of financial requirement applicable to the  applications  under
       Appendix FM, the appellants must meet the requirements  specified  in
       Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE, as to the permitted sources of income
       and savings, the time periods, and the  evidence  required  for  each
       permitted source relied upon.


   18. It follows that in  my  judgment,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal discloses a material error of law and the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   19. Having allowed the appeal under the immigration rules, the Judge  did
       not go on to consider the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


   20. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


            '7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;


            (a)   the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


            (b)   the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is
                  necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                  made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'


   21. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(a) and (b)  apply.   The
       Judge has failed to set out and consider in his decision any  of  the
       evidence that was before him as to the appeal on Article  8  grounds.
       The nature and extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  with
       regard to the claim claim under Article  8  will  be  extensive.  The
       parties will be advised  of  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   23. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


   24. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.





Signed                                             Date 3rd June 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award.  As I  have  set  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remitted the matter  for  re-hearing
I make no fee award.

Signed                                             Date 3rd June 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
