
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16624/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th December 2014                            |On 16th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               shagufta akram
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs J Desouza of Counsel instructed by Ifrahim & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against the determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid  promulgated  on  9th  September
    2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 1st January 1948, who
    applied for entry clearance as an adult dependant relative,  to  enable
    her to settle in the United Kingdom  with  her  son  Irfan  Akram  (the
    Sponsor).

 4. The application was  refused  on  23rd  June  2013  with  reference  to
    paragraph E-ECDR2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The ECO was not satisfied that  the  Claimant,  as  a  result  of  age,
    illness or disability, required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday tasks, and was not satisfied that she would  not  be  able  to
    obtain the required level of care in Pakistan.

 5. The Claimant's appeal was heard by  Judge  Majid  (the  judge)  on  3rd
    September 2014.  After hearing evidence  from  the  Sponsor  the  judge
    allowed the appeal, under the Immigration Rules, and it  would  appear,
    also on human rights grounds.

 6. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    summary it was contended that the judge had not addressed the terms  of
    the refusal decision which indicated that no evidence had been provided
    to show that the Claimant required long-term personal care as  required
    by E-ECDR2.4.  It was submitted that  the  judge  had  also  failed  to
    address the requirements of E-ECDR2.5, and failed to take into  account
    the evidential requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE.

 7. It was also contended that the judge had erred  in  his  assessment  of
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  adequately
    explained why he had considered Article 8 outside the  rules,  and  had
    not explained how family life was engaged between the Sponsor  and  the
    Claimant as both are adults, and family life between adults  would  not
    normally exist unless there were further elements of dependency  beyond
    the normal emotional ties.

 8. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  adequately  explain
    findings on material issues.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lever who  set  out  in  the  concluding  paragraph  of  his  grant  of
    permission;

         "There are substantial concerns with this decision and  the  points
         raised by the Respondent in the application  touch  upon  some  and
         demonstrate that there were clearly arguable errors of law in  this
         case."

10. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The ECO's Submissions

11. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.   Mr  Nath  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    adequately explained how the requirements of  E-ECDR2.4  and  2.5  were
    satisfied, and had incorrectly assessed Article 8.

The Claimant's Submissions

12. Mrs Desouza submitted that there was no material error of  law  in  the
    determination.

13. Although it was conceded that the determination  did  not  disclose  an
    analysis of the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  the  evidence  which
    indicated that the rules were satisfied, I was asked to accept that the
    Claimant did in fact satisfy the Immigration Rules, and that the  judge
    had not erred in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules or  on
    human rights grounds.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. As I indicated at the hearing, the judge erred in law and the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for the following reasons.

15. The  judge  did  not  engage  with  the  reasons  for  refusal  of  the
    application under the Immigration Rules.   There  was  no  satisfactory
    analysis of the requirements of E-ECDR2.4 and 2.5.

16. No adequate findings were made  as  to  how  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were satisfied, and no satisfactory analysis  of  the
    evidential requirements as set out in Appendix FM-SE at  paragraphs  34
    and 35.

17. Inadequate reasons  were  given  for  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is not clear why the appeal  was  allowed  under
    the rules.  In relation to adequacy of reasoning I set  out  below  the
    head note to Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

    It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.   This
    leads to judgments becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It  is,  however,  necessary
    for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost.

18. I do not consider that the judge complied with the obligations set  out
    above as to adequacy of reasons.

19. The judge erred in his consideration of Article  8,  in  not  giving  a
    satisfactory explanation as to  why  Article  8  should  be  considered
    outside the rules, and how Article 8 was engaged.  Inadequate reasoning
    was given for allowing the appeal under Article 8, and no comprehensive
    balancing exercise carried out in relation to proportionality.

20. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mrs  Desouza
    suggested that it would be appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal, and Mr Nath agreed.

21. I decided that it was appropriate to remit to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    although I was conscious that re-making rather than  remitting  is  the
    normal approach to determining appeals where an error of law is  found.
    In deciding to  remit  the  appeal  I  took  into  account  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement 7.2 which states;


    7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that;
         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or
         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

22. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2 are met.

23. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal will take place,  unless  the
    parties are advised in writing to the contrary, on 2nd January 2015  at
    10am at the Taylor House Hearing Centre.  The appeal is to be heard  by
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Majid.  The appeal  is  to
    be considered afresh and no findings are preserved.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.  There was  no  request
to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and no anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 8th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside so is  the  fee
award.  The fee award must be considered again by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
when the appeal is re-heard.


Signed   Date 8th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
