
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16708/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 July 2013                                  |On 20 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           ROGHAYEH IMANI GOURJAGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - istanbul


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ghani, Ismail & Ghani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Roghayeh Imani Gourjagh, was born on 27  September  1966
    and is a female  citizen  of  Iran.   On  15  August  2012,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Istanbul  refused  the  appellant's  application  for
    settlement in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a  refugee,  Eznollah
    Kamili  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the  sponsor).   The   First-tier
    Tribunal, in a determination promulgated on 18  April  2013,  dismissed
    her appeal against that decision.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Keane, wrote:

         "The grounds of appeal disclose an error of law.   In  arriving  at
         his findings, the judge accorded weight to Mr Kamali's  conduct  in
         embarking upon a period of two years' absconding after  he  claimed
         asylum on arrival in the United  Kingdom.   Such  conduct  led  the
         judge to find that Mr Kamali's claim that he wished to be  reunited
         with  his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  lack  credibility.
         However, the judge had approbated  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
         acceptance that the appellant and Mr Kamali were  married  to  each
         other, that the appellant  is  the  mother  of  Mr  Kamali's  three
         children and the judge referred, and critically, to documents which
         included a marriage certificate and proof that  the  children  were
         indeed the appellant's and Mr Kamali's children (paragraphs 21  and
         22 of the determination).  There  were  in  addition  a  number  of
         photographs which show the appellant and Mr Kamali and  there  were
         photographs of their children.  The judge arguably did  not  accord
         sufficient  weight  to  the  above-mentioned  evidence  which   may
         establish  that  the  appellant  and  Mr  Kamali  intend  to   live
         permanently with each other and that their marriage is a subsisting
         marriage but for such an error the appeal might have  been  decided
         differently."

 3. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge reached findings  which  were
    open to him on the evidence.  He  did  not  fail  to  take  account  of
    evidence which was relevant nor did he take account of  evidence  which
    was irrelevant.  The issue in the appeal was not  (as  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the grounds of permission appear to suggest) in part whether
    the appellant and sponsor had contracted a legal  marriage  or  whether
    the children referred to were the natural biological  children  of  the
    appellant and sponsor.  That much of the appellant's  case  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge [at 22] appeared to  have  accepted,  noting  that,
    "the Entry Clearance Manager does not  dispute  that  the  couple  were
    married nor that they have three children."  The judge refers  at  [23]
    to the sponsor's appeal to an Immigration Judge of the refusal  of  his
    asylum claim and to the lack of credibility in the  sponsor's  evidence
    identified by the Immigration Judge.  I find that it was  open  to  the
    judge in the instant appeal to take  those  findings  into  account  in
    assessing whether or not the appellant had proved that  she  was  in  a
    subsisting relationship with the sponsor.   The  judge  noted  at  [23]
    that,

         "... I find that [Mr Kamali's] claim he wanted to bring his  family
         here lacks credibility.  If the appellant genuinely wished to claim
         asylum to have his family join him, I do not find it credible that,
         after claiming asylum, he would abscond for two years.  I find  the
         behaviour of the appellant seriously undermines his credibility."

    At [30], the judge found that,

         "[The sponsor's] subsequent period  of  absconding  in  the  United
         Kingdom [together with his actions in  leaving  the  appellant  and
         children in 2008 to make the journey to the United Kingdom] are not
         consisted with an ongoing subsisting  relationship.   There  is  no
         cogent evidence of any contact  between  the  couple  during  those
         years."

    Those are clearly findings available to the judge.

 4. The grounds complain that the judge failed to  give  proper  weight  to
    photographs  allegedly  showing  meetings  between  the  appellant  and
    sponsor and the children.  However, the judge found at [30], that  "the
    photographs merely show meetings have taken place between the  couple."
    That again was a finding open to the judge; indeed, it is difficult  to
    see how the judge should have found that the photographs did more  than
    indicate that the sponsor  and  appellant  had  met;  it  is  virtually
    impossible for still photographs to convey the depth or strength of any
    relationships which may exist between individuals  appearing  in  them.
    In the light of the view taken of the other evidence by the  judge,  it
    is hardly surprising that the judge did not find that  the  photographs
    were sufficient to discharge the burden of proof on the appellant  that
    a relationship with the sponsor was subsisting.

 5. I find that the  grounds  amount  to  little  more  than  dispute  with
    findings which were available to the judge on the evidence before  him.
    The  grounds  fail  to  identify  an  error  of  law  such   that   the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   be   set   aide.
    Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 31 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
