
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16124/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2016                                |On 8 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Faiza Baishe Asman
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon of Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co,
solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant", is a  citizen
    of Kenya born on 28 July 1978.   Her  several  applications  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom are briefly described in paragraph 1 of
    the decision by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Peter-John  White
    promulgated on 8 January 2016 allowing her appeal against  the  refusal
    on 11 November 2014 by the Appellant  (the  ECO)  to  grant  her  entry
    clearance to join her husband Daudi Md. Yusuf,  a  national  of  Kenya,
    born on 1 July 1959, to whom on 7 October  1991  indefinite  leave  was
    granted.

 2. They had married in Mombasa on 16 December 2011.  He  is  her  Sponsor.
    He has an adult daughter by his previous marriage who  lives  with  her
    mother.  He has a son born in 1999 who lives with him and in respect of
    whom a Parental Responsibility Order in  his  favour  was  made  on  27
    November 2000.

The Original Decision

 3. In the refusal of 11 November 2014 the ECO considered the Applicant did
    not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  E-EC-P.1.1  (eligibility  for
    entry clearance) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and noted  the
    Applicant had not submitted the Sponsor's divorce certificate  and  the
    evidence which she had submitted of the subsistence of the marriage was
    limited and that there was no clear evidence whether he had visited her
    since  January  2012.   The  ECO   concluded   that   the   Applicant's
    relationship with her husband was not genuine and subsisting  and  that
    they did not intend permanently to live together.  However at the  part
    of the decision referring to paragraph E-ECP.1.1  the  ECO  stated  the
    Applicant  had  "not  submitted  the  required  financial   requirement
    Appendix form and  had  therefore  not  provided  information  that  is
    pertinent to the consideration of your visa application."

 4. On 16 July 2015 the Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision.  The
    record of the review is in formulaic terms.

 5. On 9 December 2014 the Applicant through her solicitors  lodged  notice
    of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended (the 2002  Act).   The  grounds  are  lengthy.   In
    essence  they  assert  the  ECO  should   have   taken   into   account
    documentation including the divorce certificate  which  had  previously
    been lodged by the Applicant in relation to earlier  applications  made
    in 2012.  Alternatively the Applicant should have been asked to  supply
    such documentation if it had been omitted  from  her  Visa  Application
    Form before the ECO made a decision.  Reference is  also  made  to  her
    rights to a private and family life  protected  by  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. By the decision promulgated on 8 January 2016  already  mentioned,  the
    Applicant's appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.  The  Judge
    found that the evidence of the Applicant's  husband  was  credible  and
    reliable as was the evidence of  his  son.   The  Judge  concluded  the
    Applicant's marriage was genuine and subsisting and allowed the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 7. The ECO sought permission to appeal and on 26 May  2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal J M Holmes granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    "short point that the Judge failed to engage with all the reasons given
    by the ECO for refusing the application, and thus failed to resolve all
    of the disputed issues of fact."  He went on to explain it was arguable
    that Judge White was bound to consider the evidential  requirements  of
    Appendix FM-SE.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Sponsor attended the hearing in the Upper Tribunal although he took
    no active part in the proceedings.

 9. For the ECO, Ms Ahmad submitted the decision made it clear that the ECO
    considered the Applicant had not met the financial requirements of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  need  for  the  Applicant  to   meet   these
    requirements had not been  conceded.   The  details  of  the  Sponsor's
    employment had been inserted in the Applicant's Visa  Application  Form
    of 10 November 2014 (the VAF).  At paragraph  9  of  his  decision  the
    Judge had referred to evidence which had been put  before  him  of  the
    husband's  financial  circumstances  but  subsequently  had   made   no
    reference to it and whether  the  Applicant  had  shown  she  with  her
    husband could satisfy the  relevant  maintenance  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  Judge  had  not  addressed  this  issue  and
    consequently his decision could not stand.

10. For the Applicant, Mr Solomon submitted there was no material error  of
    law in the Judge's decision.  It was necessary to distinguish between a
    failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and a failure
    to complete the relevant form with the requisite financial information.
     Failure to submit the form was not material to the application and  it
    did not mean the Applicant did not  meet  the  financial  requirements.
    The ECO had failed to separate the two elements of the refusal and  had
    dealt with the application exclusively by way of reference to paragraph
    E-EC-P.1.1 which  set  out  the  criteria  for  eligibility  for  entry
    clearance as a partner.  The ECO had not referred to paragraph  E-ECP.3
    which dealt with the financial requirements.

11. The first paragraph of the section of the refusal headed "Decision" was
    simply a mere observation and did not amount to a reason for refusal of
    entry clearance.  This view was strengthened  by  the  absence  of  any
    reference  to  paragraph  E-ECP.3  in  the  decision.   The  Judge  was
    therefore correct in viewing the only issue raised in the  refusal  was
    the Applicant's marriage.

12. In the alternative, Mr Solomon submitted that the relevant sections  of
    the VAF comprised the relevant form.



Consideration and Decision

13. Copies of the ECO's decisions on the previous application made  by  the
    Applicant for entry clearance as a spouse or the  documentary  evidence
    to show that the maintenance requirements of Appendix FM were met  were
    before  neither  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  the  Upper   Tribunal.
    Accordingly, there was no evidence that at any prior time the  ECO  had
    accepted the Applicant  with  her  husband  was  able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix  FM  or  indeed  Appendix  FM-SE  because  the
    reference in the decision is to the completion  of  the  relevant  form
    with submission of the relevant supporting  documentation.   Subsequent
    to the Applicant's appeal, it is clear the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review did not identify the point.  Nevertheless, the original  grounds
    of appeal state that  the  Applicant's  earlier  application  had  been
    refused in part because the Applicant had not shown that  she  and  her
    husband  were  able  to  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules: see para.4.

14. Consequently, the Applicant had been made aware that when preparing her
    later application leading to the decision under appeal she  would  have
    to address the maintenance requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I do
    not think that either the Applicant or the ECO  were  assisted  by  the
    fact that the ECO's agent who  assembled  the  application  incorrectly
    completed the section on the checklist of  documents  filed  under  the
    section "Finances": see page 44 of the ECO's bundle.

15. The Applicant was on notice from her  previous  settlement  application
    and from an awareness that she would have to establish that  she  would
    be adequately maintained in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules that  she  was  not  misled  into
    believing that the ECO had conceded that requirement or that it was one
    from which she had been exempted.

16. The Judge was on notice from the reference, albeit mis-placed,  in  the
    ECO's refusal of entry clearance that the obligation of  the  Applicant
    to meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    outstanding.  Similarly, the Judge  erred  in  law  by  not  addressing
    whether the Applicant  satisfied  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

17. Consequently his decision in that respect must be  set  aside  but  his
    findings as to the  genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the  Applicant's
    marriage are retained and shall stand.   This  is  not  a  Points-Based
    System appeal and so the principles in DR (Morocco) (ECO: post-decision
    evidence) [2005] UKIAT 00038 will  apply  and  the  Applicant  and  her
    husband will  have  ample  opportunity  to  ensure  that  the  relevant
    documentation to show the Applicant meets the requirements of  Appendix
    FM is supported by evidence  in  the  specified  form  as  provided  by
    Appendix FM-SE.

18. Having  regard  to  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and paragraph 7 of the Practice  Statement  of  10
    February 2010 (as amended), the case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide whether the Applicant with her husband can meet  the
    relevant maintenance requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, in this  instance,  maintenance  does  not  include
    accommodation in respect of  which  the  Applicant  has  already  filed
    sufficient evidence.

Anonymity

19. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside and cannot stand.  The findings of fact in respect
    of the subsistence of  the  Applicant's  marriage  are  retained.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration whether
    the Applicant has shown she meets the maintenance requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   08.
vii. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
