
[pic]
|Upper Tribunal                        | Appeal Number OA.16451.2012   |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:   North Shields
On:   Tuesday 20th August 2013     On: Wednesday 3rd September 2013

                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                             Mrs Bona N Ufomadu


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                       Entry Clearance Officer Nigeria


                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:           Ms C Soltani
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison (Home Office Presenting Officer)



                                  Decision

   1. This matter appears before me following a grant of permission to
      appeal by First Tier Tribunal judge Landes on 16th April 2013 in which
      he recorded the following:

      1.   This is an in-time application by the appellant, a citizen of
      Nigeria, for permission to appeal against the determination of Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal Duff, dismissing her appeal against the
      entry clearance officer's refusal to grant her a family permit.


      2.   It is arguable as set out at ground 6 that the judge did not give
      adequate reasons for his finding at paragraph 12 of the determination
      that although there had been money transfers from the sponsor the
      appellant was not dependent upon those transfers and they were simply
      to raise the standard of living of the appellant's mother and father.
      The judge did not give explicit reasons for that finding in that
      paragraph.  It is right that the judge also found the sponsor not to
      be a satisfactory witness but the judge's findings as to dependency
      are arguably based on his finding that the appellant was living with
      her husband (see paragraph 11 determination).  The statement made with
      the application indicated that the appellant's husband, the sponsor's
      father was retired and the sponsor had said that he was supporting
      them both (see paragraph 7 determination).   It does not therefore
      follow automatically that because the couple were living as a family
      unit there was no dependency.

      3.   It is also arguable as set out at ground 8 that the judge at
paragraph 13 made an assumption not warranted by the evidence that  the
fact the appellant had obtained visit visas on two occasions fitted in
with the picture that the appellant was supported by her husband.   Given
that the appellant had to show intention to return, she will have   had to
have shown ties to Nigeria but it does not follow that her main
financial support would have had to have come from Nigeria.

      4.    I consider the other grounds to be thinner although for the
      avoidance of doubt all are arguable.  Although the judge made
      reference to the reason for the appellant coming to the UK, nothing is
      pointed to at grounds 4 or 5 to indicate where it is said the judge
      confused himself about the reason for the dependency and the judge's
      reference to necessity appears only to be in the context that to be
      dependent the monies supplied would have to fund basic needs which
      seem unobjectionable.  Given that it was agreed between the
      representatives that the only consideration was financial dependency
      (paragraph 5 determination) I do not see how it can be said that
      emotional support needed to be assessed.  It may be that is a
      reference to the judge's assessment under Article 8 ECHR but if so
      that is not specified.


   2. The Home Office made the following submissions under Rule 24 of the
      procedure rules:

      1.    The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary of State for the
      Home Department.  Documents relating to this appeal should be sent to
      the Secretary of State for the Home Department, at the above address.




      2.    The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal.  In summary, the
      respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

      3.    The judge makes a series of clear and unambiguous findings as
to the reliability of the sponsor and the situation of the sponsor's
mother in Nigeria.

      4.    It was open to the judge to conclude that there was attempt to
mislead the respondent and that the intention was to obtain the
appellant's mother's services as a provider of child care.

      5.    There as clear evidence that suggested that the appellant and
her husband were not separated as claimed and even the   representative
acknowledged these inconsistencies.

      6.    The respondent requests an oral hearing.

   3. Ms Soltani's main submission was that whist at paragraph 12 the First
      Tier Tribunal at the first hearing had recorded the following:

      "Whilst I accept that those transfers have been made I do not accept
      that the appellant has been dependant upon such transfers and I find
      that they have been made for the benefit of the appellant's mother and
      father to raise their standards of living in Nigeria but not on the
      basis of necessity to fund the basics of life."


   4. There was no restriction upon the nature of the dependency such as the
      First Tier Tribunal Judge had described when considering the EEA
      regulations. She relied for that proposition upon the case of SM India
      Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2009] EWCA Civ 1426. Her submission
      was to the effect that a dependency having been established and
      accepted the reasons for it, given by the judge i.e. to provide more
      than the basics was an error of law.


   5. SM (India)  at  paragraph  21  Sullivan  LJ  noted  the  following  in
      commenting upon the ECJ case of Jia (Free movement of persons)  [2007]
      EUECJ C-105

      "Having expressly endorsed Lebon in paragraphs 35 and 36, there is  no
      reason, in my judgment, to read the discussion in paragraph 37 of  the
      extent or the degree of need  that  has  to  be  established,  "having
      regard to their financial and social conditions they are not  able  to
      support themselves ... in the State of origin",  as  qualifying,  much
      less as conflicting with, the proposition in Lebon that, if  there  is
      recourse to support to meet what are described as "essential needs  in
      the state of origin" in paragraph 43, there is no  need  to  determine
      why or to ask whether the person so supported would be able to support
      themselves by taking up paid employment."


   6. It is clear from that  paragraph  that  whilst  the  reasons  for  the
      dependency, in the sense that a choice is exercised as to who or  what
      provides the support are  matters  of  choice,  the  actual  need  for
      dependency is not. There must first be "essential  needs".  The  First
      Tier Tribunal judge found that there was no such need, rather that the
      sponsor supplied money over and above that essential need.


   7. The First Tier Tribunal  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account
      inconsistencies, such as the sponsor suggesting in his statement  that
      his parents still lived together and that he was their main source  of
      income, rather than  his  mother  having  been  abandoned,  and  other
      features in coming to the conclusions that he did, and he  gave  clear
      reasons for that, no one can be in any doubt as to why he found as  he
      did and upon what evidence, which is the requirement.


   8. As to the previous visit visa applications the First Tier Tribunal did
      not make  them  the  main  part  of  his  reasoning,  he  accepted  an
      inference, that they were much more likely to be granted  if  evidence
      of support from within Nigeria was produced and the appellant has  not
      in fact suggested otherwise, simply pointing to  an  absence  of  hard
      evidence that this is so. In those circumstances I find that there  is
      no error of law within the decision of the First Tier Tribunal.



                                  Decision


There is no material error of law within the decision of the First Tier
Tribunal


                                                      [pic]Judge John Aitken
                                                    Deputy Chamber President
                                    Health Education and Social Care Chamber
                                                    Monday, 2 September 2013


