

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16057/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 10 February 2015                           |On 12 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                MERDI KASONGO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The sponsor in  these  proceedings  is  Guelord  Kisongo,  born  on  20
    September 1982.  He and his relatives are all citizens of the DRC.   He
    was recognised as a refugee in the UK in 2010.  His  household  in  the
    DRC included his wife, Shella  Mbelu,  born  on  6  January  1986;  his
    brother, Jizreel Kisongo, born on 1 August 1997; his  daughter,  Gracia
    Kisongo, born on 10 December 2002 of an earlier relationship;  and  his
    nephew (his brother's son), Merdi Kisongo, born on 9 January 2002,  the
    appellant.

 2. All four of those relatives sought entry clearance for  family  reunion
    in the UK.  The application by Gracia was granted,  and  she  has  been
    here with the sponsor for about two years.  Jizreel did not appeal.

 3. Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal by Shella Mbelu (OA/14464/2012)  and
    Merdi Kisongo were heard by Judge D'Ambrosio on 13 May and 4 July 2014.
     In his determination promulgated on 29 July 2014  he  found  that  the
    relationship between the sponsor and  his  wife  was  as  claimed,  and
    allowed her appeal under the Immigration Rules.  At  paragraph  138  he
    said that because he had allowed the appeal under the Rules it would be
    disproportionate and unlawful for the respondent to continue to  refuse
    entry, so he allowed her appeal also under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The
    Judge found that Merdi's case failed under the  Immigration  Rules,  an
    outcome which is not disputed, and dismissed it also under Article 8.

 4.  The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

          2. ... the FtT allowed Gracia and the  sponsor  to  resume  family
          life with Shella following her entry to the UK .... The effect  of
          refusing [the appeal of Merdi] was that a twelve year old  boy  is
          now living in Congo with the prospect of his mother figure leaving
          him, following his father figure having been  separated  from  him
          through fear of persecution [and]  disappearance  of  his  natural
          mother who is presumed dead ... the sponsor confirms  that  Shella
          ... cannot leave a twelve year old boy in Congo ... the  situation
          borders on the perverse.

          3.  ... the FtT was referred to Mohamoud (paras 352D and 309A - de
          facto adoption) [2011] UKUT 378 ... similar in its facts  ...  the
          appeal was allowed under Article 8 ...  the  Rules  are  meant  to
          protect children, and from the risk of being passed from one adult
          to  another   without   appropriate   safeguards.    Despite   the
          difficulties of refugee families meeting the terms  of  the  Rules
          this does not justify departing from the Rules given that  Article
          8 is available ...

          ... the FtT refused the case under Article 8  inter  alia  on  the
          basis that failure to maintain and accommodate without recourse to
          public funds tipped the  balance  ...  such  reasoning  is  wholly
          inadequate ... it was wholly unlawful ... to fail to consider  the
          protection of the child in such a balancing exercise.

          ... the FtT erred by considering whether or  not  [Jizreel]  would
          apply to join the family unit ...

          4.  ... the findings on Article 8 are inadequate.

 5. Mr Bradley stressed that the appeal of Shella (who is now  in  the  UK)
    had been allowed not only under the Rules but also under Article 8.  If
    family life interests were such that it would  be  disproportionate  to
    deny her entry, it must have followed that the same interests  required
    the appellant's entry.  Mohamoud suggested that such  cases,  where  it
    was practically impossible to prove a de facto adoption in terms of the
    Rules, should succeed under Article 8.  The best interests of  children
    were to be respected also in entry clearance cases, and the  respondent
    was obliged to promote refugee family unity.  The Judge had not thought
    through the consequences of his two Article 8 decisions, and should not
    unnecessarily have worsened the family situation.

 6. Mrs O'Brien said that if the other  appeal  had  succeeded  "genuinely"
    under Article 8, it would have been odd to have different outcomes  for
    the two appellants; but the true situation was  that  having  succeeded
    under the Rules, she had no case requiring consideration under  Article
    8.  The Judge's finding that respect was not even  on  any  alternative
    basis.  He said specifically that he was allowing it  under  Article  8
    only because it succeeded under the Rules, which was otiose.  The Judge
    did not say why in Merdi's case he was looking  outside  the  Rules  at
    all.  Mohamoud did not require him to do so.   Although  the  case  did
    disclose an  anxious  family  situation,  the  Judge  had  not  reached
    inconsistent outcomes in the two appeals but had recognised there would
    be a difficult choice to make  (see  paragraph  159).    Accommodation,
    maintenance and general public funds considerations were not irrelevant
    but an important part of the public interest reflected  in  the  Rules.
    The SSHD was entitled through the Rules to set  the  considerations  by
    which some family members would be permitted entry and others not.  The
    Judge had undertaken a balancing exercise outside the  Rules,  although
    he had not said why the case called for that.  Assuming that the  Judge
    should have engaged in a proportionality assessment, there was no error
    in the outcome reached.

 7. Mr Bradley in reply said that the SSHD  had  not  "cross-appealed"  the
    Article 8 outcome for the other appellant, and it  must  have  followed
    that both appeals should succeed.  He accepted that the appellant has a
    route under the Rules, which includes  financial  requirements.   Those
    were not met in this case, although the sponsor has since started work,
    and the situation might be different on a future application.   He said
    that economic considerations could not trump the best  interests  of  a
    child.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. It would be very strange for Article 8 to require the entry  of  Shella
    but not of Merdi, both being  members  of  the  family  unit  and  both
    failing to meet the requirements of the Rules.  However,  and  although
    there has been no cross-appeal, the determination is  badly  framed  on
    that point.  Although the Judge was  bound  to  determine  all  matters
    raised as grounds of appeal (section 86(2)(a) 2002  Act),  once  it  is
    found that a case meets the requirements  of  the  Rules  there  is  no
    Article 8 interference to consider.  There is  no  scope  for  allowing
    under Article 8 because the respondent might "continue to refuse entry"
    after an appeal under the Rules has reached  a  successful  conclusion.
    The reason the Judge gave  for  success  under  Article  8  was  simply
    success under the Rules.  That is a misconception and of no benefit  to
    Merdi.  Although that is at first sight his best point at  this  stage,
    an unappealed technical error in her case cannot be the foundation  for
    substantive success in his.

10. Mohamoud is not  authority  for  generally  allowing  under  Article  8
    appeals by de facto adopted children who fail to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules.

11. The correct approach on the interaction of Article 8 and the  Rules  in
    family life cases is established by a series of cases.  When the First-
    tier Tribunal is sitting in Scotland it should  begin  with  MS  [2013]
    CSIH 52 where Lord Drummond Young, giving the  opinion  of  the  Court,
    said:

          It can be expected that the new rules will cover most cases  where
          an applicant seeks to rely on  his  or  her  Convention  right  to
          private and family life. If an official or tribunal  or  court  is
          asked to consider leave outside the rules, an applicant  must  put
          forward a reason for doing so. Such a reason will usually  consist
          of circumstances "in which refusal would result  in  unjustifiably
          harsh consequences for the individual such  that  refusal  of  the
          application would not be proportionate" (in the words of paragraph
          3.2.7d of the Home Secretary's guidance). We are of  opinion  that
          in considering whether such circumstances have  been  demonstrated
          by an applicant, the criterion that should be used is  that  of  a
          "good arguable case", as suggested  by  Sales J  in  the  passage
          quoted above. The decision maker should examine the  circumstances
          put forward by the applicant and determine whether they disclose a
          good arguable case that the  rules  would  produce  an  unfair  or
          disproportionate result such that the applicant's article 8 rights
          would be infringed. It is only if  that  test  is  satisfied  that
          there is any  need  to  go  on  to  consider  the  application  of
          article 8 in detail.

12. The Presenting Officer correctly pointed out  that  in  this  case  the
    Judge went straight into a proportionality assessment.

13. Whether or not the Judge was right to embark on that assessment, it has
    not been shown to suffer from any material legal  flaw.   There  is  an
    apparent inconsistency in the outcome of the two cases, but not a  real
    one.  The first appellant met the requirements of  the  Rules  and  the
    second did not.  Such outcomes are exactly what the Rules are  designed
    to  produce.   That  family  members  are  put  to  hard  choices,  are
    separated, and face financial requirements is  an  inevitable  part  of
    legitimate immigration control.  The Judge  at  paragraphs  147  -  160
    carefully weighed the factors on both sides.   He  did  not  take  into
    account any irrelevant factors and did not fail to  take  into  account
    any relevant factors.  He was entitled to strike the balance as he did.
     The Upper Tribunal is not entitled to interfere with his decision.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            11 February 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




