
[pic]


UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER            Appeal No. OA/16668/2013
                                                               OA/16669/2013
                                                               OA/16670/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Birmingham                              Decision Promulgated:
On: 21 August 2014



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                            Lilu Arjan Kuchhadiya
                          Jayshri Arjan Kuchhadiya
                            Arti Arjan Kuchhadiya

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - Mumbai

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Ruparelia, Just Legal Group
For the Respondent: Mr Dniwycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellants are nationals of India. They were born on  9  June  1997,  16
May 1999 and 11 November 2000, respectively. They are three  minor  siblings
who applied for entry clearance to join their British mother in the UK.

These are appeals against the determination promulgated on 14  May  2014  of
First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  which  refused  the   appellants'
appeals under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR brought  against  the
respondent's  decision  of  25  July  2013  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as
dependent children.

This appeal is misconceived. The applications were made  for  settlement  as
the children of someone settled in the UK. The relevant Immigration Rule  is
paragraph 297. The application form  used  showed  that  the  children  were
applying for settlement as the children of a British national.

The applications were refused in decisions dated 25 July 2013  on  the  sole
basis that the checks had shown that the company that  the  sponsor  claimed
to work for did not operate at the  address  given.  The  sponsor's  claimed
income was therefore not accepted.

The  decisions,  incorrectly,  phrased  the  finding  that   the   financial
requirements were not met in terms of the requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE.
Those requirements did not apply here where the  relevant  Immigration  Rule
was paragraph 297 and not Appendix FM.

Nevertheless, assisted, I should point out, by Mr Ruparelia  and  his  firm,
and the  respondent's  representative,  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal proceeded on the incorrect basis that the requirements of  Appendix
FM-SE had to be met.

The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the appellant's employer did  exist
and operate from the address she had given so did not find anything  in  the
respondent's sole ground of refusal.

The judge went on, however, to  find  that  other  documentary  requirements
from Appendix FM-SE were not met.

The grounds of appeal  prepared  by  Mr  Ruparelia's  firm,  challenged  the
findings  in  relation  to  Appendix  FM-SE  but  said  nothing  about   the
application having been considered on an entirely incorrect basis.

The grant of permission to appeal did not refuse permission on  the  grounds
relating to Appendix FM-SE but clearly considered that there was more  merit
in the grounds brought against the Article 8 decision.

At the hearing before me, Mr Ruparelia raised the issue of  the  application
being made under paragraph 297 and not Appendix  FM.  He  was  not  able  to
provide me with the legislation showing that his submission  on  this  point
was correct but  sent  part  of  the  transitional  provisions  relation  to
Appendix FM after the hearing. He did not apply for permission to  vary  his
grounds  to  include  this  point.  He  did  not  make  submissions  on  the
difficulty of this point becoming  arguable  before  me  where  it  was  not
argued before the First-tier Tribunal, did not form part of the  grounds  of
appeal and was not being something upon which permission to appeal had  been
granted.

Be that as it may, I do not dispute that the  application  and  appeal  were
considered by the respondent  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  wrong
basis.

It remains the case that this is not a  ground  of  appeal  before  me.  The
"Robinson-obvious" principle of taking points not previously argued  relates
to protection claims not settlement applications.

Further, even were this a ground before me, the appeals, whether  considered
under paragraph 297 or Appendix FM, had to fail. The maintenance or  finance
requirements for  the  children  could  not  be  met  unless  the  sponsor's
husband's income was taken into account. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  at
[23] did not find that his income was available to maintain or  finance  the
children.

This finding was open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  husband  had  not
signed the sponsorship documents for the children. There was nothing by  way
of a witness statement or any other document indicating that he was  willing
to  support  them  financially  or  that  he  supported   their   settlement
applications. The First-tier Tribunal judge was wholly entitled to  find  at
[21] that the sponsor's evidence  at  [13]  to  [15]  on  whether  his  bank
statements  were  submitted  with  the  entry  clearance   application   was
"inconsistent". She stated first at [14] that her husband's bank  statements
were submitted and then, at [15], that she did not know  if  they  had  been
submitted.

The Article 8 appeal also had to fail and no material error can  arise  from
the refusal of that part of  the  claim  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
situation was that the children would be coming to the UK where it  had  not
been shown that they could be adequately maintained to live with  a  sponsor
married to someone who had not shown that he supported  their  applications.
The evidence did not indicate that the children  were  living  in  difficult
circumstances in India such that the  decision  could  be  disproportionate.
The history of how the children came to remain in India and how  long  their
mother has been in the UK, if there had  been  any  visits  and  so  on  was
entirely unevidenced.

For these reasons, I did not  find  that  a  material  error  arose  in  the
decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   notwithstanding   the   incorrect
consideration of the Appendix FM-SE criteria.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 22 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




