
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA 16023 2012
                                                               OA 16029 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 January 2014                            |On 25 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               D--- D--- N---
                                  E--- S---
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, counsel instructed by Paragon Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are both citizens of Uganda and were both minors  at  the
    date of decision.  Although I appreciate  the  practice  of  the  family
    courts is being reviewed I find it undesirable for this decision  to  be
    published in a way that identifies the children and  I  make  the  usual
    order in this case restraining any publication  that   identifies  them.
    They were born in 1995 and 1999 respectively and made an application  to
    join their mother who is a person present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The applications were  refused  on  30  May  2012.   In  each  case  the
    respondent was satisfied that false documents had been used  to  support
    the application and that the appellants had  failed  to  show  that  the
    parent in the United Kingdom was exercising sole responsibility or  that
    there were serious and compelling  family  or  other  reasons  requiring
    their admission.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Freeman  who  gave  directions
    intended to focus  everyone's  attention  on  the  quality  of  evidence
    supporting the contention that false documents had been provided.

 4. I am entirely satisfied that the evidence before the  Tribunal  did  not
    support the conclusion that false documents had been  provided  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge should not  have  concluded  on  the  evidence
    before him that false documents had been used.  There was only  evidence
    relating to the false birth certificate  in  the  case  of  one  of  the
    children.  The First-tier Tribunal  judge  said  at  paragraph  26  that
    "there is no credible suggestion that one certificate is genuine and the
    other is not.  Clearly if one is not genuine then the other is not".   I
    have reflected very carefully on that and can see no  justification  for
    it whatsoever.  It does not follow from the fact that a  false  document
    was produced in one case that the document in the other case was  false.
    This is perverse.

 5. However, even in  the  case  where  the  allegedly  false  document  was
    produced the evidence is completely unsatisfactory.  It gets  off  to  a
    bad start because it has been compiled on a form that  is  provided  for
    the use in the case of disputed bank statements.  This does  not  really
    matter in the sense that the meaning is plain enough but it does give an
    impression  of  a  casualness  which  ought  not  to  be  present   when
    allegations of this kind are made.

 6. The big problem however is the reason advanced for finding the  document
    to be forged.  It is that enquiries  have  been  made  of  an  allegedly
    appropriate registrar in Uganda who can find no record of  the  disputed
    certificate.   I  note  that  this  is  hearsay  evidence.  It  is   not
    inadmissible in this jurisdiction but its uncertain provenance  devalues
    the reliance that can be placed on it. Much more importantly than  that,
    as Mr Hodgetts has pointed out, we do not know what questions were asked
    so we do not really know what the registrar was saying.  We do not  know
    for example if an enquiry made about registration in a very similar name
    or on similar dates in an effort to see if an honest  mistake  had  been
    made would have produced a different result.  We do not know why it  was
    assumed that the registrar who was  questioned  was  in  a  position  to
    answer the question asked.  We do not know for example  that  there  was
    any system of requiring registrars  to  forward  the  information  to  a
    central registry or that any such obligation is carried out  diligently.
    Clearly  there  was  proper  reason  to  be  doubtful  about  the  birth
    certificate but the evidence  produced  shows  no  more  than  there  is
    something about which concern should be expressed.

 7. What should have happened is that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  should
    have asked for the certificate to be examined by  a  registrar  and  the
    registrar's comments recorded.  There is no  such  evidence  before  me.
    This is not a case, for example, where there is something wrong with the
    paper on which the document is published or  there  is  something  wrong
    with the serial numbers or  dates  that  would  produce  an  incongruous
    result.  Nothing like that is alleged. We are just told that because  it
    is not traceable by somebody who was asked it must be forged.   This  is
    the kind of evidence which would not begin to  establish  a  prima  face
    case in the criminal courts and I am quite satisfied  does  not  support
    the conclusion reached by the First-tier Tribunal judge.

 8. It does concern me that the Entry Clearance Officer is prepared to  make
    such a serious allegation with such serious consequences on such  flimsy
    evidence.  If the document is forged  that  should  be  proved  properly
    because there is a clear obligation in the Rules to treat in  a  certain
    way a case that is supported by unreliable or dishonest documents and no
    judge will want to be associated with encouraging people  to  cheat  the
    system.  However if proper evidence is not produced  it  should  not  be
    inferred or assumed because the respondent finds it convenient.

 9. It follows that I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
    that a forged document was produced in either case is  wholly  unfounded
    and this needs  to  be  removed  from  the  determination.   It  follows
    therefore I have no hesitation in setting  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10. I must now decide what to do.  Mr  Hodgetts  invites  me  to  allow  the
    appeal.  Ms Everett sounds a note  of  caution.   She  says,  with  some
    justification, that the findings that have been made are not  clear  and
    need to be made properly.

11.  However,  having  looked  carefully  at  the  determination  I  am  not
    persuaded by the note of caution that Ms Everett has sounded.  Paragraph
    35 of the determination begins with the assertion  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge is going to  establish  the  facts.   There  is  then  in
    paragraph 36 a correct direction about the nature of sole responsibility
    and at paragraph 37 a clear and unequivocal finding that the father  has
    not been involved in the care of the children so he  falls  out  of  the
    picture completely.   There  is  then  a  finding  of  sorts  about  the
    grandmother, who has been the day-to-day carer on anybody's  version  of
    events,  being  involved  in  a  car  accident  in  2004.   It  was  the
    grandmother's case that the mother had had responsibility for  financing
    her and the children and making all the important decisions.

12. It does not stop there.  There is clear  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that the sponsor paid the children's fees and paid them on time and paid
    fees relating to the extra curricular activities of the son.  There is a
    letter from the school supporting the claim that the  sponsor  has  been
    directly  involved  in  decisions  about  the  school  and  a  generally
    supporting letter from the secondary school where  the  older  appellant
    attended, although it is noted correctly that that does not say  exactly
    what sort of involvement there has been.

13. There is also a finding at paragraph 38 of the  determination  that  the
    evidence was not reliable but the reason for this as advanced is a false
    reason, namely that a false document was produced, and so that criticism
    falls away.

14. The findings are not crystal clear and they  are  shot  through  with  a
    reservation about the quality of  the  sponsor's  evidence  because  she
    herself was involved in entering the United Kingdom irregularly in 2001.
     That is a long time ago.

15. I find, looking at the determination as  a  whole,  although  the  point
    could have been better expressed, it  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge that the mother has been doing the paying  and  has  been
    involved in the lives of the children in making important decisions.

16. Clearly she has been advised by experienced solicitors  so  the  sponsor
    could be expected to produce the most relevant and helpful evidence  but
    it does not follow from that that it is unreliable  or  tainted  in  any
    way.

17. I find it probable that in reality this is a case where the  grandmother
    had day-to-day care of the children but the mother in the United Kingdom
    was taking a close supervisory role and was paying the important  bills.
    I find that is enough to support the conclusion that the mother had sole
    responsibility  for  the  children  at  least  at  the  time  when   the
    application was made. It  is  clear  that  the  grandmother's  role  has
    diminished as her health declined as a result of the  car  accident  and
    she became a little older and consequently less able to cope.

18. It is not often in cases such as this that the decision can  be  reached
    with complete confidence but I am persuaded on the  evidence  before  me
    that the proper decision is not only to set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which I do, but to go on to make a finding that the
    appellants have shown that the sponsor had sole  responsibility  and  to
    allow the appeals outright in each case.

19. Although I make it plain that I allow the appeals on the basis  of  sole
    responsibility, I also find merit in the argument  that  there  are  now
    compelling circumstances requiring the family  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom because I am satisfied the evidence shows that the  grandma  has
    reached the point where she is not really able to cope anymore.  This is
    not to say the  children  are  living  in  dire  circumstances  but  the
    grandmother has reached an age when because of her damaged body  in  the
    car accident she is not able to give the appellants appropriate care. It
    is time that the family members were united properly where they would be
    with their other sister, that is the sponsor's other child who lives  in
    the United Kingdom.  This is very much a  secondary  finding.   My  main
    point is that sole responsibility has been established.

20. Therefore I allow both appeals.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 March 2014                  |



