
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/16754/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2014                    |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Tirana
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Nexhmie Docaj
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms J  Heybroek  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Marsh  &
Partners.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Hanes promulgated on  14  July  2014  allowing  Ms  Docaj's  appeal
         against the decision of the ECO dated 29 July 2013 to refuse  entry
         clearance as a partner pursuant to section EC-P of Appendix  FM  of
         the Immigration Rules.

      2. Although before me the ECO is the appellant and  Ms  Docaj  is  the
         respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before
         the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Ms Docaj as  the
         Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.

    Background

      3. The Appellant is a national of Albania born on 3 February 1965.  On
         25 August 2084 she was married to Mr Isni  Docaj  ('the  sponsor').
         The sponsor has been living in the UK since 2000. On  13  May  2013
         the Appellant applied for entry clearance with a view to settlement
         as the spouse of the sponsor. An  application  was  also  made  for
         entry clearance by the couple's adult son, Mr Zamir Docaj (date  of
         birth 25 December 1991) - and who was a  second  appellant  in  the
         proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal. (The appeal in  respect
         of Mr Zamir Docaj was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and  on
         human rights grounds by the First-tier Tribunal and there has  been
         no challenge to that decision. Accordingly the  issues  before  the
         Upper Tribunal only relate Ms Nexhmie Docaj.)

      4. The Appellant's application was refused for reasons set  out  in  a
         Notice of Immigration Decision dated 29 July 2013, with  particular
         reference  to  paragraphs  E-ECP.2.6,   and   2.10   ('relationship
         requirements') of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

      5.  The  Respondent  also  addressed  the  financial  requirements  of
         Appendix FM, and noted that the Appellant had failed to  provide  a
         tax return for the sponsor and had  not  provided  bank  statements
         covering a sufficient period. The  Respondent,  however,  indicated
         that no final determination  was  being  made  in  respect  of  the
         financial requirements of the Rules because of outstanding  appeals
         addressing the financial requirements of Appendix FM.  (In  context
         this was a reference to the then ongoing appeal of MM (Lebanon) and
         other [2014] EWCA Civ 985 which was yet to be heard in the Court of
         Appeal - in due course heard on 4-5 March 2014 with judgement given
         on 11 July 2014.) This was set out in  the  Notice  of  Immigration
         Decision in the following terms:

        "I am not satisfied you  have  provided  all  required  evidence  to
             establish  your  sponsor's  employment  and  income  and  your
             application therefore falls to  be  refused  under  the  Rules
             because you do not meet the income threshold requirement under
             Appendix FM and/or the related evidential  requirements  under
             Appendix FM-SE. However, no final determination has been  made
             at this stage as to whether  you  meet  the  income  threshold
             and/or related evidential requirements. This  is  because  the
             Courts have not yet decided the outcome of  the  Secretary  of
             State's appeal in a legal challenge to  the  income  threshold
             requirement. More information about this is  set  out  on  the
             Home Office website.

        If you appeal against this refusal decision, a  final  determination
             as to whether you meet the  income  threshold  and/or  related
             evidential requirements under the Rules may be made at a later
             stage. In making any such determination account would be taken
             of any further information or document(s) regarding the income
             threshold and/or related  evidential  requirements  which  you
             enclosed with your appeal."

      6. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  satisfied  in  respect  of  the
         relationship requirements of the Rules  finding  that  the  marital
         relationship between the Appellant and the sponsor was genuine  and
         subsisting and they intended to live together permanently in the UK
         as husband and wife (determination at paragraph 9).

      8. The Judge noted the contingent nature of the Respondent's  decision
         in  respect  of  the  financial  requirements   (determination   at
         paragraph 5). The Judge also noted that the Appellant attempted  to
         demonstrate that the financial threshold under the Rules was met by
         reliance in  substantial  part  on  evidence  that  post-dated  the
         Respondent's decision. The  Judge  correctly  identified  that  the
         jurisdiction of the Tribunal did not  permit  taking  into  account
         matters that did not appertain to the circumstances at the date  of
         the Respondent's decision. (See determination at paragraph 10.) The
         Judge concluded that he was "not able to make a  finding  that  the
         financial  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  have  been  met  as  the
         evidential requirements of Appendix FM-C have not yet been  totally
         met".

      9. However, the Judge did not dismiss the appeal, but  allowed  it  on
         the limited basis "that the decision is not in accordance with  the
         law and awaits a lawful decision" (paragraph 10-12 and 19).

     10. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 31 July 2014.

    Consideration

     11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge explained the decision to  remit  the
         appeal to the Respondent at paragraph 11 of the  determination.  It
         was noted that the contents of the Notice of  Immigration  Decision
         reflected the Respondent's policy of 'putting on hold' applications
         that were being refused  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  financial
         requirements of the Rules pending the litigation in  MM  (Lebanon).
         Although the particular application  had  been  refused  for  other
         reasons - in respect of the relationship requirements -  the  Judge
         having made favourable findings  in  that  regard  identified  that
         accordingly the only 'live' issue remaining in the  appeal  related
         to the financial requirements. Given that there had been no  proper
         decision in this  regard  by  Respondent,  the  matter  effectively
         remain outstanding before the Respondent.

     12. I pause to note that the Respondent's effective undertaking to take
         into  account  any  further  evidence  relating  to  the  financial
         requirements that might be submitted in the context  of  an  appeal
         given the contingent nature of the decision, could not in  any  way
         extend the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in respect of admissibility
         of  evidence  or  the  evaluation  of  the  circumstances  as  they
         appertained at the date of the Respondent's decision.

     13. The Respondent raises the challenge that the Judge having concluded
         at paragraph 10 that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of
         Appendix FM should have simply dismissed the appeal outright. It is
         said that any issue of policy did not arise because the  Respondent
         refused  the  application  on  matters  other  than  the  financial
         requirements.

     14. I do not accept the Respondent's submission. The Judge clearly  and
         sustainably rejected the basis of the Respondent's refusal. In this
         context it is important to note that the Respondent did not  refuse
         the application on the basis that the Appellant failed  to  satisfy
         the financial requirements of the Rules, but declined to  determine
         that specific issue. Once the Judge had determined the basis of the
         refusal in  the  Appellant's  favour,  the  issue  of  whether  the
         Appellant met the requirements of all of the Rules became key.  The
         Judge appropriately identified that there was no decision  made  by
         the Respondent in this regard, and that the Tribunal was limited in
         its jurisdiction in such a way that it could not undertake the sort
         of re-evaluation  offered  by  the  Respondent  in  the  Notice  of
         Immigration Decision.

     15. In such circumstances it seems to me that  realistically  the  only
         proper, just, and procedurally fair way to determine the appeal was
         to identify  that  there  was  indeed  an  outstanding  issue  that
         required to be decided by the Respondent.

     16. I find no error of law in the  approach  taken  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

     17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error
         of law, and accordingly the decision stands.

     18. The appeal of Ms Nexhmie  Docaj  remains  allowed  to  the  limited
         extent that the decision of the Respondent was  not  in  accordance
         with the law and the Appellant awaits  a  lawful  decision  on  her
         application for entry clearance.

     19. No anonymity order is sought or made.






    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis 10 May 2015
