

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16647/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th December 2014                         |On 13th January 2015         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MERON BELAY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Kullar, Solicitor, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  against  a
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi promulgated  on  20
         August 2014, following a hearing at Sheldon Court Birmingham on 4th
         July 2014,  in  which  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules, although dismissed it on asylum and human rights
         grounds, against the refusal of an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to
         grant Meron Belay leave to enter under the Refugee  Family  Reunion
         Policy to join Samuel Belay who has been recognised as a refugee in
         the United Kingdom.


      2. The application was refused on 12 June 2013  as  the  ECO  was  not
         satisfied that Meron Belay is biologically related to his  sponsor.
         DNA testing undertaken by Cellmark Diagnostics  ruled  out  such  a
         relationship.  It was found that  false  representations  had  been
         made in the application form with regard to the relationship.


      3. Having considered the competing arguments and evidence provided the
         Judge set out her findings from paragraph 18 of the  determination.
         Although the sponsor did not accept the DNA test results the  Judge
         correctly noted there was no evidence of a challenge  to  them.  It
         was noted the Rules are specific in only providing  an  opportunity
         for family members of  refugees  who  are  part  of  the  refugee's
         household to join them.  It was found that Meron Belay is  not  the
         biological child of  the  sponsor  although  thereafter  the  Judge
         stated "the question is whether in practical terms the child was  a
         child of the family of the appellant and his wife, and  whether  he
         lived as part of the household of the appellant before he  came  to
         the United Kingdom in order to seek asylum".  The Judge found Meron
         Belay had been treated as a child of sponsor's family and according
         was in a similar position to a child who has been  adopted  by  the
         family even though  there  was  no  adoption.  The  Judge  was  not
         satisfied  deception  had  been  used  in  relation  to  the  birth
         certificate as she  was  satisfied  that  the  sponsor,  at  least,
         believed Meron Belay was his son.


      4. In paragraph 21 the Judge made the following findings:


             21.  This is an unusual situation and  not  one  which  either
                  party considered,      namely whether a child who has been
                  treated as a child of the family of the       sponsor  can
                  benefit from the family reunion policy.   I  am  satisfied
                  that he  can, because the rules refer to a  child  of  the
                  sponsor, which this appellant   was because he was a child
                  of the family, although not a biological child of      the
                  family (similar possibly to a stepchild) and he  did  form
                  part of the   family unit before the sponsor left to claim
                  asylum. I accept that the  sponsor did not  form  part  of
                  that unit himself, but there were reasons for    that:  he
                  was in prison and he left as soon as he  was  released.  I
                  find  that  the      appellant  therefore  does  meet  the
                  requirements of paragraph  352D.   I  have       based  my
                  decision entirely on the findings  of  fact  that  I  have
                  made, namely  that the appellant was treated as a child of
                  the family of the sponsor. I am     aware and accept  that
                  there  are  cases  in  which  the  rules  are  abused   by
                  those who are not related, or  children  of  other  family
                  members in which  refugee seeks  to  support  their  entry
                  into the United Kingdom. However I  am  satisfied  on  the
                  evidence that this is not one of those cases.


      5. The Judge found it  was  not  necessary  to  consider  whether  the
         decision breached a right to family life as the appeal was  allowed
         under the Rules but stated that if she  had  considered  Article  8
         that too would have depended on whether  it  had  been  established
         that there existed a relationship, biological or  psychological  on
         the sponsor, as his father, and that the  continued  separation  in
         circumstances in  which  sponsor  had  affectively  exercised  sole
         responsibility since his  wife  death  would  have  amounted  to  a
         disproportionate interference in Meron Belay's life.


      6. The ECO sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  the  Judge  had
         failed to adequately reason her findings, especially  in  light  of
         the fact that the term 'parent' is defined within  the  Immigration
         Rules.



Discussion



      7. In Chapter 6 of the Immigration Rules, the definition section,  the
         term 'parent' is defined in the following terms:


             "a parent" includes


             (a)  the stepfather of a child whose father is  dead  and  the
                  reference  to   stepfather  includes  a  relationship  and
                  rising through the civil partnership;


             (b)  the stepmother of child whose  mother  is  dead  and  the
                  reference to  stepmother includes a relationship  uprising
                  through its partnership and;


             (c)  the father as well as the mother of an illegitimate child
                  where he is proved     to be the father;


             (d)   an  adoptive  parent,  where  a  child  was  adopted  in
                  accordance with a      decision  taken  by  the  competent
                  administrative authority or  court  in  a   country  whose
                  adoption orders are recognised in the  United  Kingdom  or
                  where a child is the subject of a  de  facto  adoption  in
                  accordance with the    requirements of paragraph  309A  of
                  these Rules (except that an adopted     child or  a  child
                  who is the subject of a de facto adoption may not make  an
                  application for leave to  enter  or  remain  in  order  to
                  accompany, join or      remain  with  an  adoptive  parent
                  under paragraphs 297-303);


      8. The Judge found Meron Belay to  be  in  a  similar  position  to  a
         stepchild although to satisfy the  requirements  relating  to  step
         parentage there is a requirement that the biological father is dead
         or that an adoption or de facto adoption has taken place. The Judge
         makes no reference to the  above  provisions  no  analysis  appears
         within  the  body  of  the  determination  of  how   the   specific
         requirements can be met.  The finding the definition of a  'parent'
         could be met based upon the reasons provided  by  the  Judge  is  a
         material misdirection in law


      9. Although the Judge  states  that  neither  party  appears  to  have
         considered the situation, contrary to  their  duty  to  assist  the
         tribunal, the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court have.  In  relation
         to de facto adoptive children; in AA (Somalia)  v  Entry  Clearance
         Officer (Addis Ababa) [2012] EWCA  Civ  563  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered the proper interpretation of  the  phrase  "child  of  a
         parent" under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules  and  whether
         the definition of "parent" and "adoptive parent" under paragraph  6
         and  "de  facto  adoption"  under   paragraph   309A   applied   to
         applications for  entry  clearance  under  paragraph  352D.  Expert
         evidence adduced on the Claimant's  behalf  demonstrated  that  her
         relationship with the Sponsor fell within the concept of  "Kafala",
         an informal system of parental responsibility under Shari'a Islamic
         law akin  to  adoption.  The  Judge  held  that  refusal  of  entry
         clearance would violate Article 8 ECHR. The Court  of  Appeal  held
         that there was no proper basis for saying that there could be  some
         notion of adoption applicable to entry clearance applications under
         paragraph 352D which could operate separately from and outside  the
         meaning  given  to  it  for  the  purposes  of   the   Rules.   The
         interpretation to be applied under paragraph 6 to  "adoption"  (and
         "adopted" and "adoptive parent") itself expressly brought into play
         the requirements of  paragraph  309A.  Moreover,  the  requirements
         under paragraph 352D were cumulative; being a part  of  the  family
         unit at the  relevant  time  was  not  in  itself  enough  to  give
         entitlement to entry. It was just one of the six requirements  that
         had to be met. It was to be noted that  under  requirement  (i)  of
         paragraph 352D the requirement that the applicant "is" the child of
         a parent granted asylum in the  UK,  not  that  the  applicant  was
         regarded as, or treated as, such a child.


     10. On appeal in AA Somalia  (FC)  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Addis
         Ababa) [2013] UKSC 81, 18 December 2013, it was held that paragraph
         352D of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  which  provided
         for the grant of leave to enter to the child of a  parent  who  had
         been admitted to the UK as a refugee, did not embrace a  child  for
         whom a family member had taken parental  responsibility  under  the
         Islamic procedure known as Kafala, a process of legal  guardianship
         akin to adoption.


     11. Even if the relationship between Meron Belay and  the  sponsor  has
         not been specifically found to  be  the  taking  of  responsibility
         under the Kafala procedure, this  appears  to  be  similar  to  the
         nature of the relationship between them.


     12. In relation to the question of whether a policy exists outside  the
         Rules that allows Meron Belay to succeed, in MK(Somalia) and Others
         v ECO and Others (2008) EWCA Civ 1453 the appellants  were  seeking
         to join an aunt, a refugee from Somalia, in  whose  household  they
         had lived before their aunt fled to the UK.  The  Court  of  Appeal
         confirmed that there was no free standing policy operating  outside
         the Rules which accrued to the particular  advantage  of  de  facto
         adoptive children who fell outside paragraph 309A.   There  was  no
         policy outside the Rules which enabled family re-union specifically
         for children of the family who were not the biological  or  legally
         adopted children of the parents and did not fulfill the Immigration
         Rules on de facto adoptions (e.g. because they  did  not  meet  the
         maintenance requirements).  The reference in  the  Family  Re-Union
         policy to the possibility of other members of the  family  such  as
         elderly parents being allowed to  come  to  the  UK  if  there  are
         compelling compassionate circumstances did not extend to  de  facto
         adoptive children.


     13. The Judge therefore materially erred in law in allowing the  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules on the basis  that  the  sponsor  of  a
         child treated as a child of the family is entitled to succeed under
         the refugee family reunion provisions.  The  determination  is  set
         aside.


     14. I substitute a decision under the Rules dismissing  the  appeal  on
         the basis it has not been shown the mandatory requirements  of  the
         Rules or terms of any applicable policy can  be  satisfied  on  the
         facts of this case.


     15. In relation to the Article  8  element,  the  Judge  dismissed  the
         Article 8 claim whilst at the same time indicating in paragraph  22
         that she did not need to consider it.  If this element had not been
         considered it is arguable the Judge should not have dismiss it.  If
         she did consider this ground of appeal she was entitled to  dismiss
         it although the analysis under Article 8 is defective.


     16. As this is a refusal of entry  clearance  the  date  at  which  the
         issues must be considered is the date of decision, which is 12 June
         2013. Meron Belay at that date was 25 years of age and not a  child
         and, whatever may have been  the  arrangements  in  the  past,  the
         sponsor is not his biological parent. It has not been shown that he
         can succeed under any other provision of the Immigration Rules, for
         under 317(f) he would need to be a relative. Even if this provision
         had been established it is necessary to show the accommodation  and
         maintenance requirements can be met of which there was insufficient
         evidence.


     17. As Meron Belay cannot succeed under the Rules it  is  necessary  to
         consider  the  matter  by  reference  to  domestic   and   European
         jurisprudence. There is no need to rehearse the decisions in  cases
         that have been published since  July  2012  relating  to  how  such
         matters are to be assessed, but it is clear that what needs  to  be
         established, if the issue is that of proportionality, is  that  the
         decision   will   result   in   unjustifiably    harsh/unreasonable
         consequences for him that will make the  decision  disproportionate
         as they  outweigh  the  legitimate  aim  of  effective  immigration
         control.


     18. The Judges analysis under Article 8 in paragraph 22 is defective as
         it is based upon a relationship with  the  sponsor  as  his  father
         which does not exist and even  if  since  his  mother's  death  his
         father has exercise sole responsibility Meron Belay is now an adult
         and has been for some time. If financial requirements cannot be met
         there is a  strong  economic  argument  for  finding  the  decision
         proportionate as the purpose of the minimum income levels  provided
         for in the Rules is to prevent an individual becoming a  burden  on
         the public purse.


     19. It has not been established that Meron Belay speaks  English  to  a
         degree that will enable him to integrate into society in the United
         Kingdom or that the nature of the relationship between him and  the
         sponsor at this  stage  is  particularly  strong  or  contains  any
         unusual features or elements of dependency, emotional or physical.


     20. Having considered the competing interests it is my primary  finding
         that it has not been established  at  the  date  of  decision  that
         family life recognised by Article 8 continues to exist between  the
         sponsor and Meron Belay.


     21. In the alternative, if family life recognised by Article 8 had been
         proved and the issue was one of proportionality, I would have found
         that the ECO has discharged the burden of  proof  to  the  required
         standard show that the decision to refuse is proportionate for  the
         reasons set out above. Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 considered.


    Decision


     22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
         follows. This appeal is dismissed.


    Anonymity.


     23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I  make
         no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008. Meron Belay is an  adult  and  no  basis  for
         justifying such an order has been made out.


    Fee Award.


    Note: this is not part of the determination.


     24. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
         by dismissing it, I have considered whether to  make  a  fee  award
         (rule  23A  (costs)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
         (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).


         I have had regard to the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
         Awards in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


         I make no fee award.


         Reason: The appeal has been dismissed.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 9th January 2015
