
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16664/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2014                        |On 22nd December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                             Mr  Muhammad sohail
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 9th April 1973 is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant had made application for entry clearance as a  family  member
    of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.  The Respondent had refused that application on 19th  July
    2013.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert sitting at Manchester
    on 21st May 2014.  She had dismissed his appeal  both  under  the  2006
    Regulations and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. Application for permission to appeal had been made on  the  Appellant's
    behalf with Grounds of Appeal  dated  6th  June  2014.   Permission  to
    appeal  had  been  granted  by  Judge  Easterman  on  18th  July  2014.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the case of O v  The
    Netherlands C-456-12 arguably should have been  given  precedence  than
    the Regulations and permission was granted on all grounds.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3.  Mr  O'Ryan  referred  me  to  the  comprehensive  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Essentially and in brief summary it was submitted  that  the  Appellant
    was married to a British national who had been exercising treaty rights
    in Denmark as a worker for a three year period between 2003  and  2006.
    The Appellant had obtained a Danish permanent residence  card  in  2008
    and in 2009 had acquired the right to  permanently  reside  in  Denmark
    after completing five years' residence as the non-EEA family member  of
    an EEA national.  The Appellant's wife had then returned to the  UK  in
    2010 due to family circumstances.  It  was  submitted  that  it  was  a
    material error of  law  for  the  judge  to  have  preferred  the  2006
    Regulations rather than the EU case  of  O  v  The  Netherlands  whilst
    conceding that currently the Regulations in that case are incompatible.
     Nevertheless it was  submitted  that  primary  legislation  should  be
    disapplied where  the  substantive  rights  at  issue  are  within  the
    material scope of EU law as  a  result  of  the  Treaty  of  Lisbon  in
    December 2009.

 Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr McVeety whilst conceding this was not an easy decision  referred  to
    the Respondent's response in this matter dated 25th July 2014.  At  the
    conclusion I reserved my decision on whether or not an error of law had
    been made and now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 5. The judge noted at paragraph 4.3 that there was  no  dispute  of  facts
    before her.  It was noted that the Appellant had been removed from  the
    United Kingdom in 2002 having overstayed as a visitor since 1999.   His
    wife, the Sponsor, had moved to live in  Denmark  in  2003  and  worked
    there until 31st October 2006.  The Appellant and Sponsor  had  married
    in Pakistan in February 2004 and the Appellant had joined his  wife  in
    Denmark in June  2004.   He  subsequently  obtained  an  EEA  permanent
    residence card in Denmark in 2008.  The couple have two  children  born
    in July 2005 and March 2007 and there is a  further  child  namely  the
    Sponsor's 16 year old daughter from her previous marriage.  The Sponsor
    had returned to the United Kingdom from Denmark with her three children
    on 8th December 2010.

 6. The Appellant had initially applied for entry clearance to  the  United
    Kingdom as a spouse under paragraph 281 of the  Immigration  Rules  but
    that application had been dismissed on 28th June 2012 as  the  evidence
    before the Immigration Judge on that  occasion  demonstrated  he  could
    neither meet the language nor the income requirement of the Rules.   It
    was also noted that on that previous occasion the judge  had  described
    the Appellant's previous convictions as "a sequence of extremely  grave
    offences" and concluded that his exclusion from the United Kingdom  was
    conducive to the public good under paragraph 320(19).

 7. The judge had noted in line  with  the  case  of  Devaseelan  that  the
    previous Immigration Judge had made no findings as to  the  Appellant's
    position under the EEA  Regulations  which  was  the  matter  that  was
    essentially before her.  The Respondent's principal argument  was  that
    the Sponsor had not  been  economically  active  in  exercising  treaty
    rights  prior  to  her  return  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2010  and
    accordingly the Appellant failed to satisfy Regulation 9(2)(a)  of  the
    2006 Regulations which was designed to  incorporate  into  UK  law  the
    decision in Surindher Singh.

 8. The judge had been referred to the case of O v The Netherlands C-456-12
    which essentially extended the principal in Surindher Singh and  was  a
    decision of the European Court.   The  Immigration  Judge  conceded  at
    paragraph 4.8 that having read that decision it was a matter that could
    be argued in support of the Appellant's case but took the view that her
    role  was  to  determine  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the United Kingdom law as set out in 2006 Regulations.

 9. The first matter is whether there is  an  incompatibility  between  the
    2006 Regulations and the decision in O v  The  Netherlands  a  judgment
    handed down on 12th March 2014.  In summary at  paragraph  61  of  that
    judgment  the  court  stated  that  Article  21(1)  the  TFEU  must  be
    interpreted as meaning that  where  a  Union  citizen  has  created  or
    strengthened a family life with a third country national during genuine
    residence pursuant to and in conformity with the conditions set out  in
    Article 7(1) and (2) and Article 16(1) and (2) of Directive 2004-38, in
    a Member State other than that of which he is a national the provisions
    of that Directive applied by analogy where that Union citizens  returns
    with the family member in question to his Member State of  origin.   It
    seems therefore that a key to the court's judgment is whether the Union
    citizen had been conforming with the condition set out in Article  7(1)
    and (2) in the Member State  other  than  that  to  which  they  are  a
    national.  The court referred to Article 7(1) and (2)  of  the  2004/38
    Directive at paragraph 7 of that same judgment.  That Article  provided
    that all Union citizens shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
    territory of another Member State for a period  of  longer  than  three
    months if they:

      a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State; or

      b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their  family  members
         not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the  host
         Member  State  during  their   period   of   residence   and   have
         comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or



      c) are enrolled at a private or  public  establishment  accredited  or
         financed by the host Member State on the basis of  its  legislation
         or administrative practice for the principal purpose of following a
         course  of   study   including   vocational   training   and   have
         comprehensive sickness insurance cover;

      d) are family members accompanying or  joining  a  Union  citizen  who
         satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

10. The facts of the case before the First-tier Judge  indicated  that  the
    Sponsor British spouse had been in employment in Denmark  for  a  three
    year period between 2003 and 2006 and therefore was  exercising  treaty
    rights within the terms  of  Article  7(1)(a)  as  referred  to  above.
    However it would appear that since 2006  the  Sponsor  spouse  had  not
    worked in Denmark and had been receiving disability living allowance in
    Denmark prior to her arrival in  the  UK  in  2010.   It  would  appear
    therefore that the Sponsor spouse had between the period  of  2006  and
    2010 not been a worker within the terms of Article 7(1)(a) nor is there
    evidence that she had fulfilled the criteria within Article 7(1)(b)  or
    7(1)(c).  It also follows therefore that  the  Appellant  as  a  family
    member did not satisfy Article 7(1) or (2) because  his  wife  did  not
    fall within the criteria of Article 7(1)(a), (b) or  (c).   Accordingly
    when looking at the judgment of O v The Netherlands and  in  particular
    the  conclusion  paragraph  at  61  the  Union  citizen,   namely   the
    Appellant's wife, had not during that period of residence in Denmark in
    the previous four years been pursuing that residence in conformity with
    the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and to  that  extent  it
    could not be said by  analogy  that  the  provisions  within  Directive
    2004/38 applied where the Appellant's wife returned from Denmark to the
    United Kingdom.  On the face of it therefore, and I accept this is  not
    an easy matter, the specific facts of the case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not necessarily demonstrate that the  Appellant  and
    his wife could rely upon the judgment in O v  The  Netherlands  because
    the Appellant's wife did not appear  to  have  fulfilled  the  criteria
    within Article 7(1) an (2) which appears to be a  requirement  for  the
    operation of the exercise of  movement  by  the  third  party  national
    envisaged within the case of O v The Netherlands.

11. Secondly even if there had been some incompatibility between that  case
    handed down in March 2014 and the 2006 EEA Regulations any  declaration
    of incompatibility was not something that could be done at the level of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the judge was not wrong therefore  to  have
    followed and complied with the 2006 Regulations.

12. In the sense that I am being asked as to whether an error  of  law  was
    made by the First-tier Tribunal, firstly it does not appear that in the
    specific facts of this case there was necessarily  any  incompatibility
    between the judgment in O v The Netherlands and  the  2006  Regulations
    referred to by the First-tier Judge.  Secondly even  if  there  was  or
    potentially an incompatibility it was not within the terms of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to make a  declaration  of  incompatibility  or  do
    anything other than follow the 2006 Regulations which was the  decision
    taken.

13. Accordingly therefore there was no error of law made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in this case.  If a genuine incompatibility does exist  within
    the facts of this specific case as between the European Court  judgment
    in O and the current 2006 Regulations a declaration of  incompatibility
    or a remedy for such incompatibility would  lie  with  a  higher  court
    seized of that matter.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 22nd December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

