
   [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number OA/17144/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 30 September 2014              On 01 October 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Bangkok
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Pan Ei Khaing
                           (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr. M. Biggs of Counsel instructed by Blacjstone  Law
                       Associates.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Lambert promulgated on 4 July 2014, allowing the appeal of  Ms  Khaing
      against the Respondent's decision dated 24 September 2013 to refuse to
      grant  entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  Mr  Arvind  Kohli  ('the
      sponsor').

   2. Although in the proceedings before  me  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      ('ECO') is the appellant, and Ms Khaing is  the  respondent,  for  the
      sake  of  consistency  with  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Ms Khaing as the Appellant and the
      ECO as the Respondent.
Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Myanmar born on 26 May 1985.  She  made
      an application for entry clearance as the spouse of the sponsor  using
      an on-line application form completed on 2 July 2013. The  application
      was refused on 24 September 2013 for reasons set out in  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision with particular reference  to  the  'Relationship
      Requirements' of Section E-ECP  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   4. The Respondent also gave consideration to the 'Financial Requirements'
      of Appendix  FM  and  the  associated  evidential  requirements  under
      Appendix FM-SE, but made no  decision  in  this  regard  -  "no  final
      determination has been made at this stage as to whether you  meet  the
      income threshold and/or related evidential requirements" - because  of
      pending  litigation.  In  this  context,  the  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision stated:

"If you appeal against this refusal decision, a final  determination  as  to
      whether you meet  the  income  threshold,  and/or  related  evidential
      requirements under the Rules may be made at a later stage.  In  making
      any  such  determination  account  would  be  taken  of  any   further
      information or  document(s)  regarding  the  income  threshold  and/or
      related evidential requirements which you enclose with your appeal".


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. Her appeal was allowed for  reasons
      set out in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 15 August 2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
      Hutchison.


   7. A Rule 24 reply has been filed on behalf of  the  Appellant  dated  12
      August 2014.


Consideration

   8. I am grateful to the helpful  and  co-operatives  way  in  which  both
      representatives dealt with the issues in the appeal today.


   9. Although the Respondent had - quite correctly - taken the decision  on
      the Appellant's application by reference to Appendix FM,  it had  been
      common ground before the First-tier Tribunal that the  Respondent  had
      erred in failing to consider the pre-Appendix FM  rules,  specifically
      paragraph 281. At paragraph 9 of Mr Biggs'  Skeleton  Argument  before
      the First-tier Tribunal it was asserted that it  was  plain  that  the
      Appellant's application fell for consideration pursuant  to  paragraph
      281; it appears from paragraph  1.2  of  the  determination  of  Judge
      Lambert that the Respondent's Presenting  Officer  conceded  that  the
      application had been made before the provisions of  Appendix  FM  came
      into force,  and  the  Judge  accepted  this  concession.  It  is  now
      acknowledged that both the representatives and the Judge were wrong in
      this regard, having seemingly mixed up the year:  the  change  in  the
      Rules was introduced in 2012, not 2013.


  10. Nonetheless, the Appellant in the Rule 24 response has maintained that
      this error was  not  material,  and  that  the  Appellant  would  have
      succeeded in the appeal in any event bearing in  mind  the  favourable
      findings and supporting evidence.


  11. In this context Mr Duffy acknowledged that the issues  raised  in  the
      Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  in  respect  of  the  'Relationship
      Requirements' were variously conceded by the Respondent on review (see
      section 3 of the Entry Clearance Manager review of 5  June  2014),  or
      were the subject of favourable unchallenged findings by the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge. The only 'live' issue upon which permission to  appeal
      had been sought related to the 'Financial Requirements'.


  12. In this regard the  Appellant's  representatives  have  identified  at
      paragraph 6(b) of the Rule 24 response  the  relevant  income  of  the
      sponsor, and  more  particularly  at  subparagraph  (ii)  have  cross-
      referred to the documents that were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      that met the requirements of Appendix FM-SE in respect of income  from
      dividends - specifically, the relevant dividend vouchers and  personal
      bank statements showing those dividends were paid into an  account  in
      the name of the sponsor.

  13. Mr Duffy had sight of and considered those documents  at  the  hearing
      today, and accepted that they met the relevant  requirements  of  both
      Appendices FM and FM-SE. In such circumstances, he  did  not  seek  to
      prosecute the appeal, but indicated that he  was  not  in  a  position
      formally to withdraw the Respondent's challenge.

  14. In such circumstances whilst it is common ground that the Judge  erred
      in considering the appeal under the wrong Rules,  it  is  also  common
      ground that the outcome of the appeal  should  not  be  altered.  Both
      representatives indicated their agreement to my suggestion that in the
      circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should  be  left
      to stand.

Decision

  15. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained an  error  of
      law. However, in all of  the  circumstances  I  do  not  exercise  the
      discretion to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      pursuant to section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
      Act 2007. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


  16. The appeal of Ms Khaing remains allowed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     30 September 2014

