
[pic]
IAC-HW-am-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th July 2015                    |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               mr dennis assem
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Robin James Hossford
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on  2nd  February  1983  and  he
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of Mr Robin Hossford.  That application was refused on 16th
    August.  The Entry Clearance Officer founded his refusal on  the  basis
    that the relationship had been claimed to commence on 1st June 2004 but
    the appellant and his partner first met on 6th  November  2012  and  he
    last saw his sponsor on 28th November  2012.   They  were  planning  to
    marry on 6th July 2013 in the UK.  From the evidence it appeared to the
    Entry Clearance Officer that the sponsor had met the appellant  on  one
    occasion and spent a further three weeks together.  There had  been  no
    explanation why they did not meet in person until 2012.

 2. It was said by the appellant they kept in touch via  Skype  and  emails
    and that he received money remittances and he had provided  a  purchase
    history from Skype as evidence of contact between him and  his  sponsor
    but  these  documents  listed  credit  purchases  only  and   did   not
    demonstrate the facility had been used for the sponsor to contact  him.
    Some money remittances had been provided but these did not  demonstrate
    a subsisting relationship and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not
    accept that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

 3. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd  on  20th  August
    2014 and he dismissed the appeal both under the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights grounds on 25th September 2014.  At paragraph 4 of  his
    decision he stated the following:

         "In considering this appeal, I have  before  me  the  Respondent's'
         bundle  comprising  the  Appellant's  Application  with  supporting
         documentation, Notice of Decision, Notice of Appeal with Grounds of
         Appeal and further documentation attached thereto.  I have  various
         items of documentation lodged by the Appellant.  The Appellant  did
         lodge some documentation post-Tribunal which was received  on  25th
         August 2015 but as this post-dates the date of Decision, I  am  not
         able to take this information into account."

 4. An application for permission to appeal was lodged by the appellant but
    this was initially refused on 20th January 2015 by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Frankish.  It was found there was scant evidence from the
    appellant although the sponsor was found to be sincere.

 5. The application for permission to  appeal  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal made  a  mistake  in
    failing to read the evidence and in particular missing the registration
    booking for the intended partnership or wedding.

 6. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede  on  14th  April
    2015 as she found that it appeared evidence had not been considered.

 7. Mr Richards acknowledged at the hearing that there was an error of  law
    at paragraph 16 in that the judge had failed to identify  the  note  of
    the booking for the civil partnership.

 8. It is not clear from the  face  of  the  decision  whether  the  bundle
    stamped by Richmond-upon-Thames  Magistrates'  Court,  and  dated  15th
    August 2014 was indeed before the judge who sat  at  Richmond  on  20th
    August  204.   This  evidence  included  documentary  evidence   of   a
    moneygram,  photograph  and  two  provisional  bookings  for  a   civil
    partnership ceremony dated 27th April  2013  and  25th  February  2013.
    This leads me to conclude that it is possible that  this  evidence  was
    not before the judge bearing in mind that at  paragraph  16  the  judge
    stated

         "It is noticeable  that  there  is  no  evidence  produced  of  any
         bookings made or enquiries made  regarding  arranging  their  civil
         partnership".

 9. Although Mr Richards urged me to find no material error of  law,  I  do
    note that the judge remarked on the length of the relationship and  the
    shortage of documentary evidence and made  further  references  to  the
    scantiness of the evidence.   I  conclude  that  the  omission  whether
    through administrative error or otherwise referring to the evidence  in
    the bundle stamped 15th August 2014 may be material and therefore I set
    aside the decision because it would appear that there is  a  procedural
    error.

10. The appellant is to submit an  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  of  all
    evidence he wishes to rely on and serve identical bundles on  both  the
    Tribunal and the respondent at least 14  days  before  any  substantive
    hearing of which he will be notified.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed      Date 24th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
