

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
OA/17984/2012

                                                       OA/17985/2012




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House on
  Determination promulgated on
1 July 2013


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                                     and

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY



                                   Between
                            SAJID AHMED (MASTER)
                            RASHEDA KHANAM (MRS)

                                                   Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -DHAKA


Respondent
Representation:

For the appellants: Mr Choudhury
For the respondent: Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The  appellants  are  a  minor  child  and  his  mother,  citizens  of
      Bangladesh.  Together with a second child, Rifat Ahmed,  they  applied
      to join their father/husband, Jamal Ahmed, the sponsor, as  dependents
      of a relative present and settled in this  country.  The  applications
      were all rejected on 26 August 2012, and all three people appealed  to
      the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. It became apparent at the hearing on 17 April 2013 before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal that adequate means were not available  to  comply  with
      the financial requirements of the  rules  in  relation  to  all  three
      appellants. It is not entirely clear what means were available, but it
      is inherent  in  the  appellants'  position,  as  put  forward  by  Mr
      Choudhury, both at that hearing and this,  that  adequate  means  were
      available to meet the requirements of the rules with regard to two  of
      the appellants, but not with regard to all three. Mr Choudhury has not
      suggested to us that adequate means  were  available  to  satisfy  the
      requirements of the rules with regard to all  three  of  the  original
      appellants.

   3. Mr Choudhury said at the original hearing that he wished  to  withdraw
      the appeal of one of the children in the event of the judge concluding
      that the requirements could not be met for all three appellants.

   4. The judge ruled in his determination that as  there  had  not  been  a
      formal withdrawal of the appeal of  Rifat  Ahmed  he  was  obliged  to
      consider it. There was a  letter,  from  the  sponsor,  purporting  to
      withdraw the appeal.  The grounds of appeal argue that the  judge  was
      wrong to require a formal withdrawal of  the  appeal,  and  the  judge
      granting  permission  points  out  that  under  paragraph  17  of  the
      procedure rules an appeal may be withdrawn orally at a hearing.

   5. The grounds do say that the judge wrongly concluded that Mr  Choudhury
      had conceded that the financial  requirements  were  not  met.  It  is
      possible that the judge did misunderstand Mr Choudhury, but there  can
      be no doubt that the conclusions as to a shortfall in paragraph 15  of
      the determination was one that the judge was entitled to reach, and Mr
      Choudhury has not argued to the contrary.

   6. Mr Choudhury argues that the judge was wrong not to allow  the  appeal
      of Rifat to be withdrawn. We are  prepared  to  accept  that,  as  the
      child's father, the sponsor, Jamal Ahmed, may have been in a  position
      to withdraw his son's appeal. There are problems when the boy's mother
      has played no part in the decision, and the  result  of  the  decision
      might have meant  that  Rifat  may  have  been  left  on  his  own  in
      Bangladesh; the fact that Rifat is now sixteen suggests that he  could
      have had some say in the decision to withdraw his appeal. However,  in
      the light of our subsequent  conclusions, we do not  propose  to  deal
      with this aspect further  and  accept  that  the  sponsor  could  have
      withdrawn his son's appeal.

   7. There are other problems. The letter that Jamal Ahmed wrote states:

                  I Mr Jamal Ahmed sponsor in the above appeal wish to state
                  that in the event of the Tribunal finding that  I  do  not
                  have sufficient income to maintain  all  three  appellants
                  then  I  wish  to  withdraw  the  appeal  of  Rifat  Ahmed
                  OA/17983/2012 and proceed with the two other appeals.

   8. The problem with this letter is that it is  a  conditional  withdrawal
      that only comes into effect  after  the  judge  has  made  a  negative
      decision, which is something that only happens when  the  decision  is
      promulgated.

   9. Again, for the sake  of  argument  we  are  prepared  to  act  on  the
      supposition that Rifat's appeal was withdrawn at the hearing, and that
      the judge erred in law in not allowing the appeal to be withdrawn. The
      question is whether that error is in any way material.

  10. The judge who granted permission clearly saw the  problem  that  faced
      the remaining appellants. He said, in paragraph 3 of his grant:

                  However in this particular appeal the finances in issue as
                  considered by the Entry Clearance Officer were  considered
                  as at the date of the Respondent's decision on  26  August
                  2012. In that context it is questionable as to whether the
                  withdrawal of the appeal at the  hearing  of  one  of  the
                  Appellants was an appropriate way to  proceed.  Permission
                  to appeal is being granted because I consider that  it  is
                  an appropriate matter for the Upper Tribunal to consider.

  11. In other words, the normal rule in out of country cases  is  that  the
      facts are looked at as at the date of the decision, and in a case such
      as this, those facts include the number of dependants who have  to  be
      supported in accordance with the requirements of the rules.  We  asked
      Mr Choudhury how he got round this problem. He said that the effect of
      the withdrawal of an appeal is that the party drops out of the case ab
      initio; it is as if that party had never been involved in the case. We
      do not accept that argument. Even where an appeal  is  withdrawn,  and
      precisely the same principle would apply if one of a number of  family
      members  who had applied to come together did not appeal, a judge  has
      to look at a  decision  in  the  light  of  all  those  who  made  the
      application.[1]


  12. It follows that we are satisfied that the original judge did not make
      a material error of law and the original decision shall stand.



The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                1 July 2013



-----------------------
[1] This is of course very apparent from the Immigration Rules where
maintenance has to cover a spouse and "dependants"; see , for example,
paragraph 281(v) .

