
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17402/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th June 2014                               |On 9th July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           bernard Kudzai Chidziva
                        (no anonymity direction made)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Faryl, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
Canter Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 2.  The  Claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   against   the
    Respondent's decision dated 25th May 2012 to refuse him entry clearance
    to the United Kingdom as the child of a refugee.  The  application  was
    refused with reference to paragraph 352D(iv) of the Immigration  Rules,
    the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) not accepting that the  claimant  was
    part of the Sponsor's family unit at the time  that  the  Sponsor  left
    Zimbabwe to seek asylum.

 3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  M  Davies  on
    13th November 2013  and  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  was
    satisfied that the Claimant and Sponsor were living in  a  family  unit
    until the Sponsor departed from Zimbabwe in 2002.

 4. The ECO applied for permission to appeal contending that  the  FTT  had
    given inadequate reasons for allowing the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted, and the  Tribunal  issued  directions
    that there should be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the FTT had erred in law such that the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety conceded that the determination of
    the FTT did not disclose a material error of law.  There was  therefore
    no need to hear from Miss Faryl.

 7. In my view the concession by Mr McVeety was rightly made.  The Sponsor,
    the Appellant's mother had given evidence before the FTT and  confirmed
    in that evidence that the Claimant had been a member of her family unit
    before she left Zimbabwe to claim asylum.  That evidence had  not  been
    challenged by the Presenting Officer before the FTT.

 8. The FTT therefore had unchallenged  evidence,  that  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor had been in the  same  family  unit  before  the  Sponsor  left
    Zimbabwe, and the FTT was entitled to find that the Sponsor  had  given
    credible evidence. Therefore the issue  raised  by  the  ECO  had  been
    satisfactorily addressed, and the burden of proof had  been  discharged
    by the Claimant, and the appeal was allowed.

 9. The grounds do not disclose a material error of law, and the  FTT  gave
    adequate reasons for accepting unchallenged evidence.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.

The appeal of the ECO is dismissed, and the decision  of  the  FTT  allowing
the Claimant's appeal stands.



Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Claimant
is now an adult.  There has been no request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper
Tribunal makes no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 30th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

Fee Award

No fee award was made by the First-tier Tribunal and that decision stands.






Signed                              Date 30th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




