

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17479/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 18th June 2014                             |on 20th June 2014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          YORDANOS TEKLE TESFAGABIR

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H V McCusker, of McAuley McCarthy & Co,
Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This determination refers to parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The ECO appeals against a determination by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Debra Clapham, promulgated on 10th May 2013, allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against refusal of her application for entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a person with refugee status in the UK.


 3. The ECO's refusal notice dated 31st August 2012 raised various  issues,
    but the only one now remaining is  whether  the  marriage  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor, contracted  when  she  was  aged  15,  is  a
    marriage legally recognised  in  Eritrea,  and  hence  in  the  law  of
    Scotland.

 4. The Appellant's first Ground of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal was:



      My marriage was properly carried out according to my  church  on  7th
        January 2008.



 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  at   paragraph   32   of   her
    determination:

         In relation to the  ECO's  contention  that  this  was  an  illegal
         marriage since the Appellant was apparently under age,  it  appears
         to me that the background evidence shows that Eritrea as a majority
         population still follows Sharia law, as opposed  to  national  law.
         Although the legal age for     marriage is 18, under  age  marriage
         remains prevalent.  I am satisfied ... that these  parties  entered
         into marriage ...

 6. Mr Mullen at the hearing sought to raise a  second  Ground  of  Appeal,
    whether the judge applied the incorrect standard  of  proof.   He  said
    that the judge nowhere specifies the normal civil standard, and  seemed
    to have fallen into the assumption that because  the  case  involves  a
    refugee, the lower standard of proof applies.

 7. I decided at the hearing  that  it  was  much  too  late  to  raise  an
    additional Ground of Appeal, and that in any event the point is  of  no
    substance.  A judge is presumed to know the correct standard of  proof,
    and the determination does not suggest that she  decided  the  case  on
    anything but the balance of probability.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge erred in arriving at the conclusion  that
    the evidence established a marriage  of  a  nature  which  enabled  the
    Appellant to succeed.  Background evidence that  the  majority  of  the
    population follow Sharia law  was  irrelevant  to  the  validity  of  a
    marriage in a Christian church.   The  question  was  not  whether  the
    Appellant and Sponsor entered into a marriage which followed custom and
    prevalent practice, but whether it  was  a  marriage  recognised  as  a
    matter of formal law.  The judge reached no clear conclusion on whether
    she thought the marriage was customary,  Sharia,  or  formally  lawful.
    Such reasons as are expressed at  paragraph  32  point  to  an  outcome
    against the Appellant, not in her favour.

 9. Mr Mullen initially submitted that any fresh decision should be reached
    by way of a remit to the First-tier Tribunal, but I could see no reason
    why the Upper Tribunal should not  proceed  to  decide  the  case.   Mr
    McCusker did not seek such a remit.

10. For the purposes of remaking the decision, Mr McCusker sought  to  rely
    on one further piece of background information which was not before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Mullen did not object to its introduction into
    evidence.

11. The Respondent's  Country  of  Information  Report  (COIR)  dated  13th
    October 2009 includes the following:

         Marriage

         22.06    The righttoeducation.org website  contains  a  profile  on
             Eritrea stating:

             According to Article 46 of Proclamation  No  1,  1991  of  the
             TCCE, marriage is solely based on the voluntary  agreement  of
             both parties.  In general, persons have to attain the  age  of
             18 years if they are going to marry.  In spite  of  this,  the
             code in many Articles talks of underage marriage.  But for  an
             underage person to marry, he/she must  voluntarily  agree  and
             get permission from his/her parents ...   Although  the  draft
             civil code of Eritrea states that the marriageable age is  18,
             this does not apply if the man and woman  have  both  attained
             the full age  of  16  years  and  the  woman  submits  to  the
             authority who will celebrate the marriage a  declaration  made
             by a doctor stating that the woman is pregnant or has  already
             given birth to a child ...

             ...

         22.09    The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)  has  stated
             in its report published in 2003 ...

            Eritrean civil law provides that the minimum  age  for  marriage
             for both girls and boys is 18.   Nevertheless,  customary  law
             carries great weight in Eritrean society and often  girls  are
             married at ages well below the  legal  limit.   It  is  widely
             acknowledged in Eritrea that girls are  married  earlier  than
             boys.  The traditional view  holds  that  the  ideal  age  for
             marriage for a girl is between 12 and 18.

12. Paragraph 22.09 does not appear in later  editions  of  the  COIR.   Mr
    McCusker submitted that the 2009 version was the most  relevant,  being
    nearest to the date of the marriage.  He acknowledged that it does  not
    show that the Appellant and  Sponsor  contracted  a  marriage  formally
    recognised in Eritrean law.

13. Mr McCusker's next point of reference is a  report  which  was  in  the
    Appellant's First-tier Tribunal inventory of productions  at  page  20,
    entitled "Gender Equality in  Eritrea",  from  "wikigender.org".   This
    relates that the Constitution and transitional civil  code  prohibiting
    discrimination against women have not yet been fully implemented.   The
    following section appears on the next page:

         Discriminatory family code

         The transitional civil code recognises  three  types  of  marriage:
         civil, religious and customary.  The code  explicitly  states  that
         the minimum age of marriage for women and men is 18  years.   These
         conditions do not apply to marriages  governed  by  Islamic  Sharia
         law.  While the minimum age of marriage according to the civil code
         is 18 years of  age,  the  civil  code  also  recognises  marriages
         between the age of 15 and 18 in recognition of  Eritrean  customary
         marriage  practices  ...  For  the  most  part  customary  marriage
         disregards the  TCE's  minimum  age  condition  and  sets  its  own
         minimums: the age for girls is 8 to 15 and that for boys is  12  to
         15 ... marriages under customary law are still widely practised ...
         particularly in rural areas.

14. The further evidence relied upon in the Upper Tribunal is item 7, pages
    10 to 26 of a supplementary inventory of productions, entitled "Eritrea
    Gender Profile November 2008".  The authors are the  Human  Development
    Department of the African Development Bank and the African  Development
    Fund.  At page 26 of the bundle the following appears:

         3.3      Legal Framework

             3.3.1     Eritrea is a  country  of  old  customary  laws  and
                  traditions  many  of  which  have  been  written   several
                  centuries ago, but amended in 1910.  Customary laws  still
                  have a significant impact on the socio-cultural and socio-
                  economic relations of Eritrean society and the  fact  that
                  they are codified render them more difficult to change  or
                  supplant by modern civil codes.  Although customary law is
                  not recognised as an official source of law in Eritrea  it
                  enjoys a great deal of importance in practice.  Because of
                  lack of uniformity, as various Eritrean  communities  have
                  their own customary laws, it makes blanket  customary  law
                  application impossible.  It has, however,  maintained  its
                  importance in the Eritrean legal system  through  informal
                  incorporation in "modern laws".  For instance,  while  the
                  age of majority according to the civil code is 18 years of
                  age, the civil code also recognises marriages between  the
                  age of 15 and 18  in  recognition  of  Eritrean  customary
                  marriage practices ...

15. Mr McCusker submitted that the above material is sufficient to show  on
    the balance of probability that a church marriage contracted  by  a  15
    year old Eritrean woman  is  among  the  types  of  customary  marriage
    recognised as valid in Eritrean law.  The only other information was in
    the statement of the Sponsor, who says that such a marriage  is  valid,
    but of course he is no legal expert.  Mr  McCusker  submitted  that  it
    would be strange if the civil code were to recognise such a marriage if
    contracted in a mosque, but not if contracted in a church.

16. Mr Mullen in response  directed  my  attention  to  the  copy  marriage
    certificate in the Respondent's First-tier Tribunal bundle at page  17.
    He observed that in its formal recording of the  nationalities  of  the
    parties, their places of origin, the place  of  the  marriage  and  the
    officiating priest, and endorsement with an administrative stamp,  this
    seemed the type of document which might reflect a  marriage  contracted
    under a civil code or other formal legal  requirement.   On  the  other
    hand, he pointed out that it does not refer to  any  provision  of  any
    civil code or other legal source, which is commonly to be  expected  of
    such documents in any jurisdiction.  He  also  submitted  that  it  was
    surprising that the dates of birth  or  ages  of  the  parties  to  the
    marriage were not recorded.

17.  Mr  McClusker  acknowledged  that  the  appraisal  of   the   marriage
    certificate by Mr Mullen was a fair one, and had nothing to add.

18. I reserved my further decision.

19. There is  before  the  tribunal  no  clear  statement  from  a  general
    background source of  the  relevant  law  of  Eritrea,  and  no  expert
    evidence on that law.  The latter would be the ideal  proof,  but  such
    evidence may well be difficult to obtain.  The tribunal has  to  decide
    whether the Appellant has shown this to be more likely than not a valid
    marriage, based on such evidence  as  there  is.   No  material  refers
    specifically to formal recognition of church marriages, nor to  whether
    church marriages may be regarded as a type of customary marriage.   One
    source quoted  above  suggests  a  distinction  between  religious  and
    customary  marriage.   There  may  be  infinite  variety  of  customary
    practice, and the sources are  clear  that  there  are  many  different
    traditions in Eritrea.  The sources suggest that Sharia may be  one  of
    the varieties of custom.  Christian  practice  might,  by  analogy,  be
    similarly accepted.

20. The background evidence contains some passages which  tend  to  suggest
    that a marriage at the age of 15 would be accepted in custom but not in
    formal law, and others which tend to the contrary.   It  seems  that  a
    marriage in a mosque under Sharia law at such an age would be  formally
    recognised.  It also appears from the last  passage  referred  to  that
    such a marriage would be recognised  under  the  civil  code  based  on
    customary practices.

21. Either as a matter of recognition of a marriage contracted in a  church
    in its own right, or as reflecting the acceptability of such a marriage
    in custom, I find it is more probable than not (if only just) that  the
    marriage between the Appellant and  Sponsor  is  a  valid  marriage  in
    Eritrean law.

22. While it might well be that a Scottish court would refuse to  recognise
    certain child marriages, there is freedom to marry at the age of 16  in
    Scotland.  The Respondent has not suggested that even if regarded as  a
    valid marriage in the  law  of  Eritrea  public  policy  would  require
    recognition to be withheld by the law of Scotland.

23. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the
    following decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to
    the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


                               [pic]
                                19 June 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


