
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/17009/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons promulgated
On 9 December 2014     On 10 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Tirana
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Pranvera Kadriaj
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Ward of James & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver promulgated on 23 September 2014, allowing Ms  Kadriaj's  appeal
    against the decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer  ('ECO')  dated  18
    September 2013 to refuse entry clearance as a partner.

 2. Although before me the ECO is the  appellant  and  Ms  Kadriaj  is  the
    respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before the
    First-tier Tribunal I shall  hereafter  refer  to  Ms  Kadriaj  as  the
    Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of Albania born on 29  March  1992.  On  29
    July 2013 she applied  for  entry  clearance  as  the  partner  of  her
    husband, Shkelquim Kadriaj ('the sponsor'), who holds dual British  and
    Albanian nationality.

 4. The Respondent refused the application for reasons set out in a  Notice
    of  Immigration  Decision  dated  18  September  2013  with  particular
    reference to paragraphs E-ECP.2.6  and  2.10  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In addition to  the  references  to  the  particular
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  -  that  the  relationship  be
    genuine and subsisting and that the parties  intend  to  live  together
    permanently in the  UK  -  the  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  also
    contained the following passage "... I am not satisfied this is  not  a
    marriage of convenience in order to facilitate your entry to the UK".

 5. The matters that informed the  Respondent's  decision  are  essentially
    twofold: photographs submitted with the application were not dated  and
    the decision-maker was  unable  to  ascertain  when  they  were  taken;
    telephone records showing calls made from the  sponsor's  telephone  to
    the Appellant's telephone "do not confirm who was contacted or why".

 6. I pause to note that the reasons expressed in the Notice of Immigration
    Decision are, in my judgement, not substantial.

 7. The Appellant appealed  to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules for reasons set  out  in
    his determination.

 8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 7 November 2014.

 9. The Appellant has lodged  a  Rule  24  response,  albeit  that  it  was
    submitted as late as the morning of the appeal hearing.

Consideration

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains  the  following
    passage at paragraph 8:

   "The onus is on the appellant in immigration appeals to prove his or her
         case on the balance of probabilities, but that burden  is  to  show
         that he or she meets the requirements of the rule, not to  disprove
         a negative raised by the respondent. Where the  respondent  alleges
         that the marriage is one of convenience, which effectively  is  her
         position, the onus is on  her  to  establish  it  (Papajorgji  (EEA
         spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38)."

11. The Respondent's challenge as set out in the grounds in support of  the
    application for permission to appeal identify  by  way  of  background,
    that the Appellant's application was refused because the Respondent was
    not satisfied that the sponsor and the Appellant's marriage was genuine
    and subsisting (grounds at paragraph 1). It is then observed, following
    reference to Papajorgji, that this was not a marriage involving an  EEA
    national (paragraph 2), and it is emphasised that "the onus is  on  the
    appellant to demonstrate that the marriage is genuine and  subsisting".
    Although in my judgement not clearly articulated in  the  grounds,  the
    essential challenge - as  indeed  was  recognised  by  Judge  Deans  in
    granting permission to appeal - was that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had misdirected himself as to the burden of proof.

12. I reject that challenge.

13. As is observed in the Rule 24 response,  it  was  the  Respondent  that
    first introduced the  concept  of  'marriage  of  convenience'  in  the
    context of the instant application and appeal.  In  such  circumstances
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is not to be criticised for  also  making
    reference to this concept thus raised. The question really  is,  in  so
    doing, did the Judge allow himself to be distracted  as  to  where  the
    burden of proof lay?

14. Although in an EEA a case where  the  Respondent  alleges  marriage  of
    convenience the burden may  be  upon  the  Respondent,  it  is,  in  my
    judgement, absolutely clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had well
    in mind that it was for the Appellant to demonstrate that her  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting. The Judge says so in terms in  the  opening
    stanza of the  first  sentence  of  the  paragraph  8  (quoted  above).
    Although the Judge then goes on to  make  comment  and  observation  in
    respect of the Respondent's allegation that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience,  he  thereafter  states  "I  find  that  the  marriage  is
    subsisting" and does so pursuant to a self-direction regarding relevant
    case law - GA  Ghana* and Goudy. It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  the
    finding that the marriage is subsisting follows  immediately  from  the
    Judge's expression of his finding  that  the  sponsor  was  a  reliable
    witness.  Contextually  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  is  expressing
    satisfaction as to the evidence  advanced  by  and  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant - which is demonstrative of his recognition that  the  burden
    of proof was on the Appellant.

15. The Respondent has  also  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his findings  that  the  sponsor  was  a  reliable
    witness and that the marriage was subsisting.

16. I pause to note that the conclusion that the  marriage  was  subsisting
    follows on naturally  from  the  conclusion  that  the  sponsor  was  a
    reliable witness, and accordingly the challenge really is focused  upon
    the Judge's acceptance of  the  supporting  evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant by way of documentary evidence and the oral testimony of  the
    sponsor.

17. I am prepared to accept that the Judge's reasoning is  brief.  However,
    this must be seen in the context of a Respondent's decision  where  the
    only matters of  challenge  to  the  Appellant's  application  were  an
    absence of information: there was nothing concrete, for example in  the
    nature of discrepancy or false documentation, that was suggestive of  a
    lack of candour on the part of either the Appellant or the sponsor. The
    Judge identifies at paragraphs  5  and  6  particular  aspects  of  the
    evidence before him that both addressed the concerns in the  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision, and otherwise  was  demonstrative  of  a  genuine
    relationship. The Judge stated in terms that  he  rejected  the  notion
    that the Appellant and sponsor had not shown sufficient contact. Having
    done so, and  having  thereby  essentially  rejected  the  Respondent's
    reasoning  in  the  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision,  there  was   no
    outstanding issue that undermined the Appellant's case.

18. In all such circumstances, in my judgement, the reasons advanced by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge whilst brief were adequate in the context  of
    this particular case.

19. I detect no error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    and accordingly his decision stands.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained no error of law
    and stands.

21. I dismiss the ECO's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     10 December 2014

