
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18501/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 February 2015                   |On 19 February 2015                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                qurat ul ain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Cooke of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State's is, strictly, the appellant  in  this
    appeal, I have for the sake of  consistency,  retained  the  First-tier
    Tribunal designations.  The Secretary of State  is  accordingly  called
    the respondent in this decision.

2.   The appellant is a 17 year old citizen of  Pakistan  who  has  appealed
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 26th  August  2013
    refusing her leave to enter and settle in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    adopted child of her UK  sponsor  or,  alternatively,  as  a  dependent
    relative of her sponsor.  The refusal decision made it clear  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not  accept  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of any of the relevant Immigration Rules.

3.   In a decision promulgated  on  10  November  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid allowed the appeal.  It would seem - although it is  by  no
    means clear - that he purported to do so  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  the  decision.   The  grounds
    essentially argue that the judge failed to give any or adequate reasons
    for his decision, that he failed to analyse or appropriately apply  the
    law in respect of Article 8 and failed  to  apply  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  The grounds also argue that Judge Majid at  [15]
    appears to indicate that he is  exercising  discretion  when  any  such
    discretion may properly be exercised only by the respondent.

5.   At the commencement of the hearing before me  it  was  acknowledged  by
    both  representatives  that  there  were  problems  with  the   judge's
    decision.  Miss Cooke told me that although it was clear  to  her  that
    there were numerous errors of law in the decision her instructions were
    to make submissions that, despite those errors, the judge had  come  to
    the correct conclusion.  She acknowledged that the judge had failed  to
    identify which Immigration Rules were relevant in this  case  or  under
    which he was purporting to allow the appeal and, further, that  it  was
    by no means clear whether the judge was purporting to allow the  appeal
    under  Article  8.   Nevertheless  she  submitted  that  the   ultimate
    conclusion  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  was  correct.   She
    acknowledged that the  appellant  had  not  been  formally  adopted  in
    Pakistan.

6.   I  have  read,  with  some  dismay,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is almost incomprehensible as to its reasoning.  It could
    be said that paragraphs 15-17 (which  together  constitute  about  one-
    third  of  the  whole   decision)   are   completely   irrelevant   and
    inappropriate.  They are also largely wrong in law.

7.   There is no doubt that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  must  be  set
    aside in its entirety.  Nowhere does it identify the Immigration  Rules
    that the judge was bound to consider.  Nowhere does it give detailed or
    indeed any reasons by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  or  to  the
    Article 8 case law (outside the Rules) as the basis on which the  judge
    purported to allow the appeal.

8.   The determination must be regarded as  a  nullity.   It  is  devoid  of
    comprehensible reasoning.   The decision must accordingly be set  aside
    in its entirety.

9.   Both representatives submitted that the appeal must be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.  I  agree  and  I  remit  the
    appeal for a full rehearing at Taylor House on  4  August  2015  to  be
    heard by any judge (other than Judge Majid).  No part of  his  decision
    is to be retained.

10.  No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
18 February 2015
