
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18064/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 December 2014                              |On 18 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - ABUJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms Mfon Grace Usoro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy
For the Respondent:    Mr D G Onyeadiri (Sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference purposes the parties are hereafter referred to as
    they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that Ms Usoro is the  appellant
    and the Entry Clearance Officer the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 22 May 1975.  She
    was refused entry clearance as a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In essence the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's relationship with the sponsor is genuine
    and subsisting or  that  they  intend  to  live  permanently  together.
    Additionally  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  as  to  the  adequacy   of
    accommodation  without  recourse  to  public  funds  and  further   the
    appellant did  not  meet  the  English  language  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules E-ECP.4.1.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    judge found  that  the  appellant  met  all  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal.  There is no challenge to the
    judge's findings in respect of the relationship between  the  appellant
    and sponsor or the adequacy of accommodation.  However, the  respondent
    takes issue with the finding by the judge that the  appellant  met  the
    English language requirements of the Rules.

 4. The date of application by the appellant was 2 August 2013.   The  date
    of refusal was 24 September 2013.  At paragraph 20 of the decision  the
    judge records that the appellant submitted in support of the appeal  an
    IELTS certificate dated 12 October 2013 i.e. post decision.  The  judge
    found that the test results clearly revealed that the appellant has  no
    difficulty in comprehending and adequately  communicating  in  English.
    The judge in  addition  found  that  he  accepted  the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence that the only reason  why  the  appellant  did  not  initially
    undertake the test before her application was submitted was because she
    had been misled by someone at the British embassy  in  Abuja.   It  had
    been indicated to her that if applicants have a degree or  HND  studied
    in English they do not need to take  the  English  language  test.   He
    noted that the appellant indicated in her application form that she has
    an HND in accountancy and has submitted  a  copy  of  that  certificate
    which plainly indicates study in English.  Having received the  refusal
    notice the appellant undertook the test in order to address that  issue
    and she had passed it.

 5. The judge then went on to find that by virtue of Section 85(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and as "plainly  confirmed
    by the Tribunal in DR Morocco [2005] UKAIT 00038" he  was  entitled  to
    take into account post decision evidence provided it shed light on  the
    state of affairs as at the date of application/decision.  He took  into
    account the certificate that was provided post decision and as a result
    he  was  left  in  no  doubt  that  the  appellant's  English  language
    ability/skills are and were, as at date of decision, more than adequate
    to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  considerably
    exceed the level A1 of the Common European Framework of  Reference,  as
    required under the Rules. The judge thereafter allowed the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. It is plain enough that the judge had sympathy for  the  appellant  and
    sponsor and he allowed the appeal. However, he should not have done  so
    under the Rules. Summarising the English language requirements set  out
    in E-ECP.4.1 in Appendix FM if the appellant was to succeed she had  to
    be a national of a majority English speaking country as listed (Nigeria
    is not in that list);  alternatively  she  needed  to  have  passed  an
    English language test in speaking and listening at a minimum  of  level
    A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages  with  a
    provider approved by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  have  an  academic
    qualification recognised by UK NARIC to be equivalent to  the  standard
    of a bachelors or masters degree or PhD in the UK which was  taught  in
    English; in the further alternative the appellant had to show that  she
    was exempt from the English language requirement (it is  not  contended
    that this appellant is so exempted).

 7. Although the appellant has an academic qualification as  noted  by  the
    judge this is an HND in accountancy.  An HND is not the  equivalent  to
    the standard of a bachelors or masters degree.  The only way  therefore
    that the appellant could meet the English language requirement  in  the
    Rules was by providing a certificate from a recognised provider but she
    clearly did not take the test or provide a certificate until after  the
    date of decision.

 8. Section 85(4) of the NIA 2002 as referred to in  paragraph  21  of  the
    determination is applicable where the Tribunal is considering  evidence
    about any matter which it thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
    decision including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
    date of decision.  However by 85(5) sub-Section  (4)  that  section  is
    subject to the exceptions in 85A.  At 85A(2) in relation to  an  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance (as in this case) the  Tribunal  may
    consider only  the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  The judge therefore clearly erred in  allowing  this  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  It is unfortunate for the appellant  that
    although it appears that her English language ability  and  skills  are
    and were as at the date of decision more  than  adequate  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as a fact she did not meet  those
    requirements, and this is for the reasons set out above.

 9. I have taken note of the fact that the  judge  accepted  the  sponsor's
    oral evidence that the only reason why the appellant did not  initially
    undertake the test before her application was made was because she  had
    been misled by someone at the British embassy  in  Abuja.   This  is  a
    serious allegation to make.  The sponsor himself did not appear to have
    been there at the relevant time and presumably therefore he has  relied
    on what he has been told by  the  appellant.   The  judge  should  have
    required very cogent evidence to be put before him prior to making such
    a finding.  Such very cogent evidence is  entirely  lacking.   Although
    the judge believed the sponsor he was  not  entitled  to  come  to  the
    finding that  he  did  considering  the  complete  lack  of  supporting
    evidence.

10. The judge therefore erred in finding as he did and he should  not  have
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules. I therefore  set  aside
    that decision through material error of law although the findings  made
    by the First-tier judge in relation to the genuineness of the  marriage
    and accommodation stand as there is no challenge to those findings.

11. The judge giving permission to appeal the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge suggested that the appellant might wish to seek to  introduce  an
    Article 8 ECHR appeal at this stage.  As I  explained  to  the  sponsor
    this was not a matter that  I  would  allow.   It  was  in  essence  an
    entirely new issue and given that the facts as found by the  judge  and
    which are not challenged show that the marriage is a  genuine  one  and
    that all other requirements of the Immigration Rules now appear  to  be
    covered and satisfied a further application for entry clearance  should
    meet with success.  That is the proper  course  to  take.  The  sponsor
    pointed out that this would involve the appellant and himself in  great
    expense because they would have to pay a further fee but  that  is  the
    unfortunate consequence of not meeting the requirements of the rules in
    the first place. Nevertheless that is the  route  that  should  now  be
    taken rather than to seek to pursue an Article 8 claim.

Decision

12. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  for
    the reasons set out above I dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. Anonymity was not requested.  In the circumstances of this appeal I  do
    not find that anonymity is required and therefore I do not make such  a
    direction.



Signed        Date 18 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

