

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  OA/18670/2012
      OA/18671/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport      |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 22 October 2014                    |On: 24 November 2014      |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                           RUWAIDA ABDIRAHMAN SAID
                           RIQIYA ABDIRAHMAN SAID
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the continuation of an appeal by the Appellants, two children
      presently resident in Ethiopia.   They  are  Somali  citizens.  Their
      appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance  to  join  their  parents
      Faahiye Garceesaan Said (formerly known as  Abdirahman  Sharif  Said)
      and Zaynab Abdirahman Farah in the United Kingdom first  came  before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ghaffar  on  24  September  2013  and  was
      allowed by reference to  Article  8  ECHR.  The  Secretary  of  State
      applied for permission to appeal to this Tribunal and  following  the
      grant of  permission  a  Vice-Presidential  panel  decided  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material errors of  law
      and set that decision aside. In doing so the panel considered that no
      part of the First-tier Tribunal decision could  survive.  The  appeal
      was retained in the Upper Tribunal for a new decision to be made.

   2. At  the  resumed  hearing  before  me  Mr  Hodgetts  represented  the
      Appellants and Mr Richards  the  Respondent.  Neither  representative
      submitted  a  skeleton  argument.  Mr  Hodgetts  confirmed  that  the
      Appellants' parents live together in the United Kingdom with the four
      of their six children (the other two being the Appellants) and  added
      that a further child is expected in February 2015.  The  child  Muaad
      Ali Hussein who travelled to the United Kingdom with the  Appellant's
      mother as her adopted child is now living  in  Bahrain.  Mr  Hodgetts
      conceded that the Appellants were unable to satisfy  the  maintenance
      and accommodation requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Oral evidence

   3. Faahiye  Garceesaan  Said  (formerly  Abdirahman  Sharif  Said),  the
      Appellants' father, gave oral evidence and confirmed his identity and
      address and adopted his written witness statements.

   4. Cross-examined by  Mr  Richards  Mr  Said  agreed  that  he  obtained
      indefinite leave to remain in 2004 and is now a British  citizen.  He
      said that he went to Ethiopia at the beginning of 2006 where  he  met
      Zaynab Abdirahman Farah, the Appellants' mother. She was living  with
      Muaad and with  family  friends,  Saynab  Ibrahim  Ali  and  Ferdousa
      Mohamed. Both are ladies aged about 40. Saynab is from the same tribe
      as Mr Said. When he met Zaynab Mr Said said that he was  married  but
      it was not a good relationship and he was about to divorce. He stayed
      in Ethiopia for about 3 months.

   5. Asked why Riqiya's entry clearance application gave her date of birth
      as 1 January 2006 Mr Said said  that  when  they  applied  for  entry
      clearance for the children his wife was sick  and  they  guessed  the
      dates of birth. They know the correct dates  now  because  he  traced
      back his journey and he has met a few people who told him.

   6. Mr Said said that he next travelled to Ethiopia at the  beginning  of
      2007 and stayed for a few months but only spent one week with  Zaynab
      before going to Diredawa. He did not stay with Zaynab longer  because
      she was told that her previous husband was still alive so Mr Said had
      to go. He agreed that in this one week period  Zaynab  conceived  his
      child. He said that her husband sponsored her to come to  the  United
      Kingdom and she then found out that she was pregnant by Mr Said.

   7. Mr Said agreed that after he returned from Ethiopia he  met  Zaynab's
      first husband (Ali Hussein Sharif Hassan) in Bristol but said that he
      never talked about Zaynab. He did not know  that  he  was  her  first
      husband. He only became aware of  this  after  Zaynab  came  to  this
      country when he saw them living together. Referred to paragraph 10 of
      his latest witness statement Mr Said said he was  not  sure  that  Mr
      Hassan was Zaynab's husband when he  met  him  in  Bristol  and  only
      became sure when he saw them living together. He did not tell  Zaynab
      that he had met her first husband. Referred again  to  his  statement
      (paragraph 11) he said that Zaynab already knew.

   8. Mr Said thought that Zaynab and her first husband got back  in  touch
      with each other because Mohamed  Sharif  would  have  told  them.  Mr
      Sharif knows Saynab and Ferdousa and they told  Mr  Sharif  one  week
      before Mr Said went back.

   9. Mr Said said that Zaynab started living with Saynab and Ferdousa when
      she left Somalia. She applied to join her first husband  rather  than
      Mr Said because she wanted to live with her first husband even though
      Mr Said was the father  of  her  daughters.  Zaynab  told  her  first
      husband about her two daughters when she  came  here.  She  told  him
      everything about her life. Zaynab was in the United Kingdom for 10 to
      14 days before she contacted Mr Said. She told him she had nowhere to
      go because her husband had told her to leave.

  10. Mr Said  denied  Mr  Richards  suggestion  that  it  was  always  the
      intention for Zaynab to come to the United Kingdom to live with  him.
      He denied the suggestion that she applied to join her  first  husband
      as a  pre-flight  spouse  because  she  did  not  need  to  meet  the
      maintenance and  accommodation  requirements.  He  said  that  things
      happened the way they happened. A wife  cannot  marry  two  husbands.
      Referred to his reference to 'mistakes' in his  statement  (paragraph
      15) Mr Said said that it was  a  mistake  for  Zaynab  to  leave  the
      children and travel to the United Kingdom.

  11. Mr Said said that he could not go and live in Ethiopia because he has
      four children here to look after, Zaynab is  sick  and  the  children
      need a father and a mother. Fatwa  has  a  heart  problem  and  needs
      specialist treatment.

  12. Answering questions from me Mr Said said that he met Muaad in Bristol
      when he was in hospital about a year after Zaynab came here. This was
      the only time apart from when he was in Ethiopia.

  13. Zaynab Abdirahman Farah gave oral evidence and  adopted  her  written
      witness statements. She clarified that she applied to join Ali Hassan
      in the United Kingdom at the end of 2007. He  never  visited  her  in
      Ethiopia.
  14. Cross-examined by Mr Richards Mrs Farah said that she was able to re-
      establish contact with her first husband  because  someone  told  her
      that he lived in the United Kingdom. He telephoned  her  because  the
      man who told her gave him her telephone number. She  thought  he  was
      called Mohamed and was a fiend of Ferdousa.  She  did  not  tell  her
      first husband that she had a child because he was not aware. She  did
      not tell her husband because she had not seen him for  a  long  time.
      Asked why when she applied for a visa she brought Muaad but left  her
      two daughters Mrs Farah said that Muaad was related  to  her  husband
      and she thought she could ask for her daughters  to  come  after  she
      came  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Asked  why  she  said  on  the  visa
      application form that she had no children she said this  was  because
      she did not tell her husband she had children.

  15. Answering questions from me Mrs Farah said that  the  Appellants  are
      living with Saynab and Ferdousa. They do not have children  of  their
      own and are much older than Mrs Farah. They  did  not  have  husbands
      when she was there and in the three years she  lived  with  them  she
      never asked them whether they were married. She  last  saw  Muaad  in
      early 2012 when he was in hospital in Bristol

Submissions

  16. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that it was  common  ground  that
      the  Appellants  cannot  meet  the  maintenance   and   accommodation
      requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Dealing  with  Article  8  he
      asked me to look at the whole of the evidence. This is a family  that
      has practiced deception. A lot more has come out since  the  original
      hearing. It was clear when the matter first  came  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal that there was more to the circumstances than met  the  eye.
      This is borne out by  the  evidence.  There  were  falsities  in  Mrs
      Farah's entry clearance application. There were  falsities  when  she
      made her application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of a
      continuing relationship with her first husband in 2011.

  17. Mr Richards said that the whole scenario is simply  unbelievable.  It
      was always the intention that Mrs Farah come here to  join  Mr  Said.
      The application to join Mr Hassan was a cynical  ploy  because  there
      was no need to meet the maintenance  and  accommodation  requirements
      for a family reunion application. Mr  Richards  suggested  that  when
      weighing matters in the proportionality balance it should firstly  be
      borne in mind that the rules are not  met  and  that  the  burden  of
      supporting the family will fall on the British taxpayer. Secondly the
      deception of the sponsors should be weighed in the balance. The  best
      interests of the children is a primary  consideration  but  the  best
      interests of all the children has to be  considered.  The  additional
      two children mean two more inhabitants in a property  that  does  not
      meet the accommodation requirements and two more mouths to feed. When
      balancing the rights of the individuals against the  wider  need  for
      effective immigration control a refusal is proportionate and  is  not
      unjustifiably harsh.

  18. For the Appellants Mr Hodgetts conceded that Mrs Farah had denied her
      own children in her application and had falsely claimed to  be  in  a
      relationship with her former husband to obtain  indefinite  leave  in
      2001. The chickens have come home to  roost.  There  was  however  no
      deception by Mr Said. Mrs Farah rejected him. She had been  separated
      from Mr Hassan for 15 years. She thought he was dead. She  found  out
      that he was alive and having started to look after Muaad she formed a
      strong bond with him. The strength of her relationship with Muaad was
      a factor. I was asked to look at the best interests of the  children,
      that should be the starting point. The children should be  with  both
      parents. There are illegal residents in Ethiopia,  they  are  not  in
      education and are unlikely to be in the future. The children here are
      British. They cannot be expected to live illegally in Ethiopia. It is
      in the best  interests  of  the  children  for  all  siblings  to  be
      together. The primary interests of the children tips the balance.

  19. I reserved my decision.

Decision

  20. This appeal involves two infant appellants now aged 8 and 7 years  of
      age. They were born in Ethiopia and have lived in  the  household  of
      Saynab Ibrahim Ali and Ferdousa  Mohamed  since  their  birth.  Their
      father has never lived with them and their  mother  lived  with  them
      until February 2009 when  she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Since
      arriving in the United Kingdom the Appellant's mother has given birth
      to four more children and a fifth is expected in February  2015.  She
      has not been back to visit them as she has been pregnant for most  of
      the five and a half years she has  been  here.  The  Appellants  have
      applied to join their mother,  father  and  siblings  in  the  United
      Kingdom but do not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      because their parents are  unable  to  satisfy  the  maintenance  and
      accommodation requirements. It is argued on  their  behalf  that  the
      Respondent's decision to refuse admission is in breach of  Article  8
      ECHR.

  21. As a starting point it must in  my  judgment  be  accepted  that  the
      Appellants, despite living apart  from  their  parents  and  siblings
      share a prima facie family life  with  them  and,  dealing  with  the
      Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368 criteria that the  consequences  of  continued
      separation are of sufficient gravity to engage  the  Convention.  The
      decision is in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the
      Appellants do not meet the requirements of the  rules  and  for  that
      reason it is in accordance with the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
      control.  The  issue  to  be   determined   is   therefore   one   of
      proportionality.

  22. Before proportionality can be properly assessed and the positive  and
      negative factors weighed in  the  balance  it  is  important  in  the
      circumstances of this appeal to address the facts and the credibility
      issues arising from those facts. It is the Appellants' case,  as  put
      forward by their sponsoring parents, that their mother  came  to  the
      United Kingdom lawfully in the expectation that they would be able to
      join her shortly thereafter once she had explained their existence to
      her first husband Mr Hassan.

  23. The facts as put forward on behalf of the  Appellants  are  that  Mrs
      Farah married her cousin Mr Hassan in Somalia in about 1995 but  they
      became separated a few months after their marriage  and  she  thought
      that he was dead. Having fled Somalia in about 2005/6  she  lived  in
      Ethiopia in the household of Saynab and  Ferdousa  with  her  adopted
      child Muaad who was related to her husband (his sister's  child).  In
      2006, more than 10 years after losing contact with Mr Hassan, she met
      Mr Said who was visiting Ethiopia and finding out that  he  lived  in
      England asked him if he knew her husband but  he  did  not.  Why  she
      thought he may know her husband is not revealed in her statement  and
      was not explored in evidence. In any event a  relationship  developed
      between Mrs Farah and Mr Said and they got married a few weeks  after
      meeting each other. Mr Said stayed for a month and during  that  time
      Mrs Farah became pregnant with Riqiya. Mr Said returned to the United
      Kingdom and came back to Ethiopia the following year. He stayed  with
      Mrs Farah for about a week and she again became pregnant.  At  around
      the same time or shortly thereafter Mrs Farah learned that her  first
      husband was alive and living in Bristol, the same city where Mr  Said
      had his home. Contact was re-established and, despite being  pregnant
      with Ruwaida Mrs Farah decided that her feelings for Mr  Hassan  were
      stronger than those she held for Mr Said and that she  wanted  to  be
      with him. She did not tell him about her child or her pregnancy.

  24. In late 2007 before giving birth to Ruwaida, her second child  by  Mr
      Said, Mrs Farah applied along with Muaad to join  Mr  Hassan  in  the
      United Kingdom. On her entry clearance application form she said  she
      had no children  because  she  had  not  told  Mr  Hassan  about  her
      daughters by Mr Said. Mrs Farah's application  was  refused  but  she
      appealed the decision and her appeal was allowed.  In  February  2009
      she and Muaad came to the United Kingdom to join  Mr  Hassan  leaving
      her two daughters in Ethiopia with Saynab  and  Ferdousa.  Mrs  Farah
      thought that Mr Hassan would accept her two daughters  but  when  she
      told him about them shortly after her arrival in  Bristol  he  became
      extremely angry and left their home. Mrs Farah contacted Mr Said  and
      moved in with him as she did not know anyone else in  Bristol.  Their
      relationship was rekindled and in December 2009, 10 months after  her
      arrival in the United Kingdom Mrs Farah's third child by Mr Said  was
      born. When Mrs Farah's leave to remain was about to  expire  in  2011
      she sought help to obtain further leave to remain and in doing so got
      Mr Hassan to sign the form to say that they were still together.  She
      was granted indefinite leave to remain and has since obtained British
      nationality.

  25. In giving this account  Mrs  Farah  accepts  that  she  has  employed
      deception in two ways.  Firstly  by  denying  the  existence  of  her
      children on her entry clearance  application  form  and  secondly  by
      falsely asserting in her application for indefinite leave  to  remain
      in 2011 that her relationship with Mr Hassan was subsisting.

  26. Mr Richards asks me to find that  Mrs  Farah's  deception  goes  much
      deeper than that and also that Mr Said is party to her  deception.  I
      am satisfied that this assertion is correct. I  do  not  believe  the
      account that both Mrs Farah and Mr Said give me about the history  of
      their relationship or indeed about other pertinent factors  involving
      the Appellants.

  27. I do not believe that Mrs Farah could live with and thereafter  leave
      her children with  Saynab  and  Ferdousa  without  having  asked  any
      questions about their own spouses or children and having little  idea
      about them other than their names. I do not believe  Mrs  Farah  when
      she tells me that she had no idea of the  whereabouts  of  Mr  Hassan
      until just before her entry clearance application at the end of 2007.
      I find the fact that Mr Hassan and Mr Said lived in the same city  in
      England just too much of a coincidence to be  believable.  I  do  not
      accept Mrs Farah's evidence when she tells me that having married  Mr
      Said, given birth to her first child by him and conceived her  second
      that she felt her feelings for Mr Hassan, a  man  she  had  last  had
      contact with about two months  after  their  marriage  in  1995  were
      stronger. In my finding when Mrs Farah made her application  to  join
      Mr Hassan in 2007 her deception was not limited to the denial of  her
      two children it was the most fundamental deception of claiming to  be
      coming to join Mr Hassan when her true intention was to join Mr Said.
      I find it wholly unbelievable that she completed her entry  clearance
      application when heavily  pregnant  and  sought  to  join  Mr  Hassan
      without  telling  him  about  her  children.  I  find  it  even  more
      incredible that Mrs  Farah  would  take  the  refusal  of  her  entry
      clearance application to appeal, an appeal  that  Mr  Hassan  clearly
      supported as sponsor without telling him these basic  details.  I  do
      not believe that having arrived in the  United  Kingdom  to  join  Mr
      Hassan she would fall out with him within two weeks  and  immediately
      move in with Mr Said the father of her two children who just happened
      to live in the same city and almost immediately become pregnant  with
      their third child.

  28. Having found that Mrs Farah had no intention of joining Mr Hassan the
      deception goes further again because the falsity was not confined  to
      the entry clearance application but was extended to presenting  false
      evidence at appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  deception
      continued. Having been granted entry clearance to join Mr Hassan  and
      having instead moved in with Mr Said Mrs Farah was in breach  of  the
      conditions of her leave to enter and remain. Further when it came  to
      applying for indefinite leave Mrs Farah conspired with Mr  Hassan  to
      present false information to obtain that indefinite leave to  remain.
      If the truth had been known indefinite  leave  would  not  have  been
      granted, Mrs Farah did not qualify. Mrs Farah's has gone on to obtain
      British citizenship as a result of that deception. It is a  catalogue
      of falsity. I have no doubt that Mr Said is party to  the  deception.
      Having already brought his first wife to the United Kingdom as a  pre
      flight spouse Mr Said was aware of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  this
      regard. In my finding the relationship between Mrs Farah and Mr  Said
      has subsisted throughout and having made this  finding  it  can  only
      follow that Mr  Said  at  the  very  least  knew  about  Mrs  Farah's
      deception in her entry clearance application, appeal  and  indefinite
      leave application and more probably than not that he was part of  the
      plot. Mrs Farah's presence in the United Kingdom is premised on  this
      catalogue of lies. Without them she would not be here, she would  not
      be British and would be living with her daughters in Ethiopia.

  29. Turning to the Appellants their  position  in  Ethiopia  is  unclear.
      There is a paucity of evidence in this regard.  The  sponsor's  first
      witness statements say only that they live with Saynab  and  that  Mr
      Said is not able to afford to pay for  them  to  go  to  school.  The
      second statement adds that Ruweida has started to  suffer  from  fits
      this year. In oral evidence I am told that they live with Saynab  and
      Ferdousa two single middle-aged ladies and that they  have  lived  in
      their household since birth. I am told that their life in Ethiopia is
      difficult and extremely insecure but there is little if any  evidence
      of the nature of their difficulties or insecurity. It is  clear  that
      Mrs Farah was prepared to leave Ethiopia entrusting the care  of  her
      two daughters, then aged just one and two years old,  to  Saynab  and
      Ferdousa. I note that Mr Said went to visit  the  children  in  2012.
      Equally apart from that contained in Mr Said's first statement  there
      is little evidence about the position of their siblings in the United
      Kingdom other than that Fatwa suffers from a heart defect.  I  accept
      that Fatwa and Ruweida have the medical conditions described and that
      Mr Said visited the Appellants in 2012.  I  find  that  I  can  place
      little weight  upon  Mr  Said's  evidence  in  other  respects  being
      satisfied  for  the  reasons  given  above  that  both  sponsors  are
      dishonest  witnesses  who  have  conspired  together  to   circumvent
      immigration  control  and  who  will  unhesitatingly  give  expedient
      evidence to further their self serving ends.

  30. Weighing matters in  the  proportionality  balance  the  very  strong
      weight on the positive side is  that  in  most  circumstances  it  is
      expected, and it will be in the best interests, of children  to  live
      with their parents and siblings. This is  the  fundamental  ideal  of
      family life although it is an ideal which, for  various  reasons,  is
      frequently not attained. The fact that the Appellants do not  qualify
      for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules is a negative in  the
      balance but the reason that they  do  not  qualify  illuminates  that
      negative. In the first place the maintenance requirements are not met
      and in the second place the accommodation requirements are  not  met.
      Again there is a paucity of evidence to address the effect that  this
      may have not only on the Appellants but also on their siblings  other
      than the statement from Mr Peake to the effect that the sponsors will
      be able to claim child benefit and tax credits  for  the  Appellants.
      Subject to this the resources currently used to maintain 2 adults and
      4 (soon to be 5) children would have to stretch to maintain 2  adults
      and 6 (soon to be 7) children. The accommodation suitable,  according
      to the tenancy agreement, for a maximum of 5 occupants, will need  to
      accommodate 9. No details were submitted on behalf of the  Appellants
      to show how their parents plan to maintain and accommodate the larger
      family  group.  The  public   interest   in   maintaining   effective
      immigration control must  be  a  very  heavy  weight  indeed  on  the
      negative side of the balance because this is not simply a case  where
      the Appellants do not meet the requirements  of  the  rules  but  one
      where their sponsors have  practiced  fundamental  deception  without
      which the sponsor mother would not have been n the United Kingdom  to
      sponsor their application in the first place.

  31. None of the negatives in the proportionality balance are the fault of
      the Appellants. It  is  not  their  fault  that  their  parents  have
      practiced fundamental deception in order for their mother  to  obtain
      status in the United Kingdom and it is not  their  fault  that  their
      father does not earn  sufficient  to  maintain  them  in  the  United
      Kingdom and does not have property suitable to accommodate  them.  It
      is not their fault that their mother, for whatever reason, thought it
      best to leave them in Ethiopia and  migrate  to  the  United  Kingdom
      where she has since conceived 5 more children.

  32. The public interest in immigration control is a most pertinent matter
      in this appeal. The fact that the Appellant's mother's status in  the
      United Kingdom, a status that is fundamental to the application  made
      by the Appellants to join her here is  based  upon  deception  is  an
      extremely heavy weight on the negative side  of  the  proportionality
      balance. I have very carefully considered the best interests  of  the
      children, both the British citizen children in the United Kingdom and
      the Appellants. I have considered their best interests in  the  light
      of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166 and I have also had  regard  to  the
      decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 which,
      although a deportation cases, has certain  parallels  to  the  matter
      before  me.  The  best  interests  of  the  children  is  a   primary
      consideration but it is not a  trump  card.  In  my  finding  in  the
      unusual  circumstances  of  this  case  the  cynical  and  calculated
      deception of the parents makes a mockery of immigration control.  The
      public interest not only in immigration control but in the prevention
      of such practices substantially outweighs the strong positive  weight
      of the desirability of family unity.

  33. It must follow that I dismiss this appeal.

SUMMARY

  34. The decision made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a  material
      error of law and has been set aside.

  35. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I  dismiss  the
      Appellants' appeal both  by  virtue  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
      Article 8 ECHR.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal      Date: 24 November 2014


