
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/18826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th November 2014           |On 24th November 2014            |
|                                |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - Nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mrs Shafaa Abdallah Said
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as  they
    were described before the First Tier Tribunal that is Mrs Said  as  the
    appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on 18th December 1975 and  she
    appeals against a decision of the respondent  dated  29th  August  2013
    refusing her leave to enter as a spouse under the Immigration Rules (HC
    395 as amended). The ECO in his refusal identified that  the  appellant
    and the sponsor had both been previously married.   The  appellant  was
    divorced and the sponsor a widower.  It was asserted that  no  evidence
    to that effect was placed before the Entry Clearance Officer  and  thus
    the application was refused under paragraph EC-P-1.1(d) of Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In a determination dated 22nd August  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Majid   allowed the appellant's appeal stating at [8] that

         'Mr Muquit said that Ms Cooke [the Home Office Presenting  Officer]
         has been told that, although it is not in the Respondent's  bundle,
         the evidence of the divorce of  the  appellant's  father  with  his
         first wife and the death certificate of the appellant's mother  was
         in front of the ECO.  Since these were the main objections and were
         not justified because the  ECO  had  not  looked  at  the  evidence
         properly, the young appellant should be able to come to the UK  and
         join her refugee father.  Mr Muquit also said  that  the  appellant
         was without any support and she should be helped'.

 4. The application for permission was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge
    Parkes.

 5. Judge Majid's determination paragraph [8] contained fundamental  errors
    and it was not clear whether the submissions  related  to  the  instant
    case because they described the divorce of the appellant's  father  and
    death of the appellant's  mother.   They  also  referred  to  a  'young
    appellant'.  The appellant was born in 1975.

 6. At the hearing Mr Muquit  at  first  contended  that  this  was  not  a
    material error of law.  In my view it is not clear that the  Judge  was
    in fact even referring to this case.  I find also that the Judge is  in
    effect recording the  submissions  of  Mr  Muquit  rather  than  making
    findings.  In effect there is an error of law which is material.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Tufan confirmed that  no  issue  was  taken
    with regards to the income and maintenance.  It  was  submitted  by  Mr
    Muquit that it was always the appellant's case that  the  ECO  had  the
    divorce certificate and the affidavit in relation to the death  of  the
    sponsor's wife had been sent to and reviewed  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager.  The documentation had not been considered carefully.  Further
    no ECO bundle had been sent to the appellant.

 8. However, Paragraph 8 discloses an error of law and the matter should be
    remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reason identified.  I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE  2007).   Both  representatives  agreed  that
    there would need to be a re-hearing.  Bearing in mind  the  nature  and
    extent of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the  TCE  2007  and
    further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.




    Directions

      1. The divorce certificate and affidavit regarding the sponsor's  wife
         should be forwarded with 14 days of the date of this notice, by the
         appellant or her representatives to the  ECO  in  Nairobi  for  any
         representations to be made on those documents.  The ECO should make
         any representations on that documentation at least 28 days prior to
         the substantive hearing before the First Tier Tribunal.

      2. The Tribunal is to serve the ECO bundle on  the  appellant  or  her
         representative.

      3. All further evidence should be  served  on  the  Tribunal  and  the
         opposing party not later than 14  days  prior  to  the  substantive
         hearing.




Signed      Date 17th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


