
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/18530/2012
                                                               OA/18534/2012
                                                               OA/18548/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 24 July 2014                           |On 13 August 2014           |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                               WUZIYA MARECHRA
                           EUNICE TANAKA MARECHARA
                          GREGORY TAGUMA MARECHERA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Sarah Marechra the sponsor
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Law promulgated on 16 December 2013, which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.
Background


3. The Appellant was born on 13 August 1961 and is a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.
   The second and third Appellants are the children  of  the  Appellant  and
   Sponsor.
4. On 4 May 2012 the Appellant together with his two  children  applied  for
   entry clearance to join Sarah Marechera for family reunion.
5. On 21 August 2012 an Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  Appellant's
   application by reference to paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.  The
   refusal letter gave a number of reasons: there was no evidence  that  the
   parties were living as part of a family unit  before  Ms  Marechera  left
   Zimbabwe as they appeared to be living at different addresses; there  was
   little evidence of any contact between the parties since the sponsor left
   Zimbabwe; the Respondent did not accept that the marriage was subsisting.
The Judge's Decision
6.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Law (hereinafter called "the Judge") dismissed the  appeal
   against the Respondent's decision. The  Judge  found  that  the  starting
   point for his determination was the decision of Judge Greasley who  heard
   the Appellant's asylum appeal on 4 May 2006; Judge Greasley had found the
   Sponsor to be completely lacking in credit; he found no evidence that the
   sponsor and the Appellant and their two children lived  together  in  one
   household as  a  family;  he  found  the  sponsor's  credibility  further
   undermined by the delay in her application for  reunion;  he  found  that
   while the parties were legally married he did not accept the marriage was
   subsisting; he went on to consider the matter under Article  8  and  took
   into account that he did not accept that the marriage was subsisting ;the
   Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules; the  Appellant  and
   the children would be a burden on public funds which was relevant to  the
   economic interests of the United Kingdom ; he did not find  the  decision
   disproportionate
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged in  relation  to  the  Appellant  only  not
   their two children and on 26 February 2014 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Connor
   gave permission to appeal.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Marechara  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a)  She  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  drafted  by  her  previous
      representatives.

9. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

   (a)The Judge set out clearly in paragraph 21 of the determination why the
   Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:
   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."
Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. This was an appeal by the first Appellant against a refusal of leave  to
   enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of a refugee under Rule  352A  and
   the second and third Appellants under Rule 352D.

14. The refusal letter in respect the first Appellant put in  issue  whether
   he met the requirements of 352A(iv) :

   "each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other as his or
   her spouse and the marriage is subsisting."

15. In respect of the second and third  Appellants  the  issue  was  whether
   they met the requirement of 352D(iv)

   "was part of a family unit of the person granted asylum at the time  that
   the person granted asylum left the country of his habitual  residence  in
   order to seek asylum."

16. Ground 1 as drafted by the Appellants  previous  representatives  argues
   that the Judge 'failed to resolve conflicts of fact and  opinion'.  I  am
   satisfied that in resolving the conflicts generally in the  evidence  the
   Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the  determination  of  Judge
   Greasley in relation to the sponsor's asylum appeal and specifically  his
   adverse credibility findings that the 'Sponsor had been economic with the
   truth throughout the asylum process.' He noted that the Judge  had  found
   that in explaining her late claim for asylum the sponsor had invented  an
   account of meeting a bogus lawyer in the United Kingdom to cover  up  the
   fact that she had been found working illegally in the United Kingdom.

17. In resolving the issue  of  whether  the  Appellants  met  the  specific
   subsection of the Rules in issue the  Judge  therefore  was  entitled  to
   conclude having heard the Sponsor give oral evidence and  looked  at  the
   documents provided that the details were 'scant' in relation to her  life
   in Zimbabwe with the Appellants and he concluded in paragraph 18:

   "I have not found any evidence of specifics relating to the children  and
   the Sponsor living together in one home where they had a family life that
   they are seeking to replicate in the United Kingdom."

18.  I am satisfied that this was a finding open  to  him  that  made  clear
   that the second and third Appellants did not meet the requirements of the
   Rule in issue. I am satisfied that it was  then  open  to  the  Judge  to
   reject as he did at paragraph 19 the explanation given by the Sponsor for
   the delay in making an application for the Appellants  to  join  her  and
   that this account, taken together with the lack of  evidence  of  contact
   and financial support until recently,  were  relevant  to  the  issue  of
   whether the marriage was subsisting and they had been a family unit prior
   to the sponsor leaving Zimbabwe.

19. The Judge, having clearly identified the issues again at  paragraph  20,
   was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules. Although it is argued in the grounds that  the
   Judge has confused the provisions that relate to the first Appellant  and
   his two children and indeed applied the  wrong  Rules  he  sets  out  the
   different provisions as they relate to the Appellants at paragraph  1  of
   the determination and  these  subsequent  findings  make  clear  that  he
   appreciated what the issue was in relation to each of the Appellants.

20. Ground 3 argues that the Judge assessment under Article 8 which  is  set
   out at paragraphs  24-36  of  the  determination  is  flawed.  The  Judge
   followed the steps as set out in Razgar. The only criticism that might be
   levelled is that in accepting that there was family life  for  Article  8
   purposes the Judge was generous and given his findings in relation to the
   Immigration Rules the Judge should have  concluded  that  the  Appellants
   fell at the first Razgar hurdle. However the requirements  of  the  Rules
   that he was considering are different to the test under Article 8.  Given
   that he had accepted that the Appellant and sponsor  were  still  legally
   married and that the children were indeed the children of the sponsor and
   first Appellant he has accepted that the first  question  in  Razgar  was
   answered  positively.  He  acknowledged  that  the  issue  was   one   of
   proportionality and I am satisfied that in assessing that he was entitled
   to take into account that the different test set out in the Rules had not
   been met and also to take into account that on the  evidence  before  him
   the Appellants would be a burden on public funds. He concludes  that  the
   decision is proportionate.

21. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning. His task was to resolve  two  key  issues,
   whether the first Appellant and the sponsor  intended  to  live  together
   permanently and the marriage was subsisting and whether the  sponsor  had
   lived in a family unit with the second and third  Appellants.  The  Judge
   clearly found against the Appellants on those two issues. The grounds are
   simply a disagreement with findings that were open to  the  Judge  having
   found the sponsor wholly unworthy of belief.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
9.8.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
