
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/18384/2012
     OA/18387/2012
     OA/18389/2012
     OA/18391/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 September 2013                            |On 16 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                  dhon miah
                                 heena Begum
                                 rima Begum
                               Mohammed juned
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - dhaka

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr Choudhury
For the respondent:    Ms Vinyaharan

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Bangladesh  and  comprise  father  (the
    principal appellant 'the appellant') born in  1965  and  his  dependent
    children (two daughters  and  a  son)  born  in  1994,  1998  and  1996
    respectively.  They applied for entry clearance to  the  UK  to  settle
    with the sponsor, Mrs Saida Nessa, a British citizen born in  1972  who
    is the spouse of the appellant and the mother of  the  three  children.
    Mrs Nessa has three more children (Bangladesh born twins aged 12, and a
    UK born child aged 9. One of the twins is disabled) in  the  UK.  There
    are a further two older children in Bangladesh. They  have  independent
    lives and are not involved in the appeal. It is not disputed  that  the
    appellant and sponsor are the parents of all the children.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on 26  August  2012
    in respect of the appellant under  paragraph  281  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The children were refused under paragraph 297.

 3. In summary, for the appellant  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    marriage was a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.   Also  that  the
    maintenance  requirement was not met.

 4. The refusal letters in respect of the children are  in  near  identical
    terms.  In line  with  their  father  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  on
    maintenance.   Nor  was  he  satisfied  that  the  sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility for the children's upbringing.

 5.  In  respect  of  all  the  appellants  the  ECO  considered  that  any
    interference with right to respect for family life was proportionate to
    the legitimate aim.

 6. They appealed.

 7. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 14 May 2013 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Jhirad dismissed the appeals.

 8. Her findings are at paragraphs 7.1  to  8  of  her  determination.   In
    summary, she concluded that the marriage was not  subsisting  as  there
    was little evidence of contact.  Also the appellant  had  never  sought
    entry clearance to visit the sponsor.  As for maintenance  the  sponsor
    does not work.  Weekly benefits for her and her children were more than
    �250 less than the income she needed to show.  The offer of third party
    support from a restaurant owner was not genuine.  Thus the  maintenance
    requirement was not satisfied.

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 24 June 2013 who stated:

         '2.  The application for permission to appeal  is  based  upon  the
             failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to take into  account
             any matters relating to the welfare of the  children  affected
             by this appeal.

         3.   The first Appellant and his wife (who  is  a  British  citizen
             living in  the  United  Kingdom)  have  eight  children.   The
             younger three live in the United  Kingdom  with  their  mother
             (the Sponsor).  Three of the older children  are  the  second,
             third and fourth Appellants whilst the two oldest of the eight
             children  are  now  married  and   living   independently   in
             Bangladesh.

         4.   Having read the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
             I am satisfied that she has made  no  mention  of  any  issues
             which affect the welfare of the children and  I  am  satisfied
             that this is an arguable error  of  law  particularly  on  the
             basis that the children of the family are  split  between  two
             continents and one of the children who lives with  the  mother
             is disabled.

         5.    The  grounds  of  the  application  point  to  various  legal
             provisions making it a requirement for the welfare of children
             to be considered in such circumstances for example  Article  8
             of the European Convention on Human Rights, the UN  Convention
             on the rights of the child and guidance is  provided  in  case
             law and the IDIs as  to  how  the  issue  of  the  welfare  of
             children affected by an immigration decision is  to  be  dealt
             with.

         6.   In the circumstances I am satisfied that there is an  arguable
             material error of law in the determination of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge and accordingly the application  for  leave  to
             appeal is allowed."

10. At the error of law hearing before myself on 30 July 2013 Mr  Choudhury
    essentially adopted the grounds. He submitted that the judge  erred  in
    failing to consider Article 8 ECHR.  As  for  the  findings  under  the
    Rules the judge had been wrong to state  that  the  appellant  had  not
    applied previously for entry clearance.  Although he had not applied as
    a visitor he had applied before for  settlement.   As  for  maintenance
    while it was accepted that the sponsor's income was  inadequate,  there
    had been a lack of proper consideration to the  offer  of  third  party
    support which included a job offer for the appellant.

11. In reply Mr Wilding for the respondent agreed that the judge had  erred
    in failing to consider Article 8.  However her decision under the Rules
    was adequate.  Whilst it  was  correct  that  the  appellant  had  made
    previous settlement applications the judge was correct to state that no
    visit  applications  had  been  made.   That  matter  was   essentially
    peripheral.  Of greater import was the  finding  that  there  had  been
    almost no  communication  between  the  sponsor  and  appellants.   The
    finding that there was no subsisting relationship was sustainable.   As
    for maintenance the judge had given adequate reasons for rejecting  the
    evidence that the appellant, an unskilled man, had a job offer and that
    the claim of third party support was credible.

12. I considered that the judge's findings under the Immigration Rules were
    sustainable.  She was entitled to find,  it  being  accepted  that  the
    parties had not seen each other  since  2003,  that  there  was  little
    evidence of contact since she came to the UK in that year.

13. The judge was correct to hold that the appellant had never applied  for
    entry clearance  to  visit  the  sponsor.   She  did  note  (7.1)  that
    applications had been made for settlement.

14. As for maintenance it was agreed by both parties that the  sponsor  was
    not able to show that she had adequate income to support the appellants
    without recourse to additional public funds.  The judge was entitled to
    find that it had not been shown on the  evidence  that  the  restaurant
    owner could afford to employ the appellant or that there is a  vacancy.
    In that regard an incumbent, who it was said was  temporarily  employed
    in place of the appellant, had not been shown not  to  have  employment
    rights.  Further, the evidence as to wages the appellant would  receive
    was vague.  I concluded that the judge was entitled to  find  that  the
    evidence of a job and of third party support lacked credibility.

15. Mr Wilding accepted that the judge had failed to give consideration  to
    Article 8 and that such amounted to a material error of law.

16. I concluded that the judge's decision in  respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules showed  no material error of law and the decision dismissing  the
    appeals in that regard, stood.  It was agreed  that  the  judge  having
    failed to deal with Article 8 that aspect of the case had to  be  dealt
    with.

17. However, we were not able to proceed  immediately  to  deal  with  that
    aspect of the case as no interpreter had been asked for and it was  not
    possible to get one on the day.

18. The case was adjourned  until  17  September  2013  before  myself  for
    evidence to be led on Article 8.

19. At the resumed hearing it was agreed that the only issue was Article 8.
      I  heard  evidence  from  Mrs  Saida  Nessa.   She  adopted  her  two
    statements.  She said she has problems with her daughter, Tanjana,  who
    is now 12 years old.  She has had problems since birth.   She  has  one
    leg shorter than the other.  She lacks strength  in  the  shorter  leg.
    Following an operation  some months ago she is bedbound 24 hours a  day
    and needs full support which includes being taken to the toilet, washed
    and turned in bed.  The witness did not know if this was temporary  and
    whether the operation would improve her daughter's condition.

20. She said the responsibility of caring for Tanjana as well  as  for  her
    other children and other household duties falls on herself.  She has no
    help in the house.  Her sister, who lives in Brighton, comes up to look
    after the other two children when Tanjana is  in  hospital.   She  also
    sometimes gets help from social workers.  A benefit of having her other
    children come from Bangladesh would be that they would be able to help.
     In addition the family would be together.

21. She was asked about her family.  She  has  in  the  UK  twins  born  in
    Bangladesh and the youngest child born a few months  after  arrival  in
    the UK.  There are five children  in  Bangladesh.   They  are  all  the
    children of herself and the appellant. The two eldest have  not  sought
    to come for settlement as they are married and settled  in  Bangladesh.
    The younger children are upset when she speaks to them  on  the  phone.
    It would be less distressing if the family was united.

22. She said she had last seen her (Bangladesh) children in 2003.  She  had
    not seen them since she came here.

23. Asked about schooling she said the  Bangladeshi  children  who  are  of
    school age attend the madrassah.  As for the British children, two  are
    in secondary, one in primary.  Tanjana was usually able to go to school
    although not for a period before the operation or since it.  A  teacher
    now comes to the house three days a week.  Tanjana had  been  attending
    normal school not a special school.  She had been able to walk there.

24. In cross-examination asked about her immigration history she said  that
    having come on a visit visa she was told that she could apply to remain
    permanently on the basis that her father had a right of abode.  He  was
    now dead.  She did not know when she got permanent residence.

25. Asked why, when she got settlement the other  family  members  had  not
    sought to join her she said that at the time her  siblings  and  others
    had advised that they wait and gather evidence.

26. She was asked about contact between the family here and in  Bangladesh.
    She said they communicate by DVD, CD, films and photographs.   They  do
    not write as the UK children, although they speak Bengali are not  able
    to write it.  They are in regular phone contact.

27. Asked who makes the day-to-day decisions about the  three  children  in
    Bangladesh she said it was their father who looks after them.  Extended
    family there give some help.  However, the  witness  said,  she  wanted
    them to come to the UK as they need their mother.

28. In re-examination she said that the father was involved  in  discussion
    about the children with her.  Also the children sometimes get in  touch
    seeking advice.

29. In submissions, the emphasis from both sides was on  the  children.  Ms
    Vinyaharan stated that at the time of application the children were  in
    reality, young adults.  They have been under the care of  their  father
    and their day-to-day needs have been met by him as  their  sole  carer.
    There was no indication that they were anything other than  well  cared
    for.  Their mother had, effectively, given up caring for them  in  2003
    when she came to the UK.  Although it was claimed that she and  the  UK
    children are in regular contact there was little evidence of this.   No
    good reason had been given  why  she  had  not  sought,  once  she  got
    settlement, to visit her family in Bangladesh particularly as her child
    Tanjana's disability did not appear to be too serious.

30. Ms Vinyaharan, noting that no  statements  had  been  lodged  from  the
    children in Bangladesh,  submitted  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children abroad were to remain with their father  the  person  who  had
    been their sole carer for years.

31. In reply Mr Choudhury submitted that it was important to remember  that
    the child applicants were,  indeed,  still  children  at  the  time  of
    application.  There was evidence of communication between them  in  the
    form of phone cards.  It was reasonable to accept the mother's evidence
    that she struggles more or less on her own to care for her  family  not
    least because of the long-term  physical  problems  that  Tanjana  has.
    These amount to compassionate circumstances.  Were the  other  siblings
    to come to the UK the family situation would be  better.   As  for  the
    failure of the mother to visit, leaving the children  in  the  care  of
    their grandmother or others would make that difficult.

32. As for the best interests of the children abroad it would be better for
    them in terms of education and more generally were they to  come  to  a
    first world country.  The whole family not just the family abroad would
    benefit emotionally and practically.

33. Turning to consider article 8 the House of Lords in Huang  [2007]  UKHL
    11 made it plain that a step-by-step approach as  laid  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 was the appropriate method in an Article  8  case.   The
    first question is to assess whether the respondent's  decision  amounts
    to an unjustified lack of respect for family life, focusing on the UK's
    positive obligations to facilitate family reunion.

34. I also remind myself that I am not solely concerned with the rights  of
    the appellants, but I must also  consider  the  direct  impact  of  the
    refusal on the other family members.

35. The first question is whether there is family life for the  purpose  of
    Article 8.   I consider the appropriate approach  is  not  to  consider
    each one to one relationship in turn and in isolation. The approach  is
    to consider whether family life exists within the group as a whole  and
    then assess the claimant's position in it.  I  find  that  family  life
    exists within the group as a whole. While the father's situation vis  a
    vis the sponsor is one of effectively no relationship as  there  is  no
    genuine and subsisting marriage, there is family life between  him  and
    his children in Bangladesh and in the UK, and I consider that the  same
    applies in respect of the  mother  and  her  children  in  the  UK  and
    Bangladesh. In Berrehab v  The  Netherlands  [1989]  11  EHRR  322  the
    European Court said that the 'concept of  family  life  embraces,  even
    where there is no cohabitation,  the  tie  between  a  parent  and  her
    child.' In light of the  family  dynamics  looked  at  as  a  group,  I
    conclude that there is family life in respect of the appellants and the
    sponsor.

36. The effect of  the  decision  to  refuse  the  appellants  hinders  the
    enjoyment of family life in these circumstances.  The Court  of  Appeal
    has clarified that the question of significant interference must not be
    read as meaning the minimal level of severity required is a special  or
    high one (see AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801).  There is  clearly  an
    interference of sufficient gravity to require consideration to be given
    to the remaining steps.

37. The decisions are clearly lawful in  the  sense  that  they  were  made
    within the legal framework of the Immigration Acts and the  Immigration
    Rules and  were  in  pursuit  of  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
    immigration control.

38. The real issue for determination in this case is  whether  the  refusal
    strikes  a  fair  balance  between  the  competing  interests  of   the
    appellants and the community as a whole and was therefore proportionate
    to the legitimate aim pursued, or whether the appellants' circumstances
    demand that a departure be made from the Rules given that  they  cannot
    be met at present.

39. My approach to the question of proportionality is guided by  the  House
    of Lords opinion in Huang as follows:

         'In an Article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the [tribunal] is whether  the  refusal  of  leave  to
         enter or remain, in circumstances where  the  life  of  the  family
         cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking  full
         account of all considerations weighing in favour  of  the  refusal,
         prejudices  the  family  life  of  the  applicant   in   a   manner
         sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental right
         protected by  Article  8.   If  the  answer  to  this  question  is
         affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  [tribunal]   must  so
         decide'.

40. In considering proportionality  the  appellants  fail  to  satisfy  the
    Rules. Such is  not  a  factor  in  their  favour  in  considering  the
    balancing exercise.

41.  Moving on to  the  children,  although  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply to children who are
    outside the UK, where there are  reasons  to  believe  that  a  child's
    welfare may be jeopardised by exclusion from the UK, the considerations
    of Article 8 and  the  extra  statutory  guidance  to  Entry  Clearance
    Officers to apply the spirit  of  the  statutory  guidance  in  certain
    circumstances should be taken into account by the judge on appeal  (see
    T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  ULUT  00483  and
    Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 00088).

42. In this  case  in  looking  at  the  circumstances  of  the  family  in
    Bangladesh the children at  the  date  of  application  were  fourteen,
    sixteen and seventeen years of age.  I find that the person responsible
    for their day-to-day upbringing was their father. It  was  he  who  had
    sole responsibility for their upbringing.  Although  in  re-examination
    the sponsor sought to suggest  that  she  was  involved  in  day-to-day
    decisions about their upbringing with their father by telephone I found
    more truthful her clear answer in cross-examination that it  was  their
    father who made the day-to-day decisions.  I take support in that  view
    from the dearth of evidence of contact  between  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband.  As the First-tier Judge noted the only  evidence  of  contact
    was five phone cards, three of which were post decision.  As the  judge
    noted one would reasonably  have  expected  much  greater  evidence  of
    contact by phone particularly as there had been  previous  applications
    for settlement.

43. As for contact between  the  sponsor  and  her  family  here,  and  her
    children in Bangladesh I can accept that the British  children  do  not
    write Bengali so that letters or perhaps even cards were not  feasible.
    However, I find particularly striking that apart from the  tiny  number
    of phone cards (which do not remotely support the sponsor's claim to be
    in daily contact), there  is  no  documentary  evidence  whatsoever  of
    contact between her and the  children  in  Bangladesh  or  between  her
    children here and the children and their father there.  No evidence  at
    all was produced to support the claim of regular contact  by  means  of
    videos, CDs, photographs, items which one would reasonably have thought
    would have been easily produced and exchanged.

44. The evidence in this case is that the sponsor having  come  to  the  UK
    apparently as a visitor in 2003  chose  to  remain.  The  circumstances
    under which she was able to do  so  were  unclear  and  no  documentary
    evidence on this was produced. However, it was not  suggested  that  it
    was anything other than lawful. It  is  also  not  suggested  that  the
    sponsor, and her children who have lived here  all  or  most  of  their
    lives, should reasonably be expected to  live  with  the  other  family
    members in Bangladesh. Her decision to remain was of course her  choice
    but it suggests that a desire for settlement was greater than a  desire
    to return to her family.  I take nothing from the fact that she has not
    sought to return as a visitor to see her family.   I  can  accept  that
    with her family responsibilities and financial constraints  such  would
    be difficult. I see no reason to doubt that as a single parent,  albeit
    with some help from her mother, friends and social workers, it  can  be
    difficult to care for her children here.  It is clear that Tanjana  has
    a physical disability.  The medical  letters  state  she  has  one  leg
    longer than the other.  She  has  had  an  operation  to  remedy  that.
    Contrary to the sponsor's oral evidence the indication from the doctors
    is that the  prognosis is satisfactory.  Some  of  the  evidence  about
    recent medical events was post decision. However the  clear  indication
    from the oral evidence and  a  pre  decision  medical  letter  is  that
    Tanjana is able to function fairly well on a day to  day  basis,  being
    able for example to walk to school. The overall  picture  is  that  the
    family here is able to get by day to day well enough.

45. Looking at the evidence in the round the clear indication is that there
    are two family units, the British  and  Bangladeshi  units  functioning
    separately with little communication or contact between them.  There is
    no evidence of intervening devotion between the parents.  The  evidence
    points clearly to the conclusion that on leaving Bangladesh permanently
    in 2003 the sponsor gave up her role as carer of  her  children  there,
    leaving it to their father.

46. Returning to consideration of the Bangladeshi children in the  care  of
    their father, as indicated they are no  longer  young  children,  their
    continuity of residence and their development through  their  formative
    years since 2003 has been with their father.  There is no indication or
    suggestion of neglect or abuse by the father or  his  extended  family.
    There is no indication that  there  are  unmet  needs  that  should  be
    catered for. There are stable arrangements  for  their  physical  care.
    Their friends, social background and community are in Bangladesh.

47. I note that there are no statements from  the  siblings  in  Bangladesh
    indicating their views. They  are  old  enough  to  have  expressed  an
    opinion.

48. As the evidence does not show contact between the younger British based
    children and their significantly  older  Bangladeshi  siblings  I   see
    little merit in the claim  that  the  British  children  would  benefit
    emotionally by the admission of their  siblings  (or  indeed  that  the
    older children would).  I take the same view, in light of the  lack  of
    evidence of contact, about emotional benefit to their mother or, indeed
    to the father.  Should the separate units wish to get in touch they can
    do so.

49. Mr Choudhury  in  his  submissions  emphasised  that  the  children  in
    Bangladesh would have a better education and a better life  in  the  UK
    than at home.  The material advantages of life in the  UK  is  not  the
    test.  The loss of their cultural roots in the society  in  which  they
    have grown up and the lack of any evidence that they have  basic  unmet
    needs and are at risk of harm are relevant factors. I do not  see  that
    the  combination  of  circumstances  are   sufficiently   serious   and
    compelling to require admission.

50. I conclude that the best interests of the Bangladeshi children  are  to
    remain with their sole carer their father. Such, accordingly, is not  a
    factor in the appellants' favour in the balancing exercise.

51. Looking at all the material circumstances in balancing  the  respective
    interests of the parties, I find the decision to refuse entry clearance
    does not amount to an unjustified lack of respect for family  life  and
    the positive obligations to facilitate family reunion and  I  therefore
    dismiss the Appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds.



Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal showed no material error of  law  in
its consideration under the Immigration Rules and that  decision  dismissing
the appeals stands.

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8).





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


