
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18851/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 2 September 2014          |
|Prepared  21 August 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Mr MD Gedon Miah
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, date of birth 28  April  1962,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 4  September  2012  to
    refuse entry clearance to join his spouse with reference  to  paragraph
    320(3) of the Immigration Rules HC 395.

2.   The Appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond on  29  April  2014.   Permission  to
    appeal that decision was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White
    on 3 July 2014.  The Appellant had the burden of proof of showing  upon
    a balance of  probabilities  that  at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision he met the requirements of paragraph 281  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   The Respondent in the notice of immigration decision took a  number  of
    points against the Appellant.  First, the marriage of the Appellant was
    not in doubt but the extent of the relationship between  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor, his wife, was not possible to determine  on  the  evidence
    provided.  Second, the marriage was not registered between  15  October
    1989 and 12 August 2012.  It was said that there was no explanation  of
    what evidence was  provided  to  the  registrar,  producing  the  later
    certificate to confirm a wedding ever took place between the  Appellant
    and Sponsor on 15 October 1989. It was said in effect that the value of
    any information provided to the relevant registrar was only as good  as
    that given and was  not  sufficiently  contemporaneous  to  have  other
    relevance of reliability about it.

4.     Third, photographs produced really  did  not  sit  consistently  with
    their claimed dates of  origin.   Fourth,  further  as  evidence  of  a
    continuing relationship the evidence  of  financial  support  from  the
    Sponsor was  inadequate.   Fifth,  there  was  inadequate  evidence  of
    continued contact.  Sixth, that there was a lack of  evidence  relating
    to DNA evidence of his relationship with his claimed daughter  who  was
    in the United Kingdom with the Sponsor.  Seventh, there was an  absence
    of evidence to show that the  marriage  was  subsisting.   Eighth,  the
    Appellant had used and been in the United  Kingdom  with  an  alias  as
    Mohammed Noor Uddin, date of birth 5 March 1962, and it  could  not  be
    said that the true name of the Appellant was generally Miah as  opposed
    to Uddin.

5.   The judge  considered  these  issues  and  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is the father  of  the  child  currently  residing  with  the
    Sponsor.

6.   As to the marriage of the Sponsor the Appellant had produced  the  Nika
    Nama but it is noteworthy, as required in the form, the  Appellant  did
    not disclose a previous marriage.  It is unclear  whether  or  not  the
    reality is that there never was such a marriage or that there was  non-
    disclosure. I do not speculate nor did the judge as  to  the  cause  of
    that non-disclosure.  Nevertheless the judge also looked at photographs
    provided and was entitled to  reach  the  view,  bearing  in  mind  the
    differences  between  them,  without  holding  himself  out  as  having
    expertise that the photographs appeared to be taken at different times.
     The judge speculated on whether that might be in the 1980s and  it  is
    possible to argue around the issue of the photographs, the presence  of
    the baby, the  difference  in  appearance  and  so  on  and  so  forth.
    Ultimately the issue had been raised by the Respondent  and  the  judge
    dealt with it as best he could on the evidence before him.

7.   The judge  was  fairly  entitled  to  conclude  that  if  there  was  a
    polygamous marriage as claimed then contrary to what he had  said  that
    would not exclude the Appellant from entering  the  United  Kingdom  so
    long as his wife of the  first  marriage  was  not  within  the  United
    Kingdom.

8.   The judge's error in this respect  is  not  a  material  error  to  the
    overall assessment of the evidence.

9.   The refusal raises the issue of  the  reliability  of  the  Appellant's
    passport and what is said by the Appellant is  that  there  were  other
    documents before the judge that ought  to  have  swayed  the  decision.
    First, the Appellant now had a new Bangladeshi passport and as such  it
    ought to be accepted as a genuine document.   Second,  the  Appellant's
    national  identity  card   identified   him.    Third,   the   marriage
    certificate, registry office and  the  local  chairman's  office  again
    evidenced his name.  Fourth, his daughter had  a  Bangladeshi  passport
    issued in 2010 in her name, with her father's  (the Appellant) name  in
    her passport. Fifth, that there was DNA evidence of the daughter who it
    therefore followed was related to the Appellant.

10.  As to the reliability of the Bangladeshi  passport  the  difficulty  is
    that the Appellant is hamstrung by  the  fact  that  he  readily  used,
    whether provided by an agent or not, a false identity and really has no
    explanation why he chose to do so  and  then  maintain  that  identity.
    Second, there was  no  evidence  as  to  the  extent  of  the  scrutiny
    conducted by the Bangladeshi authorities of applications for passports,
    not least in the context of someone who has  previously  used  a  false
    Bangladeshi passport.   There  was  no  evidence  as  to  how  national
    identity cards are issued and the scrutiny of the evidence of identity.
     It therefore may be a factor but what weight can be given to  a  card,
    the original of which I have not seen, is difficult to assess.   As  to
    the marriage certificate, so far as I am aware or indeed the judge  was
    aware there was no identification  required  but  if  it  was  and  the
    Appellant  had  false  identification  it  follows  that  the  marriage
    certificate would similarly be false.

11.  It also  follows  inevitably  that  the  daughter  when  obtaining  her
    Bangladeshi passport would have been using  the  father's  identity  as
    known to her and therefore her passport would contain that information.
     As to the DNA evidence that plainly is important in demonstrating  the
    relationship between the Appellant and  the  mother  of  the  daughter.
    Whether he truly is who he says he is is quite another matter  and  the
    DNA evidence does not go to the issue of identity.

12.  However, it is said 'what else could the Appellant do to establish  his
    identity?'    It seems to me, without seeking to be definitive of these
    matters, that question can be answered in a  number  of  ways.   First,
    confirmation of identity  by  friends  and  persons  known  to  him  in
    Bangladesh. Second, by reference to the bank he is with and the  extent
    to which they have checked or known of his identity and the  length  of
    time and period over which it has been known.  Third, the local council
    or chairman's office could confirm length of time of knowledge  of  the
    Appellant and his name at material times.  Fourth, documents evidencing
    title to land which are  occasionally  thumb-printed  at  the  material
    time.

13.  In the circumstances I do not accept that  the  Appellant  was,  as  he
    effectively claimed, bereft of ways of providing  evidence  as  to  his
    identity and knowledge of him as a person in Bangladesh.   It  will  of
    course be the length of time that he has been known as he claims to  be
    that will be a significant factor, particularly if it goes back  beyond
    and before the false identity he  used for a period of time.

14.  These matters were all in one way or another considered  by  the  judge
    and in the circumstances  other  than  in  respect  of  the  polygamous
    marriage issue over which the Appellant was mistaken  it  seems  to  me
    that the matters he took into account were those  he  was  legitimately
    entitled to do.

15.  In the circumstances I find no material error of law which  would  have
    effected a different decision arising from the  judge's  assessment  of
    this matter.

16.  The appeal is dismissed.  The original Tribunal's decision stands.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is necessary.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

None is appropriate in the circumstances.


Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

