
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/18266/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2016                           |On 20 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                          MR HAMDI IBRAHIM SULEMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge  Morrow  in
   April 2013 and dismissed.   The  appeal  was  then  heard  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal before Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman.  The decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal was set aside but the appeal was again dismissed.

2) Thereafter there was an appeal  to  the  Inner  House  of  the  Court  of
   Session.  In an interlocutor dated  25  November  2014  the  Inner  House
   allowed the appeal of consent and remitted  it  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   Regrettably a considerable period elapsed thereafter when  neither  party
   thought to notify the Upper Tribunal that the appeal had  been  remitted.
   Hence the appeal comes before us only now.

3) The interlocutor of the  Inner  House  does  not  give  reasons  for  the
   remittal but we were provided by Mr  Devlin  with  a  draft  of  a  Joint
   Minute, from which it appears that the parties were  not  satisfied  that
   the Judge of the Upper Tribunal had had regard to  all  of  the  relevant
   considerations in making a decision on the right to family life.

4) The appellant was born on 20 December 1985 and is a national of  Eritrea.
    He applied for entry clearance as a dependant relative of a person  with
   limited leave to remain as a refugee.  The application was refused on  27
   August 2012.

5) The sponsor is Kamal Suleman.  The appellant  is  his  brother.   At  the
   time of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant was around 15
   years old.  He had left Eritrea without permission.   The  appellant  has
   cerebral palsy, as a result of which he is said to require constant  care
   and attention and to be unable to look after himself.

6) The sponsor left his wife and children in Eritrea when he first  came  to
   the UK.  Once the sponsor had refugee status his wife and children joined
   him here.  When his wife and children left Eritrea  to  travel  to  Sudan
   they took the appellant with them.  The appellant's mother was  dead  and
   his father was in  prison.   Once  the  sponsor's  wife  left  Sudan  the
   appellant was looked after by a woman whom the sponsor's  wife  chose  to
   care for him.  It is said that money is sent  to  the  carer  by  regular
   money transfers for the care of the sponsor.

7) The Judge of the Upper Tribunal  accepted  that  there  was  family  life
   between the sponsor and the appellant but  found  that  the  interference
   with his family life was not such as to  require  the  admission  of  the
   appellant under Article 8.

8) At the hearing before us Mr Devlin, for the appellant, said that  he  was
   conscious of the passage of time since the hearing was  last  before  the
   Upper Tribunal.  The appellant was now aged 21.  The sponsor's  wife  had
   now returned to Sudan to look after the appellant as  his  condition  was
   giving cause for concern.

9) We observed that there was no evidence before us as  to  the  appellant's
   circumstances between the hearing before the Upper Tribunal in  2013  and
   the present.  On this basis it appeared that a new application for  entry
   clearance would be required.  The  appeal  could  not  be  determined  in
   favour of the appellant on the basis of  evidence  which  was  more  than
   three years old.  There was a lack of  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
   current circumstances.

10) At the hearing we indicated to the parties that owing  to  the  lack  of
   evidence of  the  appellant's  current  circumstances  we  would  make  a
   decision  dismissing  the  appeal.   Mr  Devlin  very  properly  in   the
   circumstances did not suggest that the outcome should be  different.   It
   might,  however,  be  appropriate  for  the  appellant  to  make  a   new
   application having regard to his family circumstances and his care needs.

Conclusion

11) The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

12) We have not been asked to make an order for  anonymity  and  we  see  no
   reason of substance for doing so.







Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


