
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/18275/2013
                                                               OA/18280/2013
                                                               OA/18288/2013
                                                               OA/18293/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th April 2015                      |On 17th April 2015                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         (1)  ms Maryan Sharif Omar
                         (2)  Ms Sacdia Sharif Omar
                          (3)  Ms Muna Sharif Omar
                         (4)  Mr Mohamed Sharif Omar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Stott promulgated on 24th  July  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  17th  July  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of the Appellants, who subsequently applied  for,
    and were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants comprise the four eldest children  of  their  sponsoring
    father in the UK, namely, of Mr Sharif Omar  Osman,  who  is  a  person
    present and settled  in  the  UK  with  British  citizenship,  now  his
    youngest five children still remain in  Somalia.   The  Appellants  are
    citizens of Somalia.  They were born on 12th  December  1998,  on  30th
    December 1999, on 30th October 1997, and  on  30th  October  1997  (the
    latter being twins).  They appealed against the decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Nairobi refusing them a visa for indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK under paragraph 297 of the HC 395, as children of a
    parent in the UK who had exercised "sole responsibility" in relation to
    their welfare and upbringing, and in relation to  there  being  serious
    compelling circumstances that would make  their  exclusion  undesirable
    from the UK.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they have been abandoned by their mother,
    following a disagreement with their father, whereupon she left them  in
    the care of other people and took the youngest five children away  with
    them.  The Entry Clearance Officer, in his decision  of  6th  September
    2013 noted the claim that they had been abandoned by  their  mother  in
    April 2013, and that their father had been in the UK since 28th January
    2006.  However, the Entry Clearance Officer stated that no  explanation
    has been provided regarding why after seven years of  care  the  mother
    would suddenly abandon them.   There  was  a  letter  from  the  Somali
    Community Centre dated 10th April 2013 which states that a person named
    Abdulkadie Yusu Mohamud said "police come and take me those children of
    Somalia community".  The letter is difficult to understand.  It is  not
    clear what is meant by it.  In any event the letter is in a format that
    is easily produced locally at low cost.  The letter also does  not  say
    what happened to the mother.  Therefore, the ECO could not be satisfied
    that the father in the UK had sole responsibility for the  children  or
    that there were serious and compelling circumstances  making  exclusion
    undesirable.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge carefully set out the Respondent's case in the  body  of  the
    determination (see paragraph 4(a) to (j)).  Equally, the judge set  out
    carefully the Appellants' case  (see  paragraph  5(a)  to  (n)).   With
    respect to the former, the judge observed that  the  Respondent's  case
    was that there had been at  least  three  individuals  caring  for  the
    Appellants, one of whom was Abdulkadie  Yusuf  Mohamud,  another  being
    Halima  Nur,  and  yet  another  being  Habibo  Hussein  Abdulla.   The
    Respondent's case was that,

         "From the oral evidence provided, the Appellants' Sponsor  has  had
         little control or direction as to the selection and choice of those
         carers and consequently for this reason also  it  is  not  accepted
         that he has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellants"  (see
         paragraph 4(d)).

    With respect to the latter, there was evidence of the fact that the

         "Transfer  of  caring  duties  between  the  three  individuals  is
         evidenced by the money transfer forms on  which  can  be  seen  the
         names initially of the Sponsor's second wife, followed by those  of
         Abdulkadie Yusuf, Halima Nur and  Habibo  Abdulla"  (see  paragraph
         5(f)).

    Moreover, the Appellants are from the Ashraf Clan, which is a  minority
    grouping, and "they can expect little in the way of protection from the
    authorities and bearing in mind their  ages  are  unable  to  care  for
    themselves"  (see  paragraph  5(g)).   Furthermore,  the  Sponsor   has
    "visited his children in  Addis  Ababa  in  April  2013  and  again  in
    February 2014.  He is distraught as to their  situation  and  keeps  in
    regular contact with them by phone (as evidenced by the copy  of  phone
    cards - see pages 76 to 82 in the bundle)" (see paragraph 5(h)).

 5. In his findings of fact, the judge considered the position in  relation
    to the "sole responsibility" test (at paragraphs 12 to 15) and observed
    that "clear evidence was not given to him by Halima Nur as to  who  the
    responsibility for caring of the Appellants was being  passed  to,  and
    therefore the Respondent has  had  no  inference  or  control  in  that
    regard" (paragraph 12)).   The  judge  also  observed  that  there  was
    "confusion  in  the  evidence  given  in  respect  of  the  Appellants'
    schooling where several reasons has  been  provided  as  to  why  their
    education ceased" (paragraph 13).  For these reasons, the  judge  could
    not be satisfied that the requirements of paragraph 297(e)  of  HC  395
    had been satisfied with respect to sole responsibility  (see  paragraph
    14).

 6. In relation to whether there were serious and compelling  circumstances
    to make exclusion undesirable, the judge  began  by  saying  that,  "as
    indicated I have accepted that they had been cared for by a  series  of
    individuals as evidenced by the money transfer forms and  the  evidence
    confirmed by the author of the  expert  report"  (paragraph  15).   The
    judge also observed that, whereas the UNHCR's assistance had  not  been
    sought in relation to  the  position  of  the  children,  nevertheless,
    "their situation is extremely difficult", but the judge did not  accept
    that it is such as to satisfy the  Rule  in  relation  to  serious  and
    compelling circumstances (see paragraph 16).

 7. Accordingly, since the Sponsor had maintained  communication  with  his
    family over a number of  years  in  this  manner  this  could  continue
    (paragraph 18).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because in
    his findings of fact there is no consideration whatsoever of  the  fact
    that the Sponsor is ultimately  financially  responsible  for  all  the
    Appellants.  There is no reference to the daily telephone contact he is
    having with them.  There is no reference to the fact that he has  twice
    visited his children in Ethiopia in the twelve month  period  following
    the disappearance of their mother.  Furthermore,  the  suggestion  that
    the carer is not clear about when she  is  planning  to  leave  is  not
    relevant given that the carer is planning to leave and the judge  makes
    no finding that she is not planning to leave.  On 12th September  2014,
    permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the  judge's  failure  to  deal  with  the  Sponsor  being  financially
    responsible for the children was an arguable error of law.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 10th  April  2015  Mr  Pipe,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellants, submitted that the  findings  made
    by the judge from paragraphs 6 to 16 are inadequate.  This was  a  case
    concerning a British citizen parent in the UK.  Yet, the judge did  not
    address the parents' two visits to Djibouti before the  abandonment  of
    the children by the wife, and the two visits to Addis Ababa  after  she
    had abandoned them.  Whereas the two earlier visits are not technically
    directly relevant, they are relevant to the question of  the  continued
    support, interest, and contribution that the sponsoring parent made  to
    the welfare of his children in Somalia.  What the judge  should  surely
    have addressed was that within twelve  months  of  the  mother  of  the
    children having abandoned them, he made two visits to see them, one  in
    April 2013 and the other in February 2014.

11. Second, the export report of Gunther Schroeder (at pages 30 to 75)  has
    not been given due and proper weight by the judge in  his  findings  of
    fact in relation to the two  core  elements  of  paragraph  297.   This
    report (dated 15th April 2014) puts forward a  factual  scenario  which
    the judge was bound to  have  taken  into  account  but  did  not.   Mr
    Schroeder explains that:

         "On 28th December 2013 I visited the children  of  Sharif  Omar  at
         their residence accompanied by my local  research  assistant.   The
         children live in Bole sub-city of Addis Ababa in Saris  area  in  a
         neighbourhood named  Addisu  Sefer  located  east  of  Addis  Ababa
         Eastern Ring Road.  In  recent  years  Saris  has  become  a  major
         settlement area for Somalians with a major concentration in  Addisu
         Sefer (literally "new quarter"), a new residential  quarter  having
         development over the past ten years.  They  rent  houses  or  rooms
         from Ethiopian house owners for exorbitant rents.  (Paragraph 158).

         "We met with the children ..... [the children are named].

         "And the  caretaker  Mrs  Halima  Ali  Nur  and  her  16  year  old
         granddaughter, Sofia, who translated from  Somali  to  Amharic  and
         English.  The  children,  their  caretaker  and  the  granddaughter
         received us in a friendly and open  manner  without  diffidence  or
         furtiveness.  As they already had contact with my  assistant  there
         was no apprehension or visible signs of mistrust  .....  (paragraph
         159).

         "The children live with the caretaker in two  small  rooms  in  the
         service quarter of a compound owned by an Ethiopian lady in  Addisu
         Sefer.  Each of these rooms has a size of about nine metres  square
         and one window each.  The second room can only be  reached  through
         the first.  Adjacent to the two rooms there is a small kitchen shed
         ...." (paragraph 160).

         "Due to shortage of funds they  currently  do  not  attend  school"
         (paragraph 164).

         "Some months ago Adbulkadie had to travel to Mogadishu because  his
         father fell ill and he is still there.  Abdulkadie contacted Halima
         Ali Nur, an  elderly  lady  from  the  Tumal  clan,  who  holds  an
         Ethiopian ID card, living the neighbourhood to  move  in  with  the
         children and to take care of them" (paragraph 166).

         "Being from a despised minority clan, Halima, her daughter and  her
         grandchildren are registered  for  resettlement  to  Canada,  which
         could come any time soon.  At the moment there  is  no  arrangement
         yet ....." (paragraph 168).

         "The children do not have  any  legal  status  in  Ethiopia  ....."
         (paragraph 169).

         "The children are adamant that they cannot return to  Mogadishu  as
         they no longer have paternal  family  members  there,  who  in  the
         Somali culture would be obliged to take care  of  them"  (paragraph
         171).

         "On 23rd March 2014, during a renewed  visit  to  Addis  Ababa,  my
         assistant and I paid an unannounced visit to the children and their
         caretaker.  I did not inform the children or  those  looking  after
         them that I would making a visit, I simply arrived at a place where
         they living that I had visited previously" (paragraph 174).

         "The children were living  at  the  same  place  and  their  living
         conditions had not changed.  However,  the  caretaker  informed  me
         that she and her granddaughter had been accepted  for  resettlement
         .... (paragraph 175)."

12. The expert, Mr Gunther Schroeder, then goes on to make his  "assessment
    of the situation of the children".  The  expert  goes  on  to  say  the
    following:

         "The children clearly indicated they could not expect  any  support
         from the relatives of their mother ..." (paragraph 176).

         "The children Sharif do not have any legal status in Ethiopia  ..."
         (paragraph 177).

         "If the children were to register now with the UNHCR and ARRA  they
         might either be sent  to  one  of  the  camps  or  might  given  as
         unaccompanied minors to remain  in  Addis  Ababa  under  UNHCR/ARRA
         protection.  However, the  children  have  no  information  on  the
         procedure for registering" (paragraph 178).

         "Somalian refugees in Ethiopia do not have the  option  to  acquire
         this Ethiopian citizen through naturalisation ..." (paragraph 180).



         "For political reasons the Ethiopian authorities tolerate the large
         presence of  illegal  Somalian  residents  in  Addis  Ababa  ...  "
         (paragraph 181).

         "As illegal immigrations in Addis Ababa the children  will  not  be
         able, once having grown up, to acquire  a  secure  livelihood  ..."
         (paragraph 182).

         "They have no legal status and  no  legal  protection  in  case  of
         conflict with local authorities ...." (paragraph 183).

         "Family reunification with family members living in third countries
         and having acquired refugee status and residence  rights  that  can
         only be affected by resettlement of refugees from Ethiopia to  join
         their family members in third countries and  not  vice  versa  ..."
         (paragraph 184).

         "According to the current legislation on immigration it  would  not
         be possible for father of the children  to  resettle  in  Ethiopia"
         (paragraph 185).

         "With the departure  of  the  current  caretaker  to  Canada  being
         imminent the children would lose the protection the status  of  the
         caretaker  provided  in  regard  to  the   Ethiopian   authorities"
         (paragraph 186)."

13. Mr Pipe continued with his submissions to say that when at paragraph 13
    the judge refers to "the confusion in the evidence" he still  makes  no
    reference in this paragraph to three important matters.

14. First, that there were two visits  made  after  the  departure  of  the
    mother of the children, by the Sponsor to see  his  children  in  April
    2013 and February 2014.

15. Second, that he has continuously been sending them monies.

16. Third, that he is in constant touch on a regular daily basis with  them
    by telephone.  None of these matters are factored in  at  paragraph  13
    which is the crucial paragraph where  the  judge  begins  to  make  his
    decisions in relation to the "sole responsibility" test.   Furthermore,
    given that Gunther Schroeder had accepted that  the  situation  in  the
    children's home was no longer tenable, it was incumbent upon the  judge
    to give specific attention to  the  expert's  report  in  this  regard.
    Therefore, the findings in relation to "sole responsibility", could not
    be upheld.

17.  Moreover,  the  judge  had  regard  to  a  matter  that  was  entirely
    irrelevant, namely, that, "there is also no suggestion that the help of
    the UNHCR cannot be enlisted ..." (see paragraph 16),  because  whether
    or not the UNHCR can help, is a matter  that  may  be  relevant  to  an
    asylum  claim,  but  was  not  relevant  to  the  question   of   "sole
    responsibility" here.

18. As far as the test of "exclusion undesirable" was concerned, the  judge
    had made a clear finding (at paragraph 16)  that  "their  situation  is
    extremely difficult".  This was important, because it had to be read in
    the context of the decision in Mundeba (s.55 and  paragraph  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC), because here Mr Justice Blake  considered  the
    application of Section 55 in conjunction with paragraph 297 of HC  395.
    This case makes it clear that although the statutory duty under Section
    55 of the BCIA 2009 only  applies  to  children  within  the  UK,  "the
    broader duty doubtless  explains  why  the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI
    invites Entry Clearance Officers so  consider  the  statutory  guidance
    issued under Section 55".

19. The case also makes it clear that due regard must  be  had  to  the  UN
    Convention on the Rights of the  Child  and  that  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision for the admission of children under 18 is "an action
    concerning children ... undertaken by ...  administrative  authorities"
    and so by Article 3, "the best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a
    primary consideration".  What this means is that family  considerations
    require an evaluation of the child's welfare including emotional needs.
     Moreover "other considerations" come into play where there  are  other
    aspects of the child's life that are serious and compelling for example
    where an applicant is living in an  unacceptable  social  and  economic
    environment."

20. What this means is a consideration of, whether  there  is  evidence  of
    neglect or abuse; or whether there  are  unmet  needs  that  should  be
    catered for; and whether there are stable arrangements of  the  child's
    physical care.  Mr Pipe submitted that if one looked at the section  on
    "security risks for Somalian refugees within Ethiopia" (at page  59  of
    the bundle, it is clear that  the  "relatively  positive  treatment  of
    refugees  in  Ethiopia  is  less  a  result  of  ...  legal   framework
    conditions, but largely the result of political  considerations,  which
    could easily change" (see paragraph 105).  Essentially, these  children
    were de facto refugees.

21. Therefore, Mr Pipe urged me to make a finding on an error of law on the
    part of the judge and remake the decision.  In so doing,  he  submitted
    that I should have regard to the fact that the fact that the judge  had
    already found  that  the  situation  of  the  children  was  "extremely
    difficult", and that the  report  by  Gunther  Schroeder,  the  expert,
    plainly pointed to the position that they are currently living in being
    untenable.

22. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that I should  have,  as  my  starting
    point, the well-known sole responsibility decision on TD (Yemen).  This
    makes it quite clear that "sole responsibility" is an issue  that  must
    be decided on "all the  evidence",  but  that  where  two  parents  are
    involved in the care of children, then it will only be in "exceptional"
    circumstances that an application will succeed.  This was a case  where
    the mother had been involved in the care of  the  children.   Not  only
    this, there were other carers involved with respect  to  the  children.
    This was the plain and clear finding of the judge in  this  case.   The
    central part of his decision was that, "they have been cared for  by  a
    series of individuals as evidenced by the money transfer forms and  the
    evidence as confirmed by the author of the  expert  report"  (paragraph
    15).  The element of sharing of responsibility plainly  meant  that  it
    could not be "sole responsibility".  It was clear from TD (Yemen)  that
    the question of "sole responsibility" has to be approached with  regard
    to nine separate factors (see paragraph 52 of the  determination).   Of
    these nine factors, it is clear that a factor  (v)  is  to  the  effect
    that,

         "If  it  is  said  that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be that  the  other
         has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In such  cases,  it
         may well be justified to  find  that  that  parent  no  longer  has
         responsibility for the child".

    Moreover, it also clear that (see factor (v), (vi) that "the  issue  of
    sole responsibility is not just a matter between the parents.  So  even
    if there is only parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent
    may not have sole responsibility".

    What this meant, according to Mr Smart, was that if the  responsibility
    was being shared by three different  carers,  it  was  clear  that  the
    parent could not have had the "sole responsibility".  It was  accepted,
    submitted Mr Smart, that the sponsoring father had made two  visits  to
    see his children and that financial remittances had been made.

    But the judge cannot be  criticised  for  overlooking  this.   This  is
    because the judge makes it clear in relation to the "Appellants'  case"
    that this is the submission and the case on behalf  of  the  Appellants
    (see paragraph 5(h)).  In his "findings of fact", the  judge  does  not
    say that he does not accept this as a fact.  Therefore, it  was  not  a
    material error on his part not to have mentioned it.

23. As far as the question of "serious  and  compelling  circumstances"  is
    concerned, the case of Mundeba plainly applies.   However,  Mr  Gunther
    Schroeder, does not say that the children are being neglected or abused
    in any way (see pages 72 to 73) and therefore the judge  was  right  in
    concluding at paragraph 16 as he did that the requirements of  "serious
    and compelling" circumstances could not be satisfied.

24. In reply, Mr Pipe submitted that one had to return to  Mundeba  because
    the Upper Tribunal, under the chairmanship of the President, Mr Justice
    Blake, had made it clear that the question that has to be asked  is  in
    relation to the child's welfare and the  child's  "best  interest"  and
    this had not been done.  Mr Piper made three further points.

25. First, the case of TD (Yemen) does  not  imply  that  the  taking  into
    account of "all of the evidence"  means  that,  once  consideration  is
    given to the  two  visits  made  by  the  sponsoring  father,  and  his
    consistent financial remittances to not just one, but to three separate
    carers, militates against the Appellants.

26. Second, the judge does refer to the visits by  the  sponsoring  father,
    but does so only in relation to the  Appellants'  case.   There  is  no
    reference at all in his "findings  of  fact"  to  how  this  tilts  the
    balance one way or the other in favour of  the  Appellants  or  against
    them.

27. Third, the case of Mundeba makes it clear (at  headnote  (iv))  that  a
    child's welfare includes "emotional needs" and that the  phrase  "other
    considerations" comes into play where there  are  other  aspects  of  a
    child's life that are serious and compelling, and in this case the fact
    that the children were de facto refugees, and had no one else  to  turn
    to, and were on the verge of being abandoned altogether by the  current
    carer, who was now going to go Canada, were  material  facts  that  the
    judge ought to have taken into account.   Mundeba  is  quite  clear  in
    saying that where there "unmet needs that should  be  catered  for"  or
    where there are questions about "stable arrangements  for  the  child's
    physical care" then this goes directly to the Section 55 duty  at  hand
    and to the consideration of the "best interests of the child".

28. Finally, since there were no challenges to the credibility findings  of
    the judge, no further evidence should be heard and no cross-examination
    allowed on the evidence, because if there is to  be  a  finding  of  an
    error of law by this Tribunal, this Tribunal can proceed to remake  the
    decision on the evidence as it stands.

Error of Law

29. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see Section  12(1))  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

30. First, the nub of the judge's findings are  at  paragraphs  13  to  15.
    Central to this consideration is paragraph 13 where the judge refers to
    "the confusion in the evidence", but does so in  relation  to  why  the
    children's education ceased.  After this, the judge forms a clear  view
    that  the  Appellant  had  not  satisfied  paragraph  297(e)   of   the
    Immigration Rules (see paragraph 14).  There is no  consideration  here
    given to the two visits made by the sponsoring parent to  Addis  Ababa,
    or to the monies that have been sent,  or  to  the  way  in  which  the
    children's emotional and other needs with respect to their welfare, are
    met by the regular telephone contact that the sponsoring father  makes.
    All of this is relevant to the satisfaction or otherwise of  the  "sole
    responsibility" test.  It is only  after  the  judge  makes  his  clear
    finding in relation to paragraph  297(e)  that  he  then  moved  on  to
    stating that there are "money transfer forms and the evidence confirmed
    by the author of the expert report", but this is  in  relation  to  the
    fact that the "Appellants' situation, ..... that they have  been  cared
    for by a series of individuals as evidenced by the money transfer forms
    ...." (paragraph 15).  In short, therefore, the failure  to  factor  in
    the visits, the monies sent, and the regular  contact,  amounts  to  an
    error of law, in that it is not possible to see  how  this  would  have
    affected the  balance  of  considerations  that  are  relevant  to  the
    determination of the "sole responsibility" test.

31. Second, no consideration is given to Section 55 BCIA and to  the  "best
    interests" of the children in the situation that is  described  in  the
    expert report of Mr Gunther Schroeder.  Failure to  give  consideration
    to Section 55 is an error of law.

32. Third, in relation to the second part of paragraph 297, namely, whether
    there are "serious  and  compelling  circumstances"  such  as  to  make
    "exclusion undesirable", whereas the judge makes a finding that  "their
    situation is extremely difficult", he imports into his consideration  a
    irrelevant consideration, namely, that, "there  is  ...  no  suggestion
    that the help of the UNHCR cannot be  enlisted"  (paragraph  16).   The
    help of the UNHCR is relevant to a asylum application  being  made  but
    not relevant to the  satisfaction  of  the  sole  responsibility  test.
    There is no obligation on a parent  seeking  to  be  unified  with  his
    children in the UK that he enlisted the help of the UNHCR as this is  a
    contradiction in terms in circumstances where what he has to do, on the
    contrary, is to show that he has been exercising sole responsibility in
    relation to the children.

33. Furthermore, and no less importantly, a finding that "the situation  is
    extremely difficult" has to be assessed in the context  of  Mr  Gunther
    Schroeder's expert report, which makes it quite clear that the position
    of the children now is  increasingly  untenable,  as  set  out  in  the
    provisions of that report that have been laid out above.   The  failure
    to give specific consideration to Mr Gunther's report, and to  indicate
    whether aspects of this report are rejected or accepted, and if  so  to
    what extent, is an error  of  law,  when  the  question  of  "exclusion
    undesirable" has to be resolved.

Remaking the Decision

34. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence that was before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.

35. I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.  This  is  a  case
    where, contrary to the suggestion in the ECO's decision in Nairobi, the
    judge did not find that the position of  the  children,  where  it  was
    alleged that the mother had abandoned them by taking the youngest  five
    children with them but leaving the eldest four behind,  was  contrived.
    On the contrary, the judge was satisfied that the  situation  in  which
    they found themselves was a genuine one.  If so,  then  the  fact  that
    money was being transferred  on  a  regular  basis,  not  just  to  one
    particular carer, but to every other one who  came  on  to  the  scene,
    where the sponsoring father himself had no control in the way in  which
    his children were being passed on, shows that the  consistent  practice
    on  his  part  of  sending  monies,  did  show  an  exercise  of  "sole
    responsibility".

36.  It  has  been  clear  since  the  case   of   Emmanuel,   that   "sole
    responsibility" is not to be literally understood as there can never be
    "sole responsibility" literally in circumstances where a child is being
    shared in terms of responsibility abroad.  What is clear,  however,  is
    that this is a case where the Sponsor already visited on two  occasions
    his children when his wife was still looking after  them  in  Djibouti.
    Subsequently, after his wife had abandoned them, he visited them  again
    on two occasions within a year of that abandonment.  It is  also  clear
    that he has been sending them monies consistently.  He has done so with
    respect to whether was the person looking after his children.   He  had
    no control over the way in which these children were  being  passed  on
    from one person to the other.

37. What is abundantly plain, nevertheless, is that the children were being
    looked after in an environment which was  increasingly  more  and  more
    unstable.  Mr Gunther Schroeder's expert report has now made  it  clear
    that this instability has culminated in the children being left without
    any care and protection whatsoever in the immediate foreseeable future.
     Whereas it is not clear when the current carer will also  leave  them,
    what is clear is that the current carer is destined to go to Canada and
    the  children  will  be  left  alone.   These  are  children  who   are
    vulnerable.  They belong  to  a  minority  clan.   They  are  de  facto
    refugees.  They are not in the protection of the UNHCR or  ARRA.   They
    are all the more exposed to a risk of ill-treatment.  The fact that the
    sponsor is  in  regular  touch  with  them  on  the  telephone  and  is
    increasingly desperate for their welfare is not entirely  difficult  to
    see.  It is in these circumstances that the conclusion must  inevitably
    fall, on a balance of probabilities, that he has been  exercising  sole
    responsibility for them.

38. As far as the existence of "serious and  compelling  circumstances"  is
    concerned which makes their  "exclusion  undesirable",  the  judge  had
    already earlier at  first  instance  found  that  "their  situation  is
    extremely difficult".  Whereas this is not the same as finding that  it
    makes "exclusion undesirable" what is directly relevant is  the  expert
    report of Mr Gunther Schroeder.  On the basis of  the  provisions  that
    have been set out, and considering the report in its  entirety,  it  is
    clear that their exclusion would indeed be undesirable, where they  now
    will no longer have a carer to look after them at a time when they  are
    vulnerable and at a critical age in their lives.

39. Also relevant with respect to these same facts is  the  application  of
    Section 55 of the  BCIA.  The  case  of  T  (S.55  BCIA  2009  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483  (IAC)  has  established  that  it
    stands to be applied in this case.  This is a case where the  interests
    of the child were plainly under consideration  in  an  entry  clearance
    case, and the original judge failed to pay close attention to the issue
    of "best interest" of the Appellant.  It is now  well-established  that
    where the interests of the child are  under  consideration  appropriate
    enquiries need to be made in entry clearance cases with regard  to  the
    age, and care arrangements of the  child  (see  JO  (section  55  duty)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517).   The  decision  maker  must  be  properly
    informed of the position of the child.   Being  properly  informed  and
    conducting a scrupulous analysis is a pre-requisite of identifying  the
    child's best interests, and then balancing them  with  other  essential
    considerations.  Performing these duties  will  be  an  intensely  fact
    sensitive and contextual exercise. This is a case where the ECO did not
    do this.  This was a failing of an administrative  responsibility.   It
    was also a failing of a legal obligation.

40. First, the facts of this case clearly  indicate  that  these  Appellant
    children's welfare will be jeopardised by  exclusion  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is possible that if  one  has  regard  to  the  "exclusion
    undesirable"  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  the  extra
    statutory guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to apply the  spirit  of
    the statutory guidance in circumstances where  children  are  involved,
    that the balance is in favour of the Appellant (see T (S.55 BCIA 2009 -
    entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 IAC).  It is clear that  the
    "best interest"  consideration  is  not  irrelevant  to  an  Article  8
    evaluation.  In fact, Article 8 is the genus and "best interest" is the
    specie where children are involved.

41. The case-law makes it quite clear that, "it is difficult to contemplate
    a scenario where a Section 55  duty  was  material  to  an  immigration
    decision and indicated a certain outcome but Article 8  did  not"  (see
    paragraph 29 of T (S.55 BCIA 2009 -  entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]
    UKUT 00483).  When the facts of this case are considered  it  is  plain
    that there is a risk of moral or physical  danger  to  the  Appellants.
    They are young and in the formative years of their age.  They are being
    looked after by someone who is not any longer able to.  The  wishes  of
    the Appellants are to be with the parent in the  UK.   The  Appellant's
    parent in the UK who can provide maintenance and accommodation and  who
    has a clear desire to  care  for  him.   In  these  circumstances,  the
    requirements of Article 8 are plainly met.  This is for  the  following
    reasons.

42. In Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) it has now  been  explained  yet  again
    that the focus in s.55 cases is on the circumstances of  the  child  in
    the light of  his  /  her  age,  social  background  and  developmental
    history.  It requires an inquiry into whether there is (a) evidence  of
    neglect or abuse ;  (b) there are unmet needs that  should  be  catered
    for; and (c) whether there are  stable  arrangements  for  the  child's
    physical care.  The assessment involves consideration as to whether the
    combination of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to
    require the admission of this appellant into the UK. Taking  all  these
    matters into account, I  am  allowing  this  appeal  for  a  number  of
    reasons.

43. If one applies Lord Bingham's tabulation in Razgar (at  paragraph  17),
    the following emerges.  First, it is plain that the continued exclusion
    of the Appellant is an interference by a public authority, namely,  the
    Secretary of State, with the  exercise  of  the  Appellant's  right  to
    respect for  his  family  life.   This  family  life  is  qualitatively
    different with one that the Appellants are enjoying in her  country  of
    origin, where their carer has  her  own  obligations,  as  against  the
    family life that she will enjoy with her own parent, who  is  keen  and
    able to look after the Appellant.

44. Second, the interference here does have consequences of such gravity as
    to potentially engage the operation of Article 8 (bearing in mind  that
    this is a low threshold).  Third, and on the other  hand  however,  the
    interference is in accordance  with  the  law  because  the  Appellants
    cannot comply with the Immigration Rules at paragraph 297  of  HC  395.
    Fourth, though, the interference  is  not  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society, because it is not necessary for the economic wellbeing of  the
    country, or for the prevention of crime, or for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others.  There is  no  hint  whatsoever  of  any
    wrongdoing or illegality by any of the parties concerned.  In fact, all
    the evidence is that the Appellants' parent is in the UK in  a  settled
    capacity. Fifth, all in all, the interference here is not proportionate
    to the legitimate public end that is sought to be achieved.

45.  It  is  well  accepted  that  the  material  question   engaging   the
    proportionality of an administrative decision that threatens to break a
    family is whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  remain
    separately from her natural parents,  which  in  this  case  means  her
    natural mother (her father  effectively  not  providing  her  with  any
    care), who is now a person with legitimate legal status in the  UK  and
    is settled.  On the facts of this case, it is not reasonable.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    16th April 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award of the whole fee award which  has  been
paid or may be payable.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    16th April 2015
