

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/18244/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 15 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                              TIMIRO NOUR OSMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - RIYADH

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 1 January  1946.
      On 23 August 2012, the appellant applied for entry clearance  to  join
      her son Abdulkadir Mohamed Dahir in the UK.  That application fell  to
      be decided under Appendix FM, section EC-DR ("Entry  clearance  as  an
      adult dependent  relative")  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended).  On 8 September 2012, the Entry Clearance Officer in  Riyadh
      refused the appellant's application on the basis  that  the  appellant
      did not meet the  requirement  in  E-ECDR  2.4.   First,  he  was  not
      satisfied that she was related to the sponsor as  claimed.   Secondly,
      she had failed to establish that she required long-term personal  care
      to perform everyday tasks.  The ECO  also  did  not  accept  that  the
      sponsor was the appellant's son as she  claimed.   That  decision  was
      upheld by an Entry Clearance Manager on 5 November 2012.

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 4 April 2013, Judge Powell  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal under Appendix FM and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   On  15  July
      2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Craig granted the appellant  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Relevant Rule

   3. The relevant provisions of Appendix FM are E-ECDR 2.4 and  2.5  which,
      so far as relevant, provide as follows:

           "2.4  The applicant... must as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
                 disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
                 everyday tasks.

              5. The applicant... must be unable, even  with  the  practical
                 and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain  the  required
                 level of care in the country where they are living, because
                 -

                    a) it is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                       country who could reasonably provide it; or

                    b) it is not affordable."

   4. It is not suggested that any of the other requirements in Section  EC-
      DR are relevant in this appeal. It is not  (now)  suggested  that  the
      appellant cannot meet those other requirements.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   5. In his determination, Judge Powell  made  a  number  of  findings.  He
      accepted that the sponsor was indeed the appellant's son which had not
      been contested before him because of  DNA  evidence  establishing  the
      family link.

   6. In para 10 of his determination the Judge identified the sole issue to
      be decided, namely:

           "Whether the appellant has shown  that  she  requires  long-term
           personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks  by  reason  of  age,
           illness or disability."

   7. In evidence before the Judge was a  medical  report  from  Dr  Michael
      Nelki dated 22 March 2013 (at pages 31-34 of the appellant's  bundle).
      Dr Nelki's report was based upon four documents:  a  prescription  for
      the appellant; a photograph showing the appellant with  her  son;  and
      two medical reports. In  addition,  Dr  Nelki  had  seen  the  witness
      statement of the appellant's son, the sponsor.

   8. In that report, Dr Nelki identified a number of drugs which were being
      prescribed for the appellant.  One drug, "Olanzapine", Dr Nelki stated
      is used for schizophrenia and mania and particularly for  the  control
      of aggression and disturbed behaviour in schizophrenia and mania (para
      4 of the report). Another drug "Depakine", Dr Nelki stated is used for
      epilepsy and bipolar disorder, the  latter  condition  formerly  being
      known as manic-depressive  psychosis  (see  para  5  of  the  report).
      Finally,  Dr  Nelki  identified  another  drug  prescribed   for   the
      appellant, namely "Quetiapine" which  again  he  stated  is  used  for
      schizophrenia and mania (para 6 of the report).

   9. Dr Nelki identified a number of typical side effects  of  these  drugs
      including, drowsiness, hallucinations and weakness and  a  Parkinson's
      disease-like syndrome the  symptoms  of  which  include  hand  tremor,
      muscular rigidity and slowness of movement.   At para 8 of his  report
      Dr Nelki concluded that the side effects of this combination of  drugs
      is "unpredictable" but it is "very unlikely" that the  appellant  does
      not have significant side effects assuming she  is  taking  the  drugs
      prescribed.

  10. At paras 11-13 of his report, Dr Nelki identified, on the basis of the
      medical reports from Saudi Arabia, that  the  appellant  suffers  from
      knee and back pain and that she suffers from  osteoarthritis  of  both
      knees  with  osteopenia  (bone  thinning).    The   condition   is   a
      degenerative joint disease and causes immobility and pain.   At  paras
      14-17 Dr Nelki under the hearing "Opinion" set out  his  understanding
      of the appellant's medical condition in the light of the documents  he
      had seen as follows:

           "14.  My inference from the information given in these documents
                 is that of Tamiro Nour  Osman;  a  67-year-old  woman  from
                 Somalia, now residing in Saudi Arabia,  illegally.

             15. She has symptoms and findings of  osteoarthritis  confirmed
                 by  Xray.   The  stated  immobility  is  confirmed  by  the
                 osteopenia also shown on Xray.

             16. Although psychiatric disease is not my field of  expertise,
                 from my long experience in General  Practice  dealing  with
                 such problems, feeling "trapped" and isolated in a  hostile
                 community, real or perceived,  is  highly  consistent  with
                 inducing agitated and paranoid thoughts.

             17. She  is  on  very  considerable,  antipsychotic  medication
                 typical of a prescription for very severe symptoms; such as
                 severe agitation and loss of touch with reality.  A typical
                 explanation from  the  above  information  is  that  of  an
                 elderly woman  living  alone  whose  immobility  will  have
                 trapped her in her room.  She is scared and has  become  so
                 agitated  and  confused  that  very  high  doses   of   two
                 medications and a low dose of a  third  is  required.   The
                 typical side effects of these medications is  to  make  her
                 more  drowsy,  confused  and  weak  thus  aggravating   her
                 immobility, sense of isolation and paranoid thoughts."

  11. At paras 18-22, under the hearing "Conclusion" Dr Nelki expressed  the
      following views:

           "18.  In conclusion Tamiro Nour Osman  is  a  67-year-old  woman
                 from Somalia living  alone  in  Saudi  Arabia,  effectively
                 confined  to  one  room.  She  is  immobile  from   painful
                 arthritis.  She is mentally  disturbed,  highly  consistent
                 with being in pain, "trapped" and alone.

             19. She is on high doses of medication, which urgently needs to
                 be reviewed and simplified and, almost certainly,  reduced.
                 It is very likely  that  she  has  side  effects  from  the
                 medication  which  might,  actually,  be  aggravating   her
                 condition.

             20.  Her  osteoarthritis  immobility  and  pain  need   to   be
                 addressed.  This is best done by her becoming progressively
                 more active with  physiotherapy  and  analgesia.   Mobility
                 cannot be achieved in her present circumstances.

             21. Getting out and about, lovingly cared for  by  someone  she
                 knows, would almost certainly help her physical and  mental
                 state enormously.

             22. Spending her remaining years in the tender, loving care  of
                 her son is to be recommended."

  12. Judge Powell  accepted  the  uncontested  medical  evidence  that  the
      appellant had been diagnosed with osteoarthritis in  both  knees  with
      osteopenia and that they cause her pain and limit  her  mobility  (see
      para 18 of the determination).  He accepted that she had "difficulties
      in walking  and  ascending  stairs".   He  also  accepted  Dr  Nelki's
      evidence regarding the likely conditions  suffered  by  the  appellant
      that required the prescription of anti-psychotic drugs (see para  19).



  13. However, in para 19 of his determination, the Judge went on  to  state
      as follows:

           "19.   I  do  not  accept  his  subsequent  description  of  the
                 appellant's likely circumstances.  He has not examined  the
                 appellant and has only a  prescription  to  go  on,  not  a
                 medical report or description of her mental health."

  14. At para 20 the Judge accepted that  despite  her  illegal  immigration
      status in Saudi  Arabia  that  the  appellant  was  "able  to  receive
      treatment for her physical and mental conditions."

  15. The Judge accepted that that  treatment  was  on-going  and,  then  in
      respect of Dr Nelki's report, he stated that:

           "Whilst  Dr  Nelki  may  prefer  to  (sic)  different  treatment
           regimes, there is no evidence, as opposed to  opinion,  to  show
           that  the  appellant's  health  is  adversely  affected  by  the
           treatment she receives."

  16. One of the grounds of appeal challenges the Judge's  rejection  of  Dr
      Nelki's opinion as not amounting to "evidence" when it was,  in  fact,
      his expert opinion.  I will return to that shortly.

  17. Turning back to the Judge's decision at para 21 he made a  finding  in
      respect of E-ECDR 2.4 of Appendix FM:

           "21.  I take into account what the sponsor told me; however,  it
                 is clear that the appellant has considerable help with  her
                 daily living.  On one hand, this  suggests  that  she  does
                 indeed need such help with day-to-day living.  On the other
                 hand, it also shows that her needs are being met  or  could
                 be met in Saudi Arabia."

  18. The sponsor's evidence was that the  appellant  was  cared  for  by  a
      member of the Somali community.  His evidence was, however,  that  she
      was awaiting a visa to join  her  husband  in  the  United  States  of
      America.  The Judge dealt with this evidence at para 22 as follows:

         "The sponsor tells me that her mother's carer is a  member  of  the
         local Somali community.  He suggests that she is  waiting  to  join
         her husband  in  the  United  States  and  therefore  a  continuing
         assistance  cannot  be  guaranteed;  however,  the  appellant   has
         produced no evidence to confirm this."

  19. Rejecting, it would seem, the sponsor's evidence on the basis that  no
      supporting evidence was produced, the Judge  set  out  E-ECDR  2.5  of
      Appendix FM at para 23 and then concluded that the appellant could not
      meet the requirements of that Rule as follows (at paras 24-25):

         "24.     It is apparent that the appellant has the required help to
             perform long-term personal care  to  perform  everyday  tasks.
             She receives treatment and has access to  medical  care.   Her
             care needs are currently being met by the concerned  and  able
             carer from her local community.

         25.      As such, the appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
             the relevant immigration rule on the date of decision.  It may
             well be the case that if there  is  clear  evidence  that  the
             carer is not able to continue to provide care and there is  no
             other person who can  do  so,  the  appellant  will  meet  the
             requirements."

  20. As a consequence, the Judge dismissed the appeal  under  Appendix  FM,
      Section EC-DR

  21. In addition, at paras 26-31, the  Judge  went  on  to  find  that  the
      respondent's  decision  was  a  proportionate  interference  with  the
      appellant's private life under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Submissions

  22.  On  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Hodgetts  made   two   principal
      submissions.

  23. First, he submitted that the Judge had been wrong to reject  parts  of
      Dr Nelki's report simply on the basis that it  was  not  evidence  but
      only opinion.  He submitted that medical opinion was evidence  and  it
      was not necessary for Dr Nelki to have  seen  the  appellant  although
      that was a matter which might go to the weight of  the  evidence.   In
      support of his submission, Mr Hodgetts relied on Miao  v  SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 75 at [17] where Sedley  LJ  stated  that  it  was  wrong  to
      dismiss  a  psychiatrist's  prognosis  on  the  ground  that  it   was
      "opinion":

         "A medical expert  witness's  function  is  precisely  to  give  an
         opinion on the basis of his clinical knowledge of the  patient  and
         of his field.  That is what [the psychiatrist] had done.  He  could
         do no more, and in the absence of some good reason for doubting his
         expertise or the factual or logical foundation of his opinion,  the
         Immigration Judge was wrong to dismiss it  as  merely  an  opinion,
         much less to treat it as  speculative  or  conjectural.   Like  any
         prognosis it might turn out to be  wrong,  but  the  uncontroverted
         evidence the Immigration Judge had - and it was none the worse  for
         being opinion evidence - was that  if  the  son  was  deported  the
         father's state, and with it the risk  of  suicide,  would  markedly
         worsen."

  24. Mr Hodgetts submitted that the Judge in this case had fallen into  the
      error identified by Sedley LJ at [17] of his judgment in Miao.

  25. Secondly, Mr Hodgetts submitted that by rejecting Dr Nelki's  evidence
      the Judge had failed to identify that the required "long-term personal
      care" needed for the appellant, as Dr Nelki identified in paras 21 and
      22 of his  report,  was  the  personal  care  from  someone  whom  the
      appellant trusted, namely a family member who  was  able  to  lovingly
      care for her.  Mr Hodgetts submitted that, therefore,  the  Judge  had
      failed to identify the level of care that the appellant  required  and
      to find, in accordance  with  E-ECDR  2.5,  that  such  care  was  not
      available and there was no person in Saudi Arabia who could reasonably
      provide it.

  26. Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had been entitled  to  reject  Dr
      Nelki's evidence for the reason he gave.  Dr Nelki  had  not  examined
      the appellant and his conclusions were only based upon  documentation.
      In any event, Mr Richards submitted that all Dr Nelki was  saying  was
      that the appellant would be happier in being cared  for  by  a  family
      member rather than another carer.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
      Rules only required that the appellant  be  provided  with  "long-term
      personal care" and the evidence accepted by  the  Judge,  was  that  a
      carer provided that on a daily basis.  He submitted that the Judge was
      entitled to find that, whilst the  appellant  required  such  care  to
      perform everyday tasks, she was receiving it.

Discussion

  27. I begin with the requirements of E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5.

  28. First, the applicant must establish that he or she requires "long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks".

  29. Secondly that need  must  arise  as  a  result  of  "age,  illness  or
      disability".  Consequently, even if the need for the personal care  is
      established, if it does not arise from one or more of the three stated
      conditions of the individual, then the requirements of  the  Rule  are
      not met.

  30. No definition of "long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks"
      is contained within the Immigration Rules.  The reference to "personal
      care" is to be distinguished from  "medical"  or  "nursing"  care  and
      would appear to mean  that  the  care  that  has  to  be  provided  is
      "personal" rather than, for example, support  provided  by  mechanical
      aids or medication.  The need is for "personal" care, in other  words,
      care provided by another person.  The "personal care" must be required
      "long-term" rather than on a temporary or  transitional  basis.   And,
      further, the provision of care must be  necessary  in  order  that  an
      individual may perform "everyday tasks".

  31. The relevant IDI (dated 13 December 2012) at para 2.2.1 gives  by  way
      of example of "everyday tasks" that  an  individual  is  incapable  of
      "washing, dressing and cooking".  Those are obviously  aspects  of  an
      individual's life properly described  as  "everyday  tasks"  but  that
      phrase has a wider meaning  which  would  include,  for  example,  the
      management of an  individual's  bodily  functions,  difficulties  with
      mobility and communication.  Other activities  of  daily  living  will
      also be included within the phrase "everyday tasks".

  32. Thirdly, E-ECDR 2.5 requires  an  individual  to  establish  that  the
      "required level of care in the country where they are  living"  cannot
      be obtained even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor
      because either it is not available or  there  is  no  person  in  that
      country who could reasonably provide  it  or  it  is  not  affordable.
      Consequently, if the sponsor can provide a relative with the  finances
      which will deliver the "required level of care" in the relative's  own
      country then the requirements of the Rule will not be met  unless  the
      "long-term  personal  care"  is  not  available  and  no  one  in  the
      individual's country can reasonably provide it.

  33. This latter requirement undoubtedly imposes a  significant  burden  of
      proof upon an individual to show that the required level  of  care  is
      not available and no one can reasonably provide it in the individual's
      country.  An example where  that  latter  requirement  might  well  be
      satisfied would be where the "required level of care" needed  requires
      a particular type of carer, for example a close family member, none of
      whom live in the individual's country.  The  evidence  would  have  to
      establish, in such a case, the need for a  particular  type  of  carer
      such as a family member and not simply that  the  individual  required
      personal care from someone.   In  many  circumstances,  the  "required
      level of care" to perform such everyday tasks as cooking, washing, and
      to assist mobility are likely to be capable  of  being  performed  not
      just by family members who do not live in that  individual's  country.
      But, it is equally possible to contemplate, having regard to  cultural
      factors, that needed "personal  care"  involving  intimate  or  bodily
      contact may require a  gender-specific  carer  from  the  individual's
      family.   What  is  the  "required  level  of  care"   and   who   may
      appropriately provide it will depend upon the  circumstances  and  the
      evidence in any given case.

  34. Turning now to this appeal, I begin first with the  Judge's  rejection
      of Dr Nelki's "opinion"  that  the  appellant's  health  is  adversely
      affected by the treatment she receives.

  35. It is of course true that Dr Nelki  did  not  examine  the  appellant.
      However, he had two medical reports relating to her and  a  record  of
      medication prescribed for her.  In his report, Dr Nelki assessed  that
      evidence and, at para 19, concluded that she was  on  "high  doses  of
      medication which urgently needed to be reviewed and  almost  certainly
      reduced."  It was very likely, in Dr Nelki's  opinion,  that  she  had
      side effects from the medication which could aggravate her  condition.
      In my judgment, even though Dr Nelki had not examined  the  appellant,
      he had material before him which entitled him to reach his opinion  in
      para 19 and, indeed, elsewhere in his report.  That  opinion  was  his
      expert opinion.  As Sedley LJ pointed out in Miao at [17], that  could
      not be dismissed as "merely an opinion".  Dr Nelki was performing  his
      function as a medical expert witness of giving an opinion based on his
      clinical knowledge of the appellant.  The Judge was wrong in  para  19
      of his determination to doubt Dr Nelki's assessment of  the  appellant
      on the basis that he only had a "prescription to go  on"  and  "not  a
      medical report or description of her mental health".  As is clear,  Dr
      Nelki   had   two   medical   reports   concerning   the   appellant's
      osteoarthritis and there was also evidence from the sponsor as to  her
      condition and presentation.

  36. For these reasons, I accept Mr Hodgetts'  submission  that  the  Judge
      erred in law in failing to place any weight upon Dr  Nelki's  evidence
      of the appellant's likely circumstances in Saudi Arabia and  that  her
      current treatment was adversely affecting her health.

  37. That said, to the extent that Dr Nelki's opinion is that the appellant
      would receive different and better or more  efficacious  treatment  in
      the UK could not, in itself, lead  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant  met  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR  2.4  and  2.5.    Those
      provisions focus exclusively upon the individual's situation in  their
      own country.  If an  individual  does,  in  fact,  require  "long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks" and that "personal  care"  is
      available (and affordable) in their own country, it  is  not  relevant
      that they would receive better or more efficacious care  or  treatment
      in the UK.  The only issue under the Rules is whether their  needs  in
      their own country are in fact met.

  38. In this case, the  Judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's  need  for
      "personal care to perform everyday tasks"  was  met  in  Saudi  Arabia
      through a carer from the local Somali community.  Unless this  finding
      is unsustainable, the appellant could not succeed under the Rules.  In
      my judgment, it is not sustainable for two reasons.

  39. First, the Judge appears to have concluded that whatever the needs  of
      the appellant, the carer met them.  However, in reaching that  finding
      the Judge failed to take into account Dr Nelki's report  and,  indeed,
      the evidence of the sponsor that the appellant was as a result of  her
      mental illness "trapped" to use Dr Nelki's word, or "a  prisoner",  to
      use the sponsor's term, in her room.  The sponsor's evidence (at  para
      10 of his statement) was that his mother did not leave the room  where
      she lived where she was a prisoner.  In part,  Dr  Nelki  stated  that
      schizophrenia - a condition for which the appellant takes medication -
      has as one of its consequences a fear of going outside and as a result
      effectively being imprisoned or "trapped" in her room.  The  sponsor's
      evidence was also that the  appellant's  lack  of  mobility  was  very
      severely impaired by chronic arthritis to her knees and back.  In para
      20 of his report Dr Nelki concluded that the appellant's physical  and
      emotional state would almost certainly be helped enormously if she was
      able to get "out and about" lovingly cared for  by  someone  whom  she
      knows.

  40. It is readily apparent that the Judge did not take this evidence  into
      account in assessing the  "required  level  of  care"  needed  by  the
      appellant as part of her "long-term personal care to perform  everyday
      tasks".  In my judgment, "everyday tasks" includes mobility and, as  a
      matter of common sense, to include the ability to leave one's home and
      interact  with  the  world  outside  engaging   in   everyday   living
      activities. In my judgment, the Judge failed to take this into account
      when he found that the appellant's needs were, in effect, provided for
      by  the  carer  of  the  appellant's  mother  from  the  local  Somali
      community.  As a result, that finding cannot stand.

  41. Secondly, in any event, the Judge's finding in para 23 that the  carer
      was available at the date of decision, and thereafter, to provide care
      to the appellant's mother is inadequately reasoned.

  42. The sponsor's evidence (in para 6 of his statement) was that the carer
      was "waiting for her visa to come through" to join her husband in  the
      United States of America.  In para 22 of his determination, the  Judge
      appears not to have accepted that  evidence  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant "has produced no evidence to confirm this".  At no point  in
      his determination did the Judge make any finding  that  the  sponsor's
      evidence was unreliable.  It is difficult, therefore, to conclude that
      the Judge rejected the sponsor's evidence.

  43. Instead, it may be that what the Judge was saying in para 22 was  that
      in the absence of  any  other  evidence  the  sponsor's  evidence  was
      insufficient to discharge the burden of proof on the civil standard of
      a balance of probabilities.  I have considerable doubt whether, in the
      absence  of  expressly  rejecting  the  sponsor's  evidence  for  good
      reasons, the Judge was entitled to find that despite that evidence, in
      the absence of confirmatory evidence it had not been established  that
      the mother's carer would shortly be leaving Saudi Arabia and that  the
      appellant would in the foreseeable future lose her carer.

  44. In any event, I am persuaded by the grounds that the  Judge's  finding
      on this matter was unfair as the  issue  was  not  raised  before  the
      Judge.  A witness statement by Derek McConnell (the solicitor who  had
      conduct of the appellant's appeal before the Judge) dated October 2013
      states that the Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  the  only  issue
      before the Judge was whether the appellant required long-term personal
      care and that the  evidence  was  related  to  that.   The  Presenting
      Officer's submission was that the appellant had failed  to  show  that
      she required long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks and the
      issue of whether that care would be provided under E-ECDR 2.5 was  not
      relied upon by the Presenting  Officer.   That  is  the  substance  of
      ground 1 of the grounds of appeal and the respondent's rule  24  reply
      dated 31 July 2013 does not dispute what is said.   I  note  that  the
      grounds state that Mr McConnell's witness statement  was  attached  to
      the grounds of appeal.

  45. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the Judge's  finding  that
      the appellant's carer will be available to continue  to  provide  care
      for the appellant cannot stand.

  46. For these reasons, the Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
      Appendix FM cannot stand and must be remade.

Re-Making the Decision

  47. I invited both representatives, at  the  end  of  the  submissions  in
      relation to  error  of  law,  to  make  submissions  on  remaking  the
      decision.

      1. The Rules

  48. Mr Hodgetts emphasised the link between  the  appellant's  mental  and
      physical health and her needs in order to perform "everyday tasks" not
      just  in  her  home  but  outside  also.   These  needs,  Mr  Hodgetts
      submitted, could only be met, as Dr Nelki suggested, by her family who
      were in the UK.

  49. Mr Richards submitted that Rules only required personal care, that  is
      that the appellant be, for example, clothed and fed and suchlike.   It
      did not require, as Mr Nelki's report suggested,  that  the  appellant
      would be better off in the UK.

  50. While I accept Mr Richards' submission that the focus  of  E-ECDR  2.4
      and 2.5 is upon the appellant's circumstances in Saudi  Arabia,  I  do
      not accept his submission that the evidence establishes that her "long-
      term personal care" required "to perform everyday tasks"  are  met  in
      Saudi Arabia.

  51. In my judgment, I am entitled to give weight to Dr Nelki's opinion  as
      to  the  impact  upon  the  appellant  of  her  current  circumstances
      resulting from her physical disability (namely her osteoarthritis) and
      her mental illness.  In  that  latter  regard,  I  accept  Dr  Nelki's
      evidence, based  upon  the  documents  dealing  with  the  appellant's
      prescription drugs, that she is suffering from schizophrenia  and,  in
      all likelihood,  bipolar  disorder.   I  accept  that  her  conditions
      require that she, despite the medication,  needs  "long-term  personal
      care" in order for her to perform  everyday  tasks  such  as  cooking,
      washing and results in severe mobility  difficulties  because  of  her
      physical condition which results in considerable pain.

  52. Further, I accept that the appellant's physical and  mental  condition
      (in particular her mental illness) has resulted in her being "trapped"
      or  "imprisoned"  in  her  home  which  she  does  not  leave.    That
      debilitating feature of the  appellant's  daily  life  is  the  direct
      result, I accept on the basis of Dr  Nelki's  report,  of  her  mental
      illness and the absence of the care of a close family member.  It  is,
      as I have stated above, part of the appellant's "everyday tasks" to be
      able to leave her home and engage with the world outside.  To do that,
      in my judgment, the appellant requires "long-term personal care" which
      can only (if her needs  are  to  be  fully  met)  be  provided  in  an
      environment where she is supported by a close family  member  such  as
      her son.  The "personal care" provided by her carer  at  the  date  of
      decision did not, plainly, fully meet those needs  in  order  for  the
      appellant to be able to perform "everyday tasks" because she  remained
      "trapped" or "imprisoned" in her home.

  53. I accept the sponsor's evidence that her current  carer  was,  at  the
      date of decision, awaiting a visa to join her husband in the USA.   It
      was, therefore, foreseeable at the date of decision that the appellant
      would lose the support of her carer upon which she  currently  relies.
      Even if there was another person in Saudi Arabia who could provide the
      same support as her current carer, that person would not  be  able  to
      provide the "required level of care" to meet the appellant's  need  to
      perform the everyday tasks as I have described above which can only be
      fully provided by a close family member.  Any  replacement  would,  of
      course, likely be a stranger to the appellant.

  54. For these reasons, I am satisfied on a balance of  probabilities  that
      the appellant requires "long-term personal care  to  perform  everyday
      tasks" (E-ECDR 2.4), and that even with the  practical  and  financial
      help of the sponsor, the "required level of care" is not available and
      there is no person in Saudi Arabia who could reasonably provide it (E-
      ECDR 2.5).  There is no evidence that the  appellant  has  any  family
      (whether as close or otherwise) in Saudi Arabia.

  55. For these  reasons,  having  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision  under
      Appendix FM, I remake the decision allowing the appeal  under  Section
      EC-DR on the basis that the appellant met the requirements  in  E-ECDR
      2.4 and 2.5 at the date of decision and it is not suggested  that  she
      did not meet any other requirements of the Rules.

      2. Article 8

  56. In the light of that finding, it is not necessary  to  deal  with  the
      Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8 in any detail.  The
      Judge's reasoning as to proportionality was  based  upon  the  premise
      that the appellant could not meet the requirement of Appendix FM.   As
      I have already found, the appellant did meet the requirements  of  the
      Rules and  for  that  reason  alone,  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
      respondent's  decision  is  a  proportionate  interference  with   the
      appellant's right to respect  for  her  private  and  family  life  is
      necessarily flawed and cannot stand.   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant enjoyed family life with the sponsor (para 26).  Further, in
      the light of my findings above I am satisfied  that  by  remaining  in
      Saudi Arabia the appellant's private life, in the sense of her  mental
      and physical integrity, is compromised despite the treatment that  she
      receives.   In  my  judgment,  the  respondent's  decision  interferes
      sufficiently seriously with the appellant's private and family life so
      as to engage Art 8.  There is no suggestion that the  appellant's  son
      could live with  the  appellant  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  there  is  no
      suggestion that they should live  in  Somalia.   It  would  be  wholly
      unreasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to either country.

  57. Accepting that a legitimate aim, namely that of effective  immigration
      control is engaged, in the light of my finding  that  the  Immigration
      Rules are met, the refusal of entry clearance was "not  in  accordance
      with the law".  In any  event,  balancing  the  implications  for  the
      appellant's health and wellbeing, set out in Dr Nelki's  report  above
      which I accept, I am satisfied that  in  all  the  circumstances,  the
      appellant's continued exclusion from  the  UK  is  a  disproportionate
      interference with her right to respect for her private and family life
      (and that of the sponsor).

  58. For these reasons, I also set aside the Judge's  decision  to  dismiss
      the appeal under Art 8 and I remake the  decision  also  allowing  the
      appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.





Decision

  59. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules and Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of  law.
      Its decision is set aside.

  60. I remake the decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
      and under Art 8 of the ECHR.










                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may  be  payable  on  the  basis  that  he
appellant has succeeded in establishing her entitlement to entry clearance.





                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
