
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18116/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of             |Determination & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Justice-Belfast On 1 December 2015       |On 22 December 2015                     |
|                                         |                            |
|                                         |                            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                   MISS RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR TH EHOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Daley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 15 August 1998.

 2. On 7 June 2013 she applied for entry clearance as the child of a parent
    granted refugee status.  The application was considered with  reference
    to paragraph 352D of HC 395 (as amended).  In a decision dated 12  July
    2013 the application was refused.  The sole basis for the  refusal  was
    with reference to paragraph 352D(iv), namely that the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer ("ECO") was not satisfied that the appellant was  part  of  the
    family unit of the sponsor at the time that he left Eritrea in order to
    seek asylum.

 3. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyd on 2  February  2015.   He  dismissed  the  appeal,
    finding that the appellant did not meet the requirements of that aspect
    of the Rules.  He also dismissed the appeal with reference to Article 8
    of the ECHR.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Judge Boyd heard evidence from the appellant's father, AK.  He recorded
    that the sponsor lived in the UK with his first wife, having come  here
    with her and their then three children.  The appellant is the  daughter
    of his marriage to his second wife.  The sponsor's  evidence  was  that
    the relationship with his second wife commenced when he started working
    away from home.  The judge noted that  in  his  witness  statement  the
    sponsor said that he saw  his  first  wife  at  the  weekends  when  he
    travelled home from work but on Monday to  Friday  he  lived  with  his
    second wife in the area where he worked.  The sponsor lived  like  this
    until he "joined" the national army in 2000.

 5. Again from his witness statement, the  judge  noted  that  the  sponsor
    divorced the appellant's mother in 2001.  He records that  the  sponsor
    stated that he last saw the appellant in 2009.  This was before he  was
    sentenced to imprisonment in Eritrea which was on 10 February 2010.  He
    found therefore, that it was reasonable to assume that the sponsor  had
    not seen the appellant between early 2009 and his arrest on 10 February
    2010.

 6. He then went on to conclude that it would appear that the  family  unit
    he had with his second wife (the appellant's mother) and the appellant,
    ended around the year 2000/2001 and from then on  "the  appellant  then
    became simply his daughter to a former relationship."

 7. He concluded that at around that time she ceased  to  be  part  of  the
    family unit "by any reasonable definition" of that phrase.  He  further
    concluded that the family unit was therefore, in effect  his  wife  and
    three children with whom he came to the United Kingdom.

 8. At [16] he stated that a family unit does not necessarily  require  all
    the parties to live together.  However, given the fact that the sponsor
    had not seen the appellant for approximately a year prior to his arrest
    and the fact that the sponsor had divorced the  appellant's  mother  in
    2001, it would appear that around that  time  he  ceased  to  have  two
    family units and was simply in the situation of having had  a  daughter
    (the appellant) from another woman outside of his marriage to his first
    wife.  He accepted that it was conceivable that prior to that time  the
    sponsor did "operate two family units" initially.

 9. At [17] the conclusion was that the sponsor's family unit was with  his
    present wife and three children but that he had contact with and access
    to the appellant, but that the appellant was not  part  of  his  family
    unit.  He stated at  [18]  that  the  sponsor  had  clearly  taken  his
    responsiblities in relation to the appellant  seriously,  including  in
    maintaining her and keeping in contact  with  her.   That  however,  he
    concluded was not sufficient to establish that  she  was  part  of  his
    family unit at the time he left Eritrea, and that the evidence does not
    support such a claim.

10. In going on to consider  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  it  was  apparently
    accepted on behalf of the appellant that she was not able to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules in any other respect.

11. In considering whether there were circumstances under Article  8  which
    would render the decision of the respondent disproportionate, the judge
    concluded that there was nothing exceptional about the case.  He  noted
    that the appellant is 16 years of age and had  lived  with  her  mother
    until 2012, and is now living outside of Eritrea, being financed by the
    sponsor.  The appellant is able to maintain contact  with  the  sponsor
    and his family in the  United  Kingdom.   Although  the  appellant  had
    stated that she is unhappy living where she is, and wishes to live with
    her father, there is nothing to indicate  as  claimed  that  she  would
    suffer psychological problems if she stayed where she was.   For  about
    three years she had been living with family friends and being supported
    by the sponsor.  There was no evidence that she is at any risk.   There
    appeared to be no reason why that situation could not continue.

12. At [22] the judge also stated that the appellant appears  to  have  had
    very limited contact with the sponsor since around  2000  and  had  not
    seen him for six years without any evident adverse effects.  At [23] he
    concluded that the decision would  not  interfere  with  her  right  to
    family or private life, which could continue as it does at present.

13. He stated that he  had  to  take  into  account  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") in  terms
    of the public interest in  controlling  immigration.   He  stated  that
    there was insufficient evidence  as  to  how  the  appellant  would  be
    maintained and looked after in the UK or as to her standard of English.



14.  He  concluded  that  the  status  quo  could  be  maintained  and  the
    respondent's decision does not amount to a disproportionate  breach  of
    her Article 8 rights.

    The Grounds and Submissions

15. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal,  in  summary,  contend
    that the First-tier Judge did not take into account that the reason for
    the  sponsor's  separation  from  the  appellant   was   his   forcible
    recruitment into the army in Eritrea, which pre-dated his divorce  from
    the appellant's mother in 2001.   This  is  evidenced  in  his  witness
    statement.

16. It  is  further  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to
    considering the definition of a 'family unit,' in effect assuming  that
    the appellant's 'nuclear' family  with  his  first  wife  and  children
    amounted to a family unit but his relationship  and  contact  with  the
    appellant did not amount to a family unit.

17. It is further said that the judge had failed to consider information in
    the screening interview of the sponsor when he claimed  asylum,  namely
    that the sponsor gave his last address in Eritrea  as  being  the  same
    address as where the appellant lived.  He also stated that his children
    lived at different addresses in Eritrea.

18. The grounds also take issue with the judge's conclusions in relation to
    Article 8, for example suggesting that he failed to take  into  account
    the best interests of the appellant and wrongly took into  account  the
    appellant's  English  language  ability,  a  matter  which  under   the
    Immigration Rules would not be relevant.  The conclusion that there was
    insufficient evidence to show how the appellant would be maintained and
    looked after in the UK is contrary to  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    sponsor could continue to support her financially.

19. Mr Daley relied on those grounds in his oral submissions.  He explained
    the background to the appellant's circumstances and separation from the
    sponsor.   It  was  emphasised  that  there  was  no  mention  in   the
    determination of the sponsor's forced enlistment in the Eritrean  army,
    the judge seemingly concluding at [11] that he had volunteered to  join
    up.

20. Ms O'Brien submitted that the issues were fact-sensitive and in reality
    the grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's
    conclusions.  It was submitted that  he  had  taken  into  account  the
    divorce  from  the  appellant's  mother  in  2001,  as  well   as   his
    conscription into the army, and the frequency of contact  between  them
    prior to the sponsor leaving Eritrea.  He took into  account  that  the
    appellant had not seen the sponsor for about a year before  his  arrest
    which was in February 2010.

21. The fact that the sponsor had discharged some  parental  responsibility
    towards the appellant did not mean that she  was  part  of  his  family
    unit, particularly bearing in mind that she lived with her  mother  and
    that there was a significant gap in time from when  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor last met and when he fled Eritrea.

22. There was no credible basis on which to challenge the judge's Article 8
    conclusions.  Although there was family life between the appellant  and
    the sponsor, she being his daughter, one had to look at the quality  of
    that family life.  In this case there was a family life  consisting  of
    periods of separation and intermittent contact. The appellant's  family
    life with her mother was really the family unit.

23. So far as the best interests of a child are concerned, it was  accepted
    that those considerations would be taken into account as  a  matter  of
    policy but best interests do not have primacy  in  an  entry  clearance
    case.

24. In reply on behalf of the appellant it was accepted that  there  was  a
    distinction to be drawn between entry clearance  cases  and  in-country
    appeals in terms of best interests considerations, but having regard to
    the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child,  the  appellant's  best
    interests should have been a primary consideration.




    My assessment

25. It is not apparent that the judge's assessment of whether the appellant
    formed part of the sponsor's family unit at the time  he  left  Eritrea
    depended on any distinction between his having  been  conscripted  into
    the Eritrean army or having  joined  as  a  volunteer.   The  sponsor's
    evidence was that he was conscripted, as is apparent from  his  witness
    statement dated 26 January 2015.

26. At [11], in rehearsing the sponsor's evidence, he  noted  that  in  his
    witness statement he said that he saw his first wife  at  the  weekends
    when he travelled home from work but on Monday to Friday he lived  with
    his second wife in the area where he worked and that he lived like this
    "until he joined the National Army in 2000."   The  judge  was  plainly
    aware of the fact that the arrangement that he had with  his  then  two
    families was interrupted by his joining the army.  The  fact  that  the
    judge did not refer to conscription or forced recruitment seems  to  me
    to be immaterial.  The judge plainly concluded that it  was  'force  of
    circumstances' which ended the arrangement that the  sponsor  had  with
    his two families.

27. Accordingly, I am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  merit  in  the
    suggestion that the judge erred in law in failing to take into  account
    that separation between him and the appellant was not by choice but  as
    a result of forced recruitment into the Eritrean army.

28. Further grounds point out that the  sponsor's  forced  recruitment  was
    accepted by the respondent as part  of  his  claim  for  asylum,  which
    itself was accepted. However, I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  did
    overlook the sponsor's national service.  What the  judge  did  was  to
    make an assessment of the extent to which the  evidence  supported  the
    claim that the appellant formed part of the sponsor's family unit  when
    he left Eritrea to seek asylum.

29. Although the judge did not cite the decision in BM  and  AL  (352D(iv);
    meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055 he did  recognise
    that a family unit does not necessarily require all the parties to live
    together (see [16]).  There is no merit  in  the  contention  that  the
    First-tier Judge considered that the sponsor's 'nuclear'  family  meets
    the definition of family unit yet his situation with the appellant  did
    not.  At [16] the judge expressly stated that it  is  conceivable  that
    the appellant did operate two family units at one time initially.   The
    judge adopted a fact-specific approach  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's claim and to the sponsor's family arrangements at the  time
    when he was in Eritrea and when he left.

30. The third ground of appeal on behalf of the appellant argues  that  the
    judge failed to consider evidence in the sponsor's screening  interview
    dated 11 October 2010, at the time when he claimed asylum.  At [16] the
    judge referred to the screening interview at  question  6.4  where  the
    sponsor stated that  the  appellant  was  living  with  her  mother  in
    Eritrea, as well as referring to the  sponsor's  four  other  children,
    three of whom travelled with him to the UK with their  mother.   It  is
    argued that it was unreasonable for the judge to conclude on the  basis
    of that answer that the appellant was not part of the sponsor's  family
    unit at that time.

31. In fact, the judge did not come to that conclusion solely on the  basis
    of that aspect of the screening interview.  He said that the conclusion
    that the appellant ceased to have two family units  after  his  divorce
    from the appellant's mother in 2001 was "consistent" with  that  answer
    in the interview.  He was entitled to come to that view.

32. The grounds refer to other aspects of the screening interview which  it
    is contended the judge failed to take into account.  An incomplete copy
    of the screening interview is in the appellant's bundle that was before
    the First-tier Tribunal at pages 42-43.  The references in the  grounds
    to question 10 and the "Additional Information Box" are in fact at  the
    start of the asylum interview, starting at page 44 of the bundle.

33. Reliance is placed on question 10 whereby the  sponsor  gave  his  last
    address in Eritrea as Kilowle, Mendefra.  The grounds  state  that  the
    appellant gave his last address in Kilowle "where  he  lived  with  the
    Appellant."  In fact, the answer to question 10 does not  say  that  he
    lived there with the appellant, although the screening interview itself
    at 6.4 does refer to the appellant as living  at  "Klewilie."   It  may
    well be that this is different  spellings  for  the  same  place.   The
    grounds also refer to what is stated in the additional information  box
    at the start of the asylum interview as follows "[one] thing I want  to
    say - children lived at different address in Eritrea Maichot,  Asmara."
    The implication of these pieces of information in the  interview  would
    seem to be argued to be that the appellant's last address was with  the
    appellant and that his children (the appellant and  his  children  from
    his first marriage) lived at different addresses, supporting the  claim
    that he had two family units.

34. It is true that the judge  did  not  refer  to  these  answers  of  the
    preliminary stages  of  the  asylum  interview.   On  the  other  hand,
    contrary to what the appellant says  in  his  witness  statement  about
    having split his holiday period when in the army between the  appellant
    and his family with his first wife, at 6.1 of the  screening  interview
    the appellant said that "when on leave stayed  [with]  wife's  parents"
    giving an address in "Asmera."  That is consistent with what he said in
    answer to question 10 of the asylum interview about where his  children
    from his first wife lived.

35. Even if it could be said that the judge ought to have referred to these
    further aspects of the screening and asylum interviews,  I  cannot  see
    that his failure to have done so could have affected the outcome of the
    appeal in circumstances where the answers do not point unequivocally to
    the contention argued for by and on behalf of the  appellant.  That  is
    aside from a consideration of the judge's assessment  of  the  evidence
    overall.

36. At [13] the judge referred to the sponsor's evidence that the last time
    he saw the appellant  was  in  2009,  and  that  this  was  before  his
    imprisonment which was  on  10  February  2010.   The  judge  therefore
    concluded that the sponsor had not seen  the  appellant  between  early
    2009 and his arrest on 10 February 2010.  He then referred at  [16]  to
    the sponsor's divorce from the appellant's mother in 2001.

37. In the circumstances, the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    family unit that he had with his second wife and  the  appellant  ended
    around the year 2000/2001, the sponsor not having  seen  the  appellant
    for approximately a year prior to his arrest and  taking  into  account
    that he divorced his second wife in 2001.

38.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor   had   carried   on   taking
    responsibility for the appellant,  in  terms  of  maintaining  her  and
    keeping contact with her, but  concluded  that  the  evidence  did  not
    establish that she was part of his family unit  at  the  time  he  left
    Eritrea.  The judge made a distinction between the appellant having had
    contact or access to the appellant and her  having  been  part  of  his
    family unit, as distinct from the family unit the  appellant  had  with
    his first wife and then three children.

39. This was a fact-sensitive  enquiry  in  relation  to  which  the  judge
    reached conclusions that were open to  him,  taking  into  account  the
    various features of the evidence.

40. As regards the judge's conclusions in relation  to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, in the light of my conclusions as to there being no error of  law
    in the judge's assessment of the circumstances in which  the  appellant
    and sponsor were separated, likewise  the  complaint  in  this  respect
    insofar as it impacts on Article 8, has no merit.  The  judge  did  not
    conclude that the disruption to family life between the  appellant  and
    the sponsor was as a result of the sponsor having to flee  the  country
    to claim asylum.  The judge concluded that the appellant was  not  part
    of his family unit in any event.

41. The judge noted that there was no dispute but that  the  appellant  was
    not able to meet the requirements of the Article 8  Immigration  Rules.
    He  therefore  went  on  to  consider  whether  there   was   "anything
    exceptional" about the case.  He did not conclude  that  the  appellant
    would  be  able   to   continue   family   life   "through   electronic
    communications."  The judge merely took into account that the appellant
    had the ability to maintain contact with the sponsor and his family  in
    the UK.

42. Although the judge did not expressly state that he had  had  regard  to
    the appellant's best  interests,  it  is  apparent  that  he  did.   He
    referred to the fact that the appellant lived  with  her  mother  until
    2012 and is now living  outside  Eritrea  and  that  the  appellant  is
    financing her.  He noted that the appellant says that  she  is  unhappy
    living where she is and wants to live with her father in  the  UK.   He
    concluded  however,  that  the   claim   that   she   would   encounter
    psychological problems if she stayed where she was was not supported by
    any evidence.  He referred at [22] to the appellant having  lived  with
    family friends, being supported by  the  sponsor.   He  concluded  that
    there was no evidence that she was at any risk and found that there was
    no reason why the present living arrangements could not  continue.   He
    noted that there was no evidence that there were any adverse effects on
    the appellant for not having seen the sponsor for about six years.

43. The determination would have been better for an explicit  reference  to
    "best interests", but the judge's reasoning shows that  he  took  those
    best interests into account.

44. There is merit in the contention that the judge was wrong to take  into
    account s.117B of the 2002 Act in terms  of  there  being  insufficient
    evidence as to the appellant's English language ability, that not being
    a matter under the Rules that she would have to establish.   Similarly,
    the conclusion that there is insufficient evidence as to how she  would
    be maintained and looked after in  the  UK  is  inconsistent  with  the
    judge's conclusion that  the  sponsor  could  continue  financially  to
    support her.

45. Nevertheless, the judge took into account the public interest  and  the
    appellant's present living arrangements which did not reveal  any  risk
    to her or anything other than the understandable desire to live in  the
    UK  with  her  father.   A  relevant  factor  in  the   proportionality
    assessment is  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, it having been accepted that she
    was not able to do so.

46. I am satisfied that the judge's assessment of proportionality  is  free
    from an error of law. He was entitled to conclude that the respondent's
    decision would not amount to a disproportionate interference  with  the
    appellant's family life with the sponsor.

47. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of
    law in any respect in the judge's decision.  The  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    therefore                                                       stands.



    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    dismiss the appeal therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                           17/12/15
