



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/18315/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision &  Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th October 2014            |On 12th November 2014           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Bandana Rai
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan of instructed by NC Brothers & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this  determination  I  shall
    refer to the parties as they  were  described  before  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India and  made  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse her entry clearance as a dependant
    of her father Mr Prem Bahadur Rai a former Gurkha soldier.

 3. The appeal was allowed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Pacey on 23rd  July
    2014.  An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the
    respondent on the basis that the Judge allowed the appeal on the  basis
    of Article 8 outside the Rules and that the appellant could not satisfy
    the rules (paragraph 276ADE), the Judge only made a  cursory  reference
    to Article 8 and there was no application of Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    Rules-correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC).  The  judge  had  given
    inadequate reasoning.

 4. The determination was not challenged on the basis that  the  judge  had
    not made a finding with reference to  family  life.   As  Mr  Shilliday
    accepted in fact the only issue was whether Article 8 was engaged.   Mr
    Shilliday acknowledged that he did not draft the grounds of appeal  and
    he attempted to vary the grounds.

 5. I refused to allow the Secretary of  State  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal in such a fundamental manner. There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    engagement of Article 8 in the permission to appeal and no reference to
    it in the grant of permission to appeal save for a general reference to
    the  judge's  approach  on  proportionality.   Although  the  grant  of
    permission states that the judge did not address why he should  address
    the matter outside the rules, it  is  clear  that  the  matter  of  the
    policies in respect of Gurkha's would  give  rise  to  a  consideration
    outside the rules.  Mr Shilliday accepted this  was  not  relevant.  Mr
    Shilliday argued that there had been no consideration of the first limb
    of Article 8 but he also accepted this was not a matter raised  in  the
    application for permission to appeal. Applications  for  permission  to
    appeal should be made in writing and these grounds were settled on 31st
    July 2014 and there had been no indication of any amendment to be  made
    prior to the day of the hearing before me.  This would  mean  that  any
    application was substantially out of time and would require  permission
    to extend time which  would  be  refused  in  the  absence  of  special
    circumstances.  I find there were none.

 6. Even if I had granted permission to amend the grounds it was clear that
    the judge, having proceeded to a proportionality assessment, considered
    that there was family life between the appellant  and  her  father  and
    that Article 8 (1) was engaged as he referred to this albeit  obliquely
    in a citation to adult dependent children.  This  is  implicit  in  the
    determination. The judge's determination reflected that he was aware of
    the nature of the appeal and he referred to the relevant case  law  not
    least Ghising & Oths (Gurkhas/BOCs historic wrong: weight)  {2013  UKUT
    00567 (IAC).  The judge found that the appellant  was  single  with  no
    protection and he gave considerable weight to the 'historic injustice'.
    The findings were open to him and although  very  brief  were  cogently
    argued and just sufficient.

 7. It was for the judge to 'strike the balance in respect of the weight to
    be attached to the historic justice argument.  He  needed  to  make  an
    assessment of proportionality in line with the last question of  Razgar
    v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27,  regarding  proportionality,  and   in   the
    circumstances attaching  relevant  weight  to  the  historic  injustice
    argument put forward.  This was accomplished.



DECISION

       The  First  Tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  error  of  law.   The
    determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed      Date 10th November 2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Rimington


