
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/18865/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On September 7, 2015                 |On September 8, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MS NGUYEN Y NHI DO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Francis, Counsel, instructed by Rahman & Co Solicitors
Respondent  Ms Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  national  of  Vietnam  and  on  June  5,  2013  she
    submitted an application to join the  sponsor,  Tam  Viet  Do,  as  his
    spouse dependant. The respondent refused her application  on  September
    17, 2013 on the following grounds:

      a. There were question marks over the sponsor's earlier marriage;

      b. Whether this marriage was genuine and subsisting;

      c. Concerns over whether the financial requirements of the Rules  were
         met; and

      d. Under paragraph 320(11) HC 395.

 2. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal SJ Clarke
    on February 24, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on  March  10,  2015
    the Tribunal refused her appeal finding the marriage was  not  genuine.
    In all other respects the Tribunal found in her favour.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on March  20,  2015  and
    permission to appeal was grated by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ransley on May 15, 2015.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Ms Francis submitted that the Tribunal had erred by firstly, failing to
    determine all  of  the  issues  in  dispute  between  the  parties  and
    secondly, by failing to take into account all  relevant  evidence  when
    considering whether the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

 7. The respondent had stated she was not satisfied that the  marriage  was
    not valid because the sponsor claimed to have been  married  previously
    and whilst there was nothing to suggest  the  marriage  had  ever  been
    ended. Ms Francis submitted the  Tribunal  should  have  made  a  clear
    finding on this issue.

 8. Turning to the second ground of appeal Ms Francis  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal failed to have due regard to all of the evidence that had been
    submitted  when  considering  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting. The Tribunal had failed to make specific reference  to  the
    joint bank accounts and the fact that these statements covered  related
    two different addresses. The Tribunal also failed to have regard to the
    NHS medical cards that were also registered to the same address.

 9. The test to show a genuine and subsisting relationship was a  low  test
    and was set out in the cases of Goudey  (subsisting  marriage-evidence)
    Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 and GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana  *  [2006]
    UKAIT 00046  where the Tribunal  made  clear  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated, on the balance of probabilities, that their  relationship
    was subsisting at the relevant time. Evidence of contact  by  telephone
    had been adduced in the absence of any countervailing factors then  the
    evidence adduced should have been sufficient to discharge the burden of
    proof on the appellant. The Tribunal failed  to  give  reasons  why  no
    weight was attached to the evidence adduced and the fact the  appellant
    and sponsor claimed not to have known each  other  before  the  sponsor
    came to the United Kingdom was not a factor that should have been  held
    against the appellant even though they came from the same village.  The
    decision should be set aside and the appeal allowed.

10. Ms Isherwood relied on the Rule 24 response  dated  June  5,  2015  and
    submitted there was no material error.

11. With regard to the first ground of appeal Ms Isherwood  submitted  that
    this  was  not  material.  The  Tribunal's  decision  to   refuse   the
    appellant's appeal had not been made on validity grounds but  had  been
    made on the basis that the marriage was neither genuine nor subsisting.



12. With regard to the second ground of appeal Ms Isherwood submitted  that
    the appellant's ground was a  mere  disagreement  with  the  Tribunal's
    decision. In paragraphs [17] and [18] of its decision the Tribunal  had
    properly considered the relationship and  evidence  and  made  findings
    open to it.

13. Whilst the Tribunal did not specify which documents it  had  considered
    it made clear in paragraph [18] that there was limited evidence to show
    that they were living together. The submission of bank  statements  did
    not prove parties were living together but merely they shared the  same
    address. The failure of witnesses to attend on the day of  hearing  and
    other matters were matters the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account because the tribunal  had  scepticism  about  the  relationship
    itself and the reasons given were sustainable.

14. Ms Francis responded to  those  submissions  and  reiterated  that  the
    Tribunal had to make a finding as to whether the marriage was  a  valid
    marriage before  considering  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting. The failure to deal with that issue was a material error.

15. As regards her second ground Ms Francis reiterated that taking all  the
    evidence demonstrated theirs was a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    and the Immigration Rules were met.

16. At the conclusion of the evidence I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS AND REASONS ON ERROR IN LAW

17. This was an application by the appellant to join her husband who was  a
    UK citizen of Vietnamese origin. The background to this matter was that
    the appellant had previously been issued with a Tier 4 Visa on December
    29, 2010 and she entered the United Kingdom on January 7,  2011.  There
    was an issue over her attending the course and her leave was  curtailed
    on June 7, 2011. She did not appeal that decision.

18. In May 2011 (some suggestion in their statements this was February 2010
    which  cannot  be  right)  the  appellant  and  sponsor   began   their
    relationship and they married on December 4, 2011 albeit they began  to
    live together from July 2011.

19. There were two refusal letters in this case but  the  relevant  refusal
    letter is dated September 17, 2013. Following the  hearing  before  the
    first Tier Tribunal on February 24, 2015  the  Tribunal  was  satisfied
    that the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met  and
    that the respondent should not  have  exercised  her  discretion  under
    paragraph 320 (11) HC 395. The only outstanding issue held against  the
    appellant was the genuineness and subsistence of the relationship.

20. Evidence of their relationship had been submitted to the Tribunal. Some
    of the evidence was submitted to the respondent directly  and  some  of
    the evidence was contained in a bundle submitted  to  the  Tribunal  on
    November 10, 2014.

21. Within the bundle were witness statements from both the  appellant  and
    the sponsor along  with  letters  of  support.  There  were  also  bank
    statements from HSBC in the sponsor's  sole  name  indicating  that  he
    lived at  55  Lynton  Road  London  and  there  were  also  joint  bank
    statements with the Nationwide showing the appellant and sponsor shared
    the same address. One  bank  statement  also  referred  to  a  previous
    address that they had claimed to have lived at together and there  were
    also medical cards confirming their address at the time  along  with  a
    number of photographs said to have  been  taken  in  Vietnam  when  the
    sponsor visited the appellant in November 2013.

22. The Tribunal was clearly aware of all of  this  evidence  as  there  is
    reference to the appellant's bundle  and  other  documentation  in  the
    determination.  The  Tribunal  also  referred  to  the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence at the Hearing.

23.  The  Tribunal  considered  all  of  the  evidence  and  found  in  the
    appellant's favour in respect of the refusal on both financial  grounds
    and under paragraph 320(11) HC 395.

24. The only remaining issue for the  tribunal,  was  the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of their marriage.

25. In her grounds of  appeal  Ms  Francis  has  also  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal should have made a finding as to whether the sponsor's earlier
    marriage meant this current marriage was not valid.

26. As regards Ms France's first ground of appeal I find this has no merit.
    The issue is not material to the matter in hand. Whilst the  respondent
    raised it in the refusal letter the Tribunal made  clear  at  paragraph
    [19] that it was deciding the appeal without reference  to  that  fact.
    The Tribunal did not make an adverse finding and the issue  of  whether
    the other matter was  legal  is  not  a  matter  which  undermined  the
    Tribunal's assessment of this marriage. If  the  Tribunal  had  made  a
    negative finding or had stated there were  ongoing  concerns,  then  Ms
    Francis may have had a valid point but as no issue  was  taken  by  the
    Tribunal on this point. I take that as  a  finding  that  the  Tribunal
    found there was no merit to that point.

27. The remaining issue and ground of appeal is whether  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to find the marriage was neither genuine nor subsisting.

28. The Tribunal made a negative finding against the sponsor in relation to
    how they came to meet in the United Kingdom and whether they knew  each
    other in Vietnam. Both  parties  indicated  they  came  from  the  same
    village but the sponsor's  evidence  was  that  he  did  not  know  the
    appellant before she came to United Kingdom and they were introduced by
    a mutual friend. The Tribunal had the benefit of hearing oral  evidence
    from the sponsor and viewed the sponsor's passport in  respect  of  the
    visit that took place on November 23,  2013.  The  Tribunal  noted  the
    sponsor had gone  to  visit  his  family  and  the  appellant  did  not
    accompany him on this occasion.

29. The Tribunal was entitled to form a view as to  the  marriage  on  that
    evidence but before doing so the tribunal considered other evidence.

30. In particular, it considered letters in the bundle but  noted  that  no
    supporting witnesses attended the hearing to give  evidence  that  they
    had lived together and that their marriage was subsisting. The tribunal
    found this to be a large omission.

31. Whilst there was some evidence  of  the  parties  living  together  the
    Tribunal found this was limited. Ms Francis submits that the Tribunal's
    failure to identify each part of the evidence  amounts  to  a  material
    error but the Tribunal is not obliged to list each piece  of  evidence.
    The Tribunal's task is to consider the available evidence and  to  then
    decide if the appellant has demonstrated the relationship  was  genuine
    and subsisting.

32. I have therefore reviewed the evidence submitted. Ms Francis  submitted
    that joint and sole bank statements  and  medical  cards  at  the  same
    address demonstrates the parties lived together. Such evidence  can  be
    evidence of parties living together but as the Tribunal made  clear  in
    Goudey where there are countervailing circumstances  a  Tribunal  could
    come to a different conclusion.

33. The Tribunal was not convinced by letters from third parties especially
    when none of those witnesses attended the  Hearing.  The  Tribunal  was
    entitled to make such a finding in circumstances where it had  concerns
    over how the parties first met.

34. The photographs carried limited weight when the appellant lived in  the
    same village as his family who the sponsor stated he had gone to  visit
    on that trip in November 2013. The absence of phone records was  factor
    relied on by the Tribunal. In Goudey the Tribunal said absence of phone
    records or did not mean the relationship was not subsisting where there
    were no countervailing circumstances. Again, the issue is how  did  the
    Tribunal assess the evidence.

35. This is not a decision where no findings or  reasons  were  given.  The
    Tribunal considered the evidence and whilst not detailing each piece of
    the evidence it made it clear that on the evidence submitted it was not
    satisfied that the relationship, at  the  date  of  the  decision,  was
    genuine and subsisting.

36. I agree with Ms Isherwood  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  a  mere
    disagreement with the decision  and  this  is  not  a  case  where  the
    Tribunal has made a material error.  The  findings  were  open  to  the
    Tribunal because concerns were properly raised about  the  relationship
    and some of those concerns arose out of the oral evidence given  before
    the first Tier Tribunal.

37. In the circumstances, I find no material error on either ground.

    DECISION

38. There was no material error.  I uphold the original decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
