
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18480/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 September 2013                        |On 10 September 2013       |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS BRENDA MURINGAYI
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
          For the Respondent: the sponsor, Mr H F Spinks

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The  appellant  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Pretoria.  The
      respondent is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 30 August 1985.  I
      will refer to them as the ECO and the  claimant  respectively.  On  31
      August 2012 the ECO refused the claimant's application  for  leave  to
      settle in the United Kingdom as the spouse of her husband and sponsor,
      Mr Spinks.


   2. The ECO refused the application under the provisions of Appendix FM of
      the Immigration Rules, concluding that the claimant had  not  met  the
      requirements because she had not submitted a written undertaking  from
      the sponsor to be responsible for her maintenance  and  accommodation,
      had not shown that her relationship with the sponsor was  genuine  and
      subsisting and that they intended to live together permanently in  the
      UK, had not provided the required documents to establish the sponsor's
      financial circumstances and had not passed an English-language test to
      the required standard.


   3. The claimant appealed and First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Ruth  heard  the
      appeal on 21 June 2013. The ECO was represented. The claimant was  not
      legally represented but the sponsor attended and gave evidence.


   4. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor and  made  findings  of
      fact in relation to that evidence.  He  found  the  sponsor  to  be  a
      credible witness. He concluded  that  the  ECO  had  not  applied  the
      correct Immigration Rule and should have decided the application under
      the provisions of paragraph 281 not Appendix FM. He allowed the appeal
      to the extent that it should be reconsidered  by  the  ECO  under  the
      provisions of paragraph 281.


   5. The ECO has appealed and been granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
      basis that the judge erred  in  law  because  the  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Rules which the claimant had to satisfy changed on 9  July
      2012.  The  claimant  made  her  application  on  20  July  2012.  For
      applications made after 9 July 2012 the requirements were contained in
      Appendix FM not paragraph 281.


   6. Insofar as permitted I did my best to assist Mr  Spinks  who  accepted
      that he had no legal expertise. I explained that after a careful study
      of the Immigration Rules including the changes made to them  from  the
      beginning of 2012 to date and any possible exceptions or  transitional
      provisions I found that the ECO's position, as set out in the  grounds
      and Mr Saunders submissions, was correct. Had the  claimant  made  her
      application on or before 9 July 2012 she would have had to satisfy the
      requirements of paragraph 281. Because her application  was  submitted
      after 9 July 2012 she had to meet the requirements of Appendix FM.


   7. On behalf of the claimant Mr Spinks accepted that at the date  of  the
      application and the date of the decision the claimant did not meet the
      requirements of Appendix FM. He believed that together they had  since
      put together all the documents and information which would  be  needed
      to meet the requirements of Appendix FM.


   8. I find that the judge erred in law and I set aside his decision. It is
      accepted that at the dates of application and  decision  the  claimant
      did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM.  No  Article  8  human
      rights grounds have been raised. In the  circumstances  I  remake  the
      decision by dismissing the claimant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.





      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 6 September 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
