
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18541/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 22nd October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before
                   MISS E E ARFON-JONES DL, VICE PRESIDENT
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                        MISS ANUSHKA ANNICA MCDONALD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - KINGSTON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chelliah (Forward & Yussuf, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  against  a
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge M A Khan)  promulgated
    on 10th July 2013 in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal to grant her leave  to  enter  as
    the child of her UK Sponsor.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer had refused the application  on  the  basis
    that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    301(i)(b), 301(i)(c), 301(iii), 301(iv) and 301(iva) of the Immigration
    Rules. The major issues were that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant and Sponsor were related as claimed,  that
    the Sponsor had had sole responsibility for the Appellant or  that  the
    Appellant could be maintained and accommodated in the UK.

 3. The Judge accepted, on the basis of DNA evidence before him,  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were related as  claimed.  However,  he  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  Sponsor  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant nor was he satisfied as to accommodation and maintenance  due
    to a lack of evidence before him.

 4. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted assert that the
    Judge erred in refusing to  adjourn  the  hearing  on  the  Appellant's
    representative's application to firstly await crucial documents in  the
    form of a court order from Jamaica which it was claimed was evidence of
    sole responsibility and secondly for the  attendance  of  the  Sponsor.
    Rather puzzlingly the grounds also assert the Judge erred  with  regard
    to his consideration of the DNA evidence, puzzling  because  the  Judge
    accepted that the DNA evidence showed the Appellant  and  Sponsor  were
    related as claimed.

 5. The Judge who granted permission found it arguable that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred because when dealing with  the  adjournment  request
    because he had referred himself to Rule 19  but  not  Rule  21  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

 6.  We note that at the First-tier Tribunal hearing there was no bundle of
    evidence provided by the Appellant, the Sponsor or  the  representative
    as directed. The only evidence before the Tribunal was the Respondent's
    bundle and the DNA Report produced at the hearing..

 7. It is clear that on the day of the  hearing  the  Sponsor  was  absent.
    There was no explanation for her absence  and  the  representative  was
    unable to provide any. The representative requested an  adjournment  on
    the basis that crucial evidence in  the  form  of  a  court  order  was
    awaited from Jamaica and that would establish sole responsibility.

 8. The Judge in the determination noted that there was no explanation  for
    the Sponsor's absence when she was clearly aware of the  hearing.  With
    regard  to  the  anticipated  evidence,  the  Judge  noted   that   the
    representatives had been involved in the  case  since  June  2012  (the
    hearing before him was in June 2013 and there had been  ample  time  to
    collate and submit evidence. It is true that the Judge referred only to
    Rule 19 of the Procedure Rules. Rule 19 provides when it is appropriate
    to hear an appeal in the absence of a party. The Judge  did  not  refer
    himself to Rule 21 which refers to the adjournment of appeals. Rule  21
    provides that where a party applies for an adjournment of  the  hearing
    of an appeal he must show good reason why an adjournment  is  necessary
    and produce evidence of any factual matter relied upon  in  support  of
    the application. Secondly, Rule 21 provides that the Tribunal must  not
    adjourn the hearing of an appeal on the application of a party,  unless
    satisfied that the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.

 9. In this case the Judge  was  faced  with  an  absent  Sponsor  with  no
    explanation whatsoever despite legal representation. He was  told  that
    crucial  evidence  was  awaited  but  no  evidence  that  it  had  been
    requested, who it was coming from and when it was expected.  There  was
    no explanation for the absence of an Appellant's bundle. Furthermore an
    adjournment application had been previously made and  refused  for  the
    same reason.

10. Under the circumstances, failing to specifically refer to Rule 21  made
    no difference to the outcome. The Judge was perfectly entitled  to  and
    indeed was required to proceed with the appeal in the circumstances  of
    this case.

11. We are fortified in that view because despite permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal having been granted, we still have no statement from
    the Sponsor  explaining why it was that she was absent from the hearing
    and we have still been provided with no application to submit the court
    order which was apparently so crucial to the Appellant's case.  That is
    a strong indication that no such document exists. Had we been presented
    with a statement from an apologetic Sponsor giving good reason for  her
    absence with the crucial evidence attached our decision might have been
    different.

12. We would add that without any application to adduce further evidence Mr
    Chelliah sought to rely on a sizeable bundle of evidence that  was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal. We indicated that we would entertain an
    application to submit additional evidence only if we decided the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination contained an error of law  such  that  it
    should be set aside. We did not so find.

13. The First-tier Tribunal's determination does not contain  an  error  of
    law and it is upheld. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 18th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

