
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/19519/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th June 2015                    |17th July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              PASCALIA McCARTHY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bussenius (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applied for entry to the UK  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national. The application was refused and the appeal  dismissed.  There
    was an issue with regard to the Sponsor's legal ability to marry  which
    has been addressed and is no longer relevant. The appeal was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Whiting in a decision promulgated  on  the
    28th of May 2014.

 2. The Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused. It was renewed by  the  Sponsor  and  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on the 23rd of September 2014. This  was  on
    the basis that the Sponsor had been granted a residence permit in  2011
    and it was arguable that the findings at paragraphs 14, 15 and 17 might
    not have been open to her.

 3. The findings at paragraphs 14, 15 and 17 relate to whether the  Sponsor
    was a qualified person within the meaning of the  EEA  Regulations  and
    whether the evidence of his receiving DLA  was  evidence  of  permanent
    incapacity. The Secretary of State maintains that the decision was open
    to the Judge on the evidence that was provided.

 4. The Sponsor's EEA residence card is contained  within  the  papers  and
    shows that it was issued to the Sponsor on the 24th of  March  2011  at
    Liverpool. The stamp also indicates that it  was  a  renewal.  That  is
    evidence that the Sponsor was in the UK as a qualified EEA national, it
    has to be taken that his residence card would not have been renewed  if
    it had not been accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  that  he  was  a
    qualified persons. This is  supported  by  medical  evidence  that  his
    incapacity to work  was  brought  about  by  a  degenerative  condition
    clearly that is not something that would get better, at best  it  might
    stabilise.

 5. Simply put the Judge erred in failing to consider that the issue of the
    residence card to the Sponsor in 2011 was itself evidence of his  being
    a qualified person. In the absence of subsequent evidence to contradict
    what the Secretary of State had previously accepted to be the  case  it
    was not open to the Judge to find that the Appellant had not discharged
    the burden of proof in that regard.

 6. The decision contains an error with  regard  to  the  Sponsor  being  a
    qualified person and as that is central the Appellant's case the  error
    is clearly material. Given the evidence that is within the papers  that
    the Sponsor is a qualified person I set aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Whiting and remake the decision allowing the appeal of  the  Appellant.
    For the avoidance of doubt I find  that  the  Sponsor  is  a  qualified
    person within the meaning of the EEA Regulations.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  allowing  the  appeal  of  Pascalia
McCarthy.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.





Fee Award

In the light of the decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award  (rule  23A
(costs) o f the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and
section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

In allowing the appeal I make a whole fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th July 2015
