
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19896/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 November 2013                         |On 13 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MISS MUSLIMA KHANOM
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Not legally
           represented. Her father and sponsor attended.
          For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 12
      April 2005. She has been given permission to appeal the  determination
      of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Shepherd ("the FTTJ") who  dismissed  her
      appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  18  September  2012  to
      refuse to grant a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode  in
      the UK ("the Certificate").  The  appellant  and  her  younger  sister
      Mukaroma who  was  born  on  16  January  2007  both  applied  to  the
      respondent at the same time and both were refused for essentially  the
      same reasons.


   2. The sponsor for the appellant and her sister is  their  father,  Mozir
      Khan, a registered British  citizen  originally  from  Bangladesh  who
      lives in Essex with his first wife, the children of their marriage and
      three children by his second marriage. The mother of the appellant and
      her sister is the second and polygamous wife of the  sponsor  and  she
      lives in Bangladesh.


   3. The basis of the applications made by the appellant and her sister  is
      that they are both the children  of  the  sponsor  who  is  a  British
      citizen otherwise than by descent and who has the right to  pass  this
      entitlement to a right of abode to his children.


   4. In the absence of DNA  evidence  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
      appellant and her sister had not  established  that  the  sponsor  was
      their father. There was no evidence as to arrangements for their  care
      or education in the UK, that he had supported them or  made  important
      decisions in their lives. It was not suggested that their mother would
      leave Bangladesh. The respondent  also  considered  but  rejected  the
      application on Article 8 human rights grounds.


   5. The appellant and her sister appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on
      6 June 2013.  They  were  not  legally  represented  but  the  sponsor
      attended on their behalf. The respondent  was  represented.  The  FTTJ
      heard evidence from the sponsor through an interpreter. He was offered
      but declined an adjournment in order to obtain legal representation.


   6. The sponsor produced DNA test results and other original documents all
      of which were accepted as genuine. The Presenting Officer conceded and
      the FTTJ found that the DNA evidence established that the sponsor  was
      the father of the appellant and her sister. She found the  sponsor  to
      be a credible witness.


   7. The FTTJ found that the sponsor was domiciled in England and Wales and
      that for the purposes of English matrimonial and nationality  law  the
      appellant and her sister were  born  outside  a  lawful  marriage  and
      remained so. She said, in paragraph 43; "the respondent avers that  to
      acquire citizenship  "by  descent"  requires  that  it  is  legitimate
      descent. This is the sole issue in the appeal."


   8. The FTTJ found that three of the  sponsor's  children  by  his  second
      marriage who had come to this country were presumed to  be  legitimate
      by virtue of Section 1 of the 1976 Legitimacy Act but this was not the
      case for any subsequent children.  Whilst  there  was  no  legislation
      which assisted the appellant her younger  sister  benefited  from  the
      provisions of the British Nationality (Proof of Paternity) Regulations
      2006 made under Section 50 (9B) of the British Nationality  Act  1981.
      This provides that for children born after 1 July 2006 citizenship  by
      descent and acquisition of the right of abode through their father  no
      longer depended on legitimacy,  whether  presumed  or  otherwise.  Her
      legitimacy was no longer a bar  to  tracing  nationality  through  the
      father who was either (a) the father named in  the  birth  certificate
      issued within one year of the birth of the children or (c) was able to
      satisfy requirements as to proof of paternity under  the  Regulations.
      The FTTJ said and I  agree  that  it  was  unfortunate  that  for  the
      appellant these provisions did not apply to her because  her  date  of
      birth was before 1 July 2006. The FTTJ concluded that she  was  forced
      to the conclusion that, whilst allowing the appeal of the  appellant's
      sister, the appellant's appeal failed  under  the  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Act  1971  and  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.  She
      dismissed the appellant's appeal.


   9. The sponsor applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  appellant's
      behalf. A judge in the First-Tier Tribunal granted permission  on  the
      basis that; "the grounds of appeal essentially refer to the desire  to
      have a family together in the  UK.  The  appellant's  qualified  right
      under Article 8 was considered by the entry clearance  officer  and  a
      not restrictive interpretation of ground 2 of the original grounds  of
      appeal might suggest that the appellant was relying on Article 8. This
      was not a matter dealt with by the judge and could therefore  be  said
      to be an arguable error in  law.  As  such  permission  to  appeal  is
      granted."


  10. The sponsor appeared before me, accompanied by one  of  his  sons.  He
      said  that  the  family  could  not  afford  legal  representation.  I
      explained the nature of my task and that I would assist him as far  as
      I could. It was clear and he accepted that he was in  no  position  to
      deal with the legal aspects of the appeal. The main point he wished to
      make was that all his children by his second marriage were now in this
      country legally, except for the appellant's sister who would be coming
      soon, the appellant and another son born to  his  second  wife  on  14
      January 2013.


  11. I accept that what is said in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, whilst making no mention of "Article 8" or  "human  rights",
      can properly be interpreted as raising some  matters  which  would  be
      relevant to any Article 8 grounds. I note that Article 8  issues  were
      addressed by the respondent in the refusal  document.  I  cannot  find
      anything in the grounds of appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  which
      expressly or by implication raises Article  8  human  rights  grounds.
      However, the FTTJ did address  Article  8;  in  paragraph  52  of  her
      determination she said;


         "I have considered the matter  in  the  light  of  Article  8,  but
         concluded that even if it was shown that there has been established
         a family life in the UK between (the sponsor) and (the  appellant),
         such that denial of an entry clearance would be a  disproportionate
         interference, I remind myself that there is  no  appeal  before  me
         concerning an application for entry clearance. The application  the
         subject of this appeal was for the issue of a Certificate to  which
         the appellant maintained she was  entitled  on  the  basis  of  her
         biological relationship with a British citizen, and the law  as  it
         currently stands. The facts have demonstrated that she is  not,  in
         my view, so entitled and that is the  limit  of  this  appeal.  The
         mechanism by which a positive finding under Article 8 may result in
         the grant to a discretionary period of leave to enter or remain  in
         the UK may not be deployed to direct the foreign post  to  issue  a
         Certificate as to facts which manifestly may not be so certified."


  12. The appellant had a  right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
      Certificate under s 82 (1) and (2) (c) of the Nationality, Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002. The grounds of appeal available  to  her  include
      human rights grounds under s 84 (1) (c) of the same Act. The  question
      arises as to what, if any, remedy is available to the appellant if  it
      was found that the decision to refuse her the Certificate breached her
      Article 8 human rights. I agree with the FTTJ that it would not be  an
      appropriate remedy to issue her with a Certificate to  which  she  was
      otherwise not entitled. One possible alternative would be for  her  to
      be given entry clearance to the UK, possibly for settlement. No  doubt
      this is what she wants but it is not what she asked for. I  reach  the
      same conclusion as the FTTJ and find that in this regard she  did  not
      err in law.


  13. However if I am mistaken and there is an appropriate remedy  available
      to the appellant on Article 8 human rights grounds then  I  find  that
      there was insufficient evidence before the FTTJ  which,  on  a  proper
      assessment, could have led her to the  conclusion  that  there  was  a
      disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  Article  8  human
      rights. There is some relevant information, for example the status and
      place of residence of the sponsor, his first and second wives and most
      of the children by his second wife and the unfortunate legal  position
      which permits one sister to come to this country but not the other. On
      the other hand there is likely to be far more  information  which  has
      not been  provided  but  would  be  available  and  important  to  the
      assessment of any Article 8 grounds. The  appellant  and  the  sponsor
      were put on notice as to what some of this information might be in the
      refusal document,  for  example  the  support  the  sponsor  has  been
      providing for the appellant in Bangladesh, who  has  been  making  the
      important decisions in her life, the arrangements for the  appellant's
      care and education in the UK  and  the  position  of  the  appellant's
      mother in her life bearing in mind that she  as  a  polygamous  second
      wife is unlikely to obtain leave to come to this country if indeed she
      wants to.


  14. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law or, if she did in relation  to
      any Article 8 human rights grounds that any judge  properly  directing
      him or herself would inevitably have come to the same conclusion.  Any
      error is not one which should result  in  the  setting  aside  of  the
      decision. I uphold the FTTJ's decision.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 8 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

