
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19195/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th April 2014                             |On 15th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                                   MR Z R

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Applicant:                        Mr N Bramble, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr I Palmer of Counsel, instructed by
                           Camden Community Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 25th  March  1968.   On
    3rd  April  2011  he  made  an  application  for  entry  clearance  for
    settlement with his wife in the United Kingdom.   The  application  was
    refused on 21st June  2011  by  reference  to  paragraphs  320(18)  and
    281(iv) of the Immigration Rules HC 395.

2.   Paragraph 320(18) indicates that entry  clearance  should  normally  be
    refused

         "save where the Immigration Officer  is  satisfied  that  admission
         would be justified for strong compassionate reasons, conviction  in
         any country including the United Kingdom of an  offence  which,  if
         committed in the United Kingdom, is  punishable  with  imprisonment
         for a term of twelve  months  or  any  greater  punishment  or,  if
         committed outside the United Kingdom, would be so punishable if the
         conduct  constituting  the  offence  had  occurred  in  the  United
         Kingdom".

3.   The claimant had  been  convicted  of  the  murder  of  two  people  in
    Bangladesh in 1990 and had been sentenced to life imprisonment.  He had
    been released in 1997 due to a  general  amnesty  for  good  behaviour.
    However the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  of  the  opinion  that  his
    admission into the United Kingdom was not in the public interest.

4.   As to paragraph 281(iv) it was  not  considered  that  there  would  be
    adequate maintenance for the parties without recourse to public  funds.
    The Entry Clearance  Officer  considered  that  the  claimant  had  not
    provided satisfactory evidence in respect of the accommodation that  he
    proposed to occupy.  The marriage had taken place on  25th  March  1998
    when  the  sponsor  was  fully  aware  of   the   claimant's   personal
    circumstances.  She was free to  visit  Bangladesh  and  to  remain  in
    contact with the appellant thereby.

5.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Blair-Gould on 18th January 2012.

6.   The Judge upheld the decision of  the  ECO  in  relation  to  paragraph
    320(18) but not that in relation to paragraph 281(iv).

7.   The Judge however went on to consider Article 8 and allowed the  appeal
    on that basis.

8.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision potentially on the basis that the Judge failed to
    appreciate the importance of protecting  the  public  interest  by  not
    allowing murderers to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.   She  argued  that
    Article 8 was inadequately reasoned and in any event the findings  were
    starkly at variance with the  fact  that  the  Judge  upheld  paragraph
    320(18).  It was submitted that there was a failure  of  logic  on  the
    part of the Judge.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Froom on 3rd May 2012.

10.  The significant  feature  then,  and  indeed  now  before  me,  is  the
    accepted position that the Secretary of State for the Home  Office  was
    substantially and significantly out of time in lodging the  application
    for leave to appeal.  The hearing  took  place  on  18th  January  2012
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge.    The   determination   was
    promulgated on 1st February 2012 and it is accepted by all parties that
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department received notification of
    that decision on 1st February 2012.  Nevertheless it was not until 25th
    April 2012 that the appeal was received.

11.  The reasons provided in the grounds of appeal for the  late  submission
    was as follows:-

         "For reasons unknown to Specialist Appeals  Team,  the  appellant's
         allowed determination was not received by the team.  The first time
         the  allowed  determination  came  to  light  was  when  the  Entry
         Clearance Assistant emailed the Specialist  Appeals  Team  on  25th
         April  2012  (today)  asking  for   an   official   copy   of   the
         determination, as the ECO was supplied with a copy by the appellant
         (email from the Entry Clearance  Assistant  is  attached  for  your
         perusal).


         In view  of  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
         appellant, the Entry Clearance Officer seeks an extension  of  time
         in this rather unique case, where public interest is paramount."

12.  Judge Froom having considered that explanation  granted  the  requested
    extension of time.

13.  That extension  of  time  was  challenged  by  and  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  The matter came for  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman on 1st October 2012.  It was his ruling that the  Tribunal  had
    no  jurisdiction  to  reconsider  that  grant  of  permission  and   in
    particular the time point  itself.   Those  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant sought to suggest that the explanation that had  been  offered
    to justify the extension of time was not the correct one and that Judge
    Froom had proceeded to grant that extension upon a false  and  mistaken
    basis.  Judge Freeman indicated that, whatever may be the position, the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to interfere with that grant or  with  the
    extension.  It was a matter that could only  be  resolved  by  judicial
    review.

14.  Thus it  was  that  the  claimant  through  his  solicitors  instituted
    judicial review proceedings successfully as it transpired  against  the
    decision of Judge Froom of 3rd May 2012.  There is  within  the  bundle
    the judgment of Mr Justice Ouseley of 24th May 2013.  The Judge  upheld
    the decision of Judge Freeman that a  challenge  to  a  refusal  of  an
    extension of time was a decision  excluded  by  the  provision  of  the
    Tribunal Rules.

15.  Mr Justice Ouseley in his judgment, particularly at paragraphs  13  and
    14 thereof, noted that the Secretary of  State  had  knowledge  of  the
    decision in time; took a decision that no appeal  would  be  made;  and
    there then followed a chapter of  accidents  (which  is  not  necessary
    further to set out) which meant that Judge Froom was not told  what  he
    needed to be told about when the determination was received and when  a
    decision not to appeal had been made which  had  led  to  a  misleading
    argument being presented to him.  The Secretary of State also  conceded
    that the Judge had got the period of delay wrong though that  was  less
    important when the reason for extension was a good one.   It  was  also
    clear that the claimant and his advisors were not  at  all  responsible
    for the mistake.

16.  Thus it was with consent that the decision of Judge Froom  on  3rd  May
    2012 was quashed.      In effect  therefore  matters  reverted  to  the
    situation that  it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department to make the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That application was duly done.

17.  The reasons for the delay between 1st February 2012 when  the  decision
    was notified and 25th April 2012 when the appeal was lodged were  dealt
    with in this way in the grounds of appeal:-

         "The appeal in this case was allowed on 1st February 2012.   An  in
         time application for permission to  appeal  was  not  made  by  9th
         February 2012 as due to resource constraints,  the  allowed  appeal
         was not considered by the Specialist Appeals  Team  (SAT)  by  that
         time.  A member of SAT looked at the determination on 14th February
         2012, decided not to challenge the case because the time limit  had
         passed, and on that basis he did not look at the  determination  in
         detail or consider the merits of the decision.   The  SAT  official
         did not record his actions on the Home Office database and the  ECO
         post was not  notified  of  the  decision.   Admittedly  these  are
         serious failings by the Home Office for which we offer our  sincere
         apologies.


         The determination came to the attention of SAT again on 25th  April
         2012 when an Entry Clearance Assistant emailed SAT to ask  for  the
         official copy of the determination  of  the  Tribunal.   The  email
         included the appellant's copy of the determination and a  different
         SAT official considered the determination and, under the impression
         that the FtT determination had never been received by the Secretary
         of State and unaware of the earlier  decision  not  to  appeal  it,
         lodged an out of time application for permission  to  appeal.   The
         SAT official was of the view that the public  interest  in  such  a
         case constituted special reasons for extending the time limit."


18.  It was submitted that there are special circumstances that  would  make
    it unjust for the time limit not to be extended.   Reliance  is  placed
    upon BO & Others (extension of time for appealing)  Nigeria  [2006]  in
    that there are sufficient reasons in the case to justify extending  the
    time limit.  The grounds go on

         "it is accepted that a member of SAT looked at the determination on
         14th February and decided not to  appeal.   It  is  submitted  that
         although the initial delay in identifying this  issue  is,  at  the
         very least, regrettable, the corrective action in making the  first
         application outside the time limit  was  made  promptly  after  SAT
         became  aware  of  the  significance  of  the  case.   This  second
         application has also been made after the judicial  review  and  was
         concluded."


    It was further said that the  consequences  of  the  failure  to  grant
    permission to extend the  time  limit  would  be  that  a  decision  of
    questionable legality remained unchallenged and would  allow  a  double
    murderer to enter the United Kingdom.

19.  The permission to appeal upon that application  was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor on 6th January  2014.   It  was  noted  that  the
    application was 57 days out of time the findings of Judge  Taylor  were
    as follows:-

         "This application is self-evidently significantly out of time.  The
         determination was considered by a member of the Specialist  Appeals
         Tribunal Team and it was decided by a member of that  team  not  to
         challenge the decision.  It appears it  was  only  when  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer brought the determination  to  the  attention  of
         another member of the team that a decision was made  to  challenge.
         This is therefore not a case  where  the  respondent  has,  through
         resource issues, failed to look at the decision  at  all,  but  has
         considered it, made a decision and then changed her mind.  This  is
         not a proper basis upon which to grant permission to appeal out  of
         time."


    She went on to conclude that on the merits the decision was  one  which
    the Judge was entitled to reach and could not be upset on the basis  of
    disagreement with the findings.  Thus permission to appeal was refused.

20.  It is in those circumstances that the matter comes  before  me  seeking
    to renew that application for the Upper-tier Tribunal under  the  terms
    and conditions of Rule 21 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

21.  Significantly Rule 21(7) applies in this case namely that:-

         "If the appellant makes an application to the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal against the decision of another Tribunal,  and
         that other Tribunal refused to admit  the  appellant's  application
         for permission to appeal because the application for permission  or
         for a written statement of reasons was not made in time -


         (a)  the application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal
             must include the reason  why  the  application  to  the  other
             Tribunal for permission to appeal or for a  written  statement
             of reasons, as the case may be, was not made in time; and


         (b)  the Upper Tribunal must only  admit  the  application  if  the
             Upper Tribunal considers  that  it  is  in  the  interests  of
             justice for it to do so."


22.  I turn therefore to consider the grounds that are submitted  before  me
    on the matter of the out of time aspect.  Those grounds  are  identical
    to those submitted in the  application  considered  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Taylor.

23.  Mr  Bramble  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department relies  upon  such  grounds.    He  submits  that  there  is
    considerable merit in the challenges that are made to the  decision  of
    Judge Blair-Gould in the determination.  He submits that  the  findings
    of fact are contradictory because on the one hand the Judge upholds the
    decision made under Rule  320(11)  and  yet  allows  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

24.  He draws my attention to paragraph 59 of the  judgment  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who says as follows:-

         "In my opinion there are not such strong compassionate  reasons  as
         to show that the appellant's admission is justified in the face  of
         the normal requirement to exclude those who have been convicted  of
         an offence carrying only twelve months imprisonment.   I  therefore
         reject the appellant under paragraph  320(18)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

25.  Having not found there  to  be  strong  compassionate  reasons,  it  is
    illogical ,submits Mr Bramble, for the Judge to conclude in considering
    Article 8 that the continuing exclusion from the United Kingdom  is  in
    the particular circumstances disproportionate to  the  requirement  for
    the strict maintenance of the United  Kingdom's  immigration  controls.
    If there were not sufficiently compassionate circumstances  to  prevent
    the operation of paragraph  320(18)  he  submits  that  there  are  not
    sufficient compassionate or compelling circumstances  as  to  admit  of
    Article 8.  He contends, therefore, that there are very strong  grounds
    which justify an appeal particularly in the light of the sensitivity of
    this case of admitting a double murderer into the United Kingdom.

26.  Both parties have submitted a skeleton argument and that  submitted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home Department  reflects  the
    reasons for the delay as set out in the grounds both before myself  and
    before Judge Taylor.

27.  Mr Palmer, who represents  the  appellant,  submits  in  the  strongest
    possible terms that grounds now relied upon for the extension  of  time
    are not accurately set out and  indeed  are  in  contradiction  to  the
    grounds that were presented before the High Court  in  the  application
    for permission for judicial review  proceedings.   Not  only  were  the
    grounds as presented before Judge Froom accepted as being inaccurate he
    invites me to find that they are still inaccurate as  presented  before
    me and as relied upon by Mr Bramble.

28.  Mr Palmer relies upon a skeleton argument upon the  appellant's  bundle
    of documents many of which were documents presented to the  High  Court
    in the judicial review proceedings.

29.  He invites my attention firstly to pages  77  and  78  of  that  bundle
    which is a letter from TSol dated 30th November  2012  written  to  the
    Camden Community Law Centre that is the solicitors acting on behalf  of
    the claimant.

     The relevant passage reads as follows:-

         "I have taken instructions from my client and it would appear  that
         the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  in  fact  been
         received by the Specialist Appeals Team on 12th February  2012  and
         an initial decision taken by a Senior Presenting Officer (SPO)  not
         to appeal.  Unfortunately,  a  record  of  this  decision  was  not
         recorded on UKBA's case information database.


         Further, the determination does appear to have  been  sent  to  the
         entry clearance post in Dhaka on 14th February, although it is  not
         clear why the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  did  not  see  a  copy
         until it was provided to him by the claimant on 25th April.


         On 25th April,  a  second  SPO,  having  received  a  copy  of  the
         determination directly from the ECO and unaware of the decision  of
         12th  February,  proceeded  to  file  grounds  of  appeal.   As   a
         consequence, it would unfortunately appear that the application for
         extension of time was unintentionally made on an erroneous basis.


         In the light of this error my client accepts it would  be  sensible
         to agree to an  order  quashing  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal dated 4th May 2012 granting permission to  appeal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal."

30.  There is as set out at pages 68 to  70  the  first  interested  party's
    detailed grounds of defence as presented  to  the  High  Court  in  the
    course of  the  proceedings,  the  first  interested  party  being  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.

31.  Paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 are relevant and set out as follows:-

         "FTTJ Blair-Gould's decision was sent to the Secretary  of  State,
         as agent for the second interested party, and received on or before
         2nd February 2012.  On  2nd  February  2012,  a  Senior  Presenting
         Officer, who had access to the decision only  and  not  the  appeal
         file decided not to appeal FTTJ Blair-Gould's  decision.   On  14th
         February 2012, the Secretary of State forwarded FTTJ  Blair-Gould's
         decision to the second interested party.  It would appear that  the
         second interested party never received the determination"

         On 23rd February 2012, the claimant's  solicitors  telephoned  the
         Tribunal Services and were informed that no appeal had been  lodged
         by the second interested party.  On 20th March 2012, the claimant's
         solicitors telephoned the  Secretary  of  State's  "Allowed  Appeal
         Section" and were informed that the determination had been sent  to
         the  second  interested  party  on  14th  February   2012   (second
         interested party being the ECO).

          On  23rd  April  2012,  the  claimant's  solicitors  emailed  the
         "Immigration Enquiries" at the British High  Commission  in  Dhaka,
         asking why the claimant's entry clearance had not yet been  granted
         in accordance with his allowed appeal.  On  24th  April  2012,  the
         Immigration Enquiries section responded by informing the claimant's
         solicitors that it had not received a copy  of  the  determination.
         It asked the claimant's solicitors to forward a copy.  They did  so
         on 25th April 2012.  On the same day, the second  interested  party
         forwarded the determination to the Secretary of State's  Specialist
         Appeals Team (SAT) and requested SAT to forward the  official  copy
         of the determination.  A Senior Executive Officer at SAT, under the
         impression that the FTT determination had never  been  received  by
         the Secretary of State and unaware of the earlier decision  not  to
         appeal it, lodged an appeal along with an application for extension
         of time on behalf of the second interested party.

         The application for extension of time was in the following terms:-

             'The appellant was convicted for double murders in  Bangladesh
             in 1990 for which he received a life  sentence.   For  reasons
             unknown  to  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team,  the  appellant's
             allowed determination was not received by the team.  The first
             time the allowed determination came  to  light  was  when  the
             Entry Clearance Assistant emailed the Specialist Appeals  Team
             on 25th April 2012 (today) asking for an official copy of  the
             determination, as the ECO was supplied  with  a  copy  by  the
             appellant (email from Entry Clearance  Assistant  is  attached
             for your perusal).  In view of the seriousness of the  offence
             committed by the appellant, the Entry Clearance Officer  seeks
             an extension of time in this rather unique case, where  public
             interest is paramount.'


         The Secretary of State has been unable to determine why the initial
         decision not to appeal the determination was  made  by  the  Senior
         Executive Officer on 25th April 2012."

32.  It is to be noted that in the letter to the claimant's  solicitors,  to
    which reference has been  made,  at  page  77  said  firstly  that  the
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal was not received by the  Specialist
    Appeals Team until 12th February but it was sent to the entry clearance
    post on 14th February.

33.  In the detailed grounds of defence the date is 2nd  February  and  that
    has been repeated on a number of occasions.  The significance being  of
    course that if it was received on 2nd February that  was  in  time  and
    would have enabled the SAT to have drafted and lodged  the  appropriate
    grounds of appeal had they so decided.

34.  In the detailed grounds of defence  that  were  filed  and  dated  11th
    February 2013 it was noted as indeed I have just noted in paragraph  12
    the following:-

         "The Secretary of State  has  been  unable  to  determine  why  the
         initial  decision  of  2nd  February  2012  not   to   appeal   the
         determination was not evident to the Senior  Executive  Officer  on
         25th April 2012."

35.  A year on there has still been no explanation from that officer  as  to
    why a decision was made not to appeal the decision, particularly as  it
    is maintained throughout that this  was  an  important  case  involving
    public interest.

36.  Of more concern, however, submits Mr Palmer is  that  the  explanation,
    set out either in the letter to the solicitors dated 30th November 2012
    or as set out in the detailed grounds of defence to the High  Court  is
    at complete variance with what is now said to be the grounds of  appeal
    for extension.  There is no mention of the fact that the  determination
    was received by 2nd or 12th  and  considered  by  a  Senior  Presenting
    Officer at SAT.  The explanation now advanced is that the determination
    was received on 14th February and because that it was out of time  when
    received that such informed the decision not to appeal.  Indeed it  was
    only after the matter had come to the attention of the SAT team on 25th
    April 2012 that a copy of the determination was  emailed  to  the  ECO.
    There is the contention made in the detailed grounds of defence that it
    was sent  on 14th February to the ECO with no explanation as to why the
    ECO did not get it.

37.  The High Court had  quashed  the  decision  of  Judge  Froom  precisely
    because misleading information had been given to him by  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department as to the circumstances giving rise to
    the delay.  That has not prevented, says Mr Palmer, the fact  that  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department now  furnishes  two  further
    and conflicting explanations, one to the High  Court  and  one  to  the
    Tribunal.  He invites me to find  that  before  exercising  any  powers
    under Rule  21  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  clear  reason  why  the
    application was late  and  that  having  three  different  explanations
    presented on occasions, when truthful and  accurate  explanations  were
    required, fundamentally undermines the credibility of the Secretary  of
    State in giving an accurate account of those circumstances.

38.  On one account there would seem to be two if not three  occasions  when
    the papers were considered by SAT and no decision made to  appeal.   It
    has only when  the  claimant's  solicitors  themselves,  in  seeking  a
    response from the Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  alerted
    that department to the determination.

39.  I invited Mr Bramble to address me as  to  the  apparent  conflict  and
    contradiction that is presented in the explanation provided to the High
    Court that the  determination  was  received  by  a  Senior  Presenting
    Officer on 2nd February 2012 who had made a decision not to appeal  the
    matter.  I asked him how that could be reconciled with his own  grounds
    of appeal that such a consideration took place on  14th  February  that
    there was a decision made at that time because the case was out of time
    not to proceed further.

40.   Mr  Bramble  said  that  he  had  been  unable  to  get  any   further
    clarification of the circumstances other  than  he  presumes  that  his
    grounds give more detail to the event than otherwise.

41.  For my part I find it difficult if  not  impossible  to  reconcile  the
    various accounts that have been presented.  Given the acceptance by the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department in the letter from TSol that
    an inaccurate account of the reasons for the delay had  been  given  to
    Judge Froom, it falls very squarely upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    provide  an  accurate  and  correct  account   of   the   circumstances
    thereafter.

42.  It is to be hoped that the detailed grounds of defence, as drafted  and
    presented to the High Court, were perhaps the most accurate  reflection
    of what had transpired.  Key to that  is  the  paragraph  12  that  the
    Secretary of State  has  been  unable  to  determine  why  the  initial
    decision of 2nd February 2012 not to appeal the determination  was  not
    evident to the Senior Executive Officer on 25th  April  2012.   Perhaps
    more of relevance would  be  to  clarify  with  the  Senior  Presenting
    Officer who considered the matter on 2nd February as to why  an  appeal
    was not lodged.  It seems to me that an explanation for not having  the
    file is a poor explanation in  reality.   The  determination  of  Judge
    Blair-Gould is of some length and sets out with clarity the issues  and
    the concerns.  Uppermost in the mind of the Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department is the admission  of  a  convicted  murderer  into  the
    United Kingdom.  That would have been perfectly apparent to the  Senior
    Presenting Officer who looked at the determination on 2nd February.

43.  As I say I find it impossible to reconcile the suggestion that  it  was
    looked at on 2nd February with the suggestion that it was first  looked
    at on 14th February when out of time.

44.  There has been ample opportunity to obtain various  witness  statements
    from the various parties concerned as to why this decision was made and
    that decision was not.  It was perfectly  apparent  to  all  that  were
    concerned with this case that central to the hearing before me would be
    the question  of  timeliness.   This  omission  is  compounded  by  the
    acceptance of the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  for  Mr
    Justice Ouseley that  misleading  an  incorrect  information  had  been
    provided to the Tribunal on a previous occasion.

45.  It is noted in the determination that the three children were  born  on
    28th December 1998, 12th April 2005 and 21st March  2008.   As  at  the
    time of the application being made they were 12, 6 and 3 years old.  It
    was the finding of the Judge which  has  not  been  challenged  in  any
    grounds of appeal that they  are  British  citizens,  that  their  best
    interests lie with being with their mother.  Because of  their  British
    nationality it was the finding of the Judge at paragraph 71 that  there
    was now no question of the claimant's wife and children living with the
    appellant  in  Bangladesh,  notwithstanding  that  the   claimant   was
    economically self-sufficient and were established there  with  a  house
    and business.  The Judge finds that the best interests of the  children
    and indeed of Ms Begum is for the claimant to live with  them.   Whilst
    the concerns as expressed of having  a  double  murderer  come  to  the
    United Kingdom, the Judge notes that he was  released  from  prison  in
    1997 for good behaviour and finds  that  he  is  a  genuinely  reformed
    character repenting of his offences and remorseful of what he has done.
     He is regarded locally as a man of integrity and honesty.  He  runs  a
    shop and established himself as a law abiding and  worthwhile  citizen.
    Mr Choudhury gave evidence concerning the perception of the claimant in
    his home area and that evidence was accepted  by  the  Judge  as  being
    credible.

46.  The Judge recognised that normally international  criminals  should  be
    excluded from the United Kingdom but came to the conclusion that in the
    light of all the circumstances that  the  continued  exclusion  of  him
    could no longer be justified. Reasons are given for that.

47.  It is somewhat difficult I  recognise  to  reconcile  the  findings  at
    paragraph 54 that the public interest in the exclusion of the  claimant
    outweighs the children's best interests the conclusion at paragraph  81
    that that continued exclusion can no longer be justified.

48.  Mr Palmer  seeks  to  argue  that  different  considerations  arose  in
    relation to a decision under  the  Immigration  Rules  than  arises  in
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Tribunal in MF has set out the relationship
    as between Immigration Rules and Article 8.  It is  only  if  there  is
    something particularly compelling outside  the  Rules  that  Article  8
    would be engaged, hence the difficulty in reconciling paragraph 59 with
    81.

49.  In one sense the children were conceived in circumstances when  it  was
    clear that it would be unlikely that the claimant would be permitted to
    come to the United Kingdom but equally  the  decision  by  the  parents
    should not be visited upon the children without good reason.  It is the
    children that is  a  primary  consideration  but  not  necessarily  the
    overriding consideration.

50.  Equally the public interest is not served by  an  unrepentant  murderer
    arriving in the United Kingdom but in this case  the  Judge,  for  good
    reasons, has found that the claimant is reformed and presents no threat
    to society indeed has contributed in a positive way to society.

51.  In looking at the merits of the matter I pay regard to the  grounds  of
    appeal and the way in which they are drafted.   It  is  said  that  the
    Judge failed to take into account the public  interest.   It  is  clear
    however the Judge has taken that into account.   It  is  said  that  it
    would be difficult to see how the  Tribunal  can  mitigate  the  public
    interest, in the absence of  any  material  change  in  the  claimant's
    circumstances since his original appeal was dismissed  in  2003.   That
    again is not an accurate statement of the findings  of  the  Judge  who
    made it clear why it was considered that  there  had  been  significant
    change over that period.  Perhaps the most relevant ground  is  as  set
    out as to why the Tribunal found it appropriate to allow the claimant's
    Article 8 claim when  dismissed  the  claim  under  paragraph  320(18).
    That  having  been  said,  the  Tribunal  has  recognised  on  previous
    occasions in respect of Rules barring entry clearance, that  there  may
    come a  time  where  the  interests  of  the  individual  outweigh  the
    interests of the public particularly given the effusion of time and  of
    the change  in the individual.

52.  In  considering  whether  or  not  to  admit  the  application  in  the
    interests of justice I have also to bear in mind that the interests  of
    justice also lie in  holding  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department responsible for the decisions that were made on her  behalf.
    This is a case which has been considered seemingly on  at  least  three
    occasions by Senior Presenting Officers or members  of  the  Specialist
    Appeals Team.  It is in the public  interest,  therefore,  that  public
    authorities to be accountable for their  actions  and  to  give  proper
    reasons for their decisions.  In this case  a  decision  seemingly  was
    taken not to proceed with an appeal, when to do so would have  been  in
    time.  There was, in circumstances yet to be  clarified,  a  change  of
    heart months later by another representative seemingly ignorant of  the
    decision of the first.  If the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had been sent to the ECO  on  14th  February  as  claimed  it  is
    surprising that it was not received and dealt with  given  the  alleged
    importance that is now attached to it.

53.  The claimant was led to have a legitimate expectation that he would  be
    granted entry clearance, precisely because of the significant delay  in
    the appeal process.  Indeed it is  significant  that  the  matter  only
    surfaced to the attention of those acting on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department precisely because the  claimant,  through
    his representatives, asked why it was that  he  had  not  been  granted
    leave which he had won upon appeal.  It seems to me that it is  also  a
    matter of public interest that public  authorities  are  consistent  in
    their decision making and are  efficient  in  their  appeal  processes.
    This is not a minor delay caused  by  administrative  oversight  but  a
    lengthy delay following a positive decision not to appeal.

54.  I am concerned that three different sets of explanation have  been  put
    forward to  the  Tribunal  and  to  the  High  Court  in  this  matter,
    particularly when the decision of Mr Justice  Ouseley,  made  it  clear
    that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   accepted
    responsibility for misinformation to the Tribunal Judge.

55.  I cannot reconcile the two accounts now presented.  I find indeed  that
    there is an inconsistency or inaccuracy in what is being  presented  to
    me.  It would have been very easy for there to be clarification by  way
    of statements or documents setting out precisely how and why a  mistake
    was made.  That at least would  assist  on  public  accountability  and
    responsibility.  That has not been done.

56.  There seems to be an  expectation  that  the  public  interest  on  the
    merits trumps everything else.   It  seems  to  me  that  that  is  not
    necessarily the case and is certainly not the case here.

57.  Judge Taylor set out clearly in her refusal of permission  why  it  was
    that she did so particularly in relation to the aspect of delay and  of
    merit.

59.  Given that I do not find acceptable  the  reason  why  the  application
    made to the Tribunal was late it follows that I should only admit it if
    persuaded it is in the interest of justice to do so.  Regrettably I  am
    not persuaded for the reasons which I have indicated.

60.  I  find  that  the  application  is  out  of  time  without  any  clear
    explanation for being out of time.  I do not find that  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice or fairness  for  any  extension  of  time  to  be
    granted. Accordingly this  application  is  refused  and  time  is  not
    extended.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

