

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/19181/2013
      OA/19185/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On February 9, 2015                  |On February 16, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR ARNAULD ELAT ETIMBIC
                          MISS ERIKA ETEINGUE ELAT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  are  citizens  of  Cameroon  and  are  aged  28  and  8
    respectively. On February 26, 2013 the  appellants  applied  for  entry
    clearance under the family reunion provisions. They applied to join the
    sponsor, Frank Eric Elat Ekwala, the same sex  partner  of  the  first-
    named appellant. The second named appellant is the sponsor's  daughter.
    The respondent refused both applications under paragraph 320(3) HC  395
    because neither provided a valid national passport  or  other  document
    satisfactorily  establishing  his   identity   and   nationality.   The
    respondent  also  refused  the  second  named  appellant's  application
    because:

      a. The respondent was not satisfied the  appellant  was  part  of  the
         sponsor's family in Cameroon in 2012  when  the  sponsor  left  the
         country.

      b. The respondent was not satisfied her mother would  relinquish  sole
         responsibility to the sponsor and consequently the appellant  could
         not satisfy paragraph 352D(iv) HC 395.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  October  14,
    2013.

 3. The entry clearance manager reviewed the decisions on February 24, 2014
    but upheld both decisions. The respondent accepted that a passport  was
    not always required but as both appellants were nationals  of  Cameroon
    and lived in the country the  respondent  concluded  their  failure  to
    present such passports was a reason to refuse under paragraph 320(3) HC
    395. In respect of  the  second-named  appellant  the  entry  clearance
    manager upheld the original decision that the appellant was not part of
    the sponsor's family.

 4. The appeal was listed for hearing on June 13, 2014 before Judge of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Hague (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ"). In a
    determination promulgated on  June  25,  2014  the  FtTJ  refused  both
    appeals under both the Immigration Rules and human rights.

 5. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on July 3, 2014 and on July 21,
    2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page found there was no error  in
    law. An application for leave  to  appeal  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on August 4, 2014 and  on  October  10,  2014  Upper  Tribunal
    Gleeson gave leave to appeal finding it was arguable the FtTJ  did  not
    apply his mind to the relevant provisions of the Rules.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date. The  representatives  made
    submissions and I reserved my decision.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 7. Ms Patel argued that the FtTJ had refused the  first-named  appellant's
    application under paragraph 320(3) HC 395 but no issue had been  raised
    in the refusal letter about the sponsor and first-named appellant being
    in  a  relationship.  The  FtTJ  considered  the  decision   of   Fetle
    (Partners:Two year requirement) [2014] UKUT 00267 (IAC) but  failed  to
    apply the principles  correctly  and  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    sponsor's interview. With regard to the second named appellant the FtTJ
    failed to have regard to the decision of BM and AL  (352D(iv);  meaning
    of 'family unit') Columbia  [2007]  UKIAT  00055  and  the  reason  the
    appellant and her father were separated. The FtTJ wrongly  applied  the
    case in paragraph [8] of his  determination.  As  regards  the  refusal
    under paragraph 320(3) HC 395 the FtTJ by not accepting  the  documents
    as evidence of their identity, nationality and date of birth because he
    failed  to  have  regard  to  the  decision  of  AM   (Section   88(2):
    "Immigration Document") Somalia [2009] UKIAT 00008.

 8. Ms Johnstone reminded me that the grounds of appeal had not  challenged
    the  findings  in  paragraph  [7]  of  the  determination  namely   the
    inconsistencies in the evidence. The FtTJ was not satisfied the sponsor
    was living with anyone else prior to leaving Cameroon and his  findings
    in paragraphs [8] and [9] were therefore open to him. The  second-named
    appellant cannot  succeed  under  these  provisions  because  the  FtTJ
    rejected they were part of the same household. As regards  the  finding
    under paragraph 320(3) HC 395 the  FtTJ  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    explanation about the passport. The FtTJ considered  the  evidence  and
    explanations and rejected them. The grounds amount to nothing more than
    a mere disagreement.

    DISCUSSIONS AND FINDINGS

 9. When the matter came before the FtTJ the sponsor  was  called  to  give
    oral evidence. During the course of the evidence the FtTJ indicated  to
    Ms Patel that in addition to the refusal  under  paragraph  320(3)  the
    FtTJ also believed that there was an issue  under  352AA  (ii)  HC  395
    which required the first-named appellant to demonstrate that he and the
    sponsor had been living in a relationship akin to a marriage  or  civil
    partnership for two years or more.

10. Ms Johnstone submitted that the  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  had  not
    challenged the FtTJ's finding  in  paragraph  [7]  that  the  sponsor's
    evidence  was  to  be  treated  with  caution  because  during   cross-
    examination  he  altered  his  evidence  to  try  and  accommodate  the
    inconsistencies. The issues surrounding the first-named appellant  must
    be considered in the light of this finding.

11. Both appellants had been refused under  paragraph  320(3)  HC  395  but
    these findings were challenged in the grounds of appeal. Paragraph  [8]
    of the grounds of appeal outlined the challenge and in particular  they
    alleged the FtTJ had erred in his approach to the lack of passports for
    either appellant.

12. The decision of AM had been handed to him and the FtTJ did not make any
    reference  to  this  decision  in  paragraphs  [9]  and  [10]  of   his
    determination which was where he considered paragraph  320(3)  HC  395.
    The FtTJ considered the evidence about both appellant's  "passport"  in
    paragraphs [9] and [10] and found they did not establish their identity
    and nationality because  of  the  way  they  were  obtained.  The  FtTJ
    erroneously noted there was no other identity document before  him  for
    the first-named appellant because as the grounds  of  appeal  correctly
    pointed out there were birth certificates in the appellants' bundle for
    both appellants. In paragraph [10] he found the evidence in relation to
    the second-named appellant to be unreliable.

13. Ms Patel submitted that the respondent had  not  raised  any  issue  of
    authenticity over the birth  certificates  and  having  considered  the
    evidence I am satisfied that Ms Patel has a valid  point.  Mr  Ogbewe's
    concerns related to the passport and his closing submissions centred on
    the fact the appellants could re-apply with a valid passport. There  is
    strength in the argument that if the respondent does  not  challenge  a
    document that is capable of satisfying Section 88(2) of  the  2002  Act
    then is it appropriate for the FtTJ to make such a finding. If the FtTJ
    wished to reject the reliability of the document he was obliged to give
    his reasons. I am satisfied he did this in  paragraph  [9]  because  he
    expressed concern about the manner in which the passport  was  obtained
    and this led him to conclude the birth certificate's  authenticity  was
    questionable.

14. The case of AM considered the requirement to  produce  either  a  valid
    national passport  or  other  document  satisfactorily  establishing  a
    person's identity and nationality. However, in AM the judge  found  the
    sponsor's evidence credible and found there was nothing in the evidence
    she heard that threw any doubt upon the claim made. The judge concluded
    in that case the  documents  produced  satisfactorily  established  the
    person's identity.

15. The failure in this case by the FtTJ to mention the case of AM is not a
    material error. The FtTJ was aware of the evidence that  was  submitted
    but was  unconvinced  by  it.  The  sponsor  had  already  admitted  in
    paragraph [8] of  his  witness  statement  that  a  passport  had  been
    obtained by payment of a bribe and the FtTJ was therefore  entitled  to
    consider documentary evidence with that factor  in  mind.  He  did  not
    reject the other forms of identity because they were not passports  but
    simply because he did not find them reliable.  The  argument  in  these
    circumstances advanced by Ms Patel has no merit and  I  therefore  find
    the FtTJ was entitled  to  reject  both  applications  under  paragraph
    320(3) HC 395 and regardless of any other findings I make these appeals
    must fail.

16. Turning to the First-named appellant the FtTJ rejected his  appeal  for
    not satisfying paragraph 352AA HC 395. The FtTJ  accepted  the  sponsor
    and appellant had been in a relationship but found that as they had not
    been cohabitees their relationship was not akin to a civil  partnership
    and this was  a  requirement  of  paragraph  352AA  HC  395.  The  FtTJ
    considered the decision of Fetle but still found they  were  not  in  a
    relationship akin to a civil partnership.

17. In Fetle (Partners: two year requirement) [2014] UKUT 00267  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal held that in contrast to the requirement of Para  GEN  1.2(iv)
    of Appendix FM, a requirement  (such  as  in  paragraph  352AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules)  that  "parties  have  been  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to either a marriage or a civil partnership which has
    subsisted  for  two  years  or  more"  does  not  require   two   years
    cohabitation, but two years subsistence of the  relationship.   Whether
    the relationship still subsists, as  required  by  the  tense  of  that
    requirement and as may be separately required, is a different issue.

18. I accept Ms Patel's submission that the FtTJ erred in finding that,  as
    they had not been cohabitees the relationship was not akin to  a  civil
    partnership. The Tribunal  made  clear  in  Fetle  that  this  was  not
    required. In assessing  whether  this  error  is  material  I  have  to
    consider the FtTJ's assessment of the  evidence  on  the  relationship.
    This can be found in paragraph [7] of the determination. The  FtTJ  did
    not reject the sponsor's claim they were in a relationship  but  merely
    the claim that they lived together. Following the decision of Fetle  it
    appears that cohabitation of any form is  not  a  requirement  and  the
    parties  merely  have  to  demonstrate  their  relationship  has   been
    subsisting for two years or more. In the circumstances I find that  the
    relationship had been  subsisting  for  at  least  two  years  and  the
    requirement of paragraph 352AA is met. The error in this appeal is  not
    material because of my earlier finding on paragraph 320(3) HC 395.

19. Finally I have considered the FtTJ's finding that the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352D(iv) are not met. The FtTJ considered the decision of  BM
    and AL but concluded that did not appear to apply in  this  appeal.  In
    paragraph [25] of BM and AL the Tribunal found that whether a person is
    part of a person's family unit will depend on the particular  facts  of
    the case. At paragraph [27] the Tribunal stated-

          "We regard the issue as  to  what  is  a  "family  unit"  for  the
         purposes of para 352D(iv) as a question of fact. In many  cases  it
         will be clear that a child was part of a family unit with an asylum
         seeker in his country of habitual residence. The  child  will  have
         lived  with  the  asylum  seeker  and  perhaps   another   partner.
         Alternatively if there has been  separation  the  reason  for  that
         separation may well be associated with the claim of persecution and
         a child might still remain part of the family unit from  which  the
         potential refugee had been temporarily separated."

20. The FtTJ found in paragraph [12] that the  second-named  appellant  had
    been living with the sponsor's brother for the two years preceding  the
    time when the Sponsor left the country and  so  was  not  part  of  his
    household at the time he departed. The grounds of appeal at  paragraphs
    [6] and [7] challenge the FtTJ's whole approach to this  issue.  It  is
    argued that the FtTJ failed to have  regard  to  the  sponsor's  asylum
    interview contained in the bundle.

21. I have considered the interview and in particular the section when  the
    sponsor was asked questions about  whom  he  lived  with  and  why  his
    daughter did not live with him. In  Q12  he  stated  he  last  saw  his
    daughter in 2012 and at Q13 and 14 he stated she lived with his brother
    because he had separated from her mother  in  2008  and  she  left  the
    second-named appellant with him. At Q15 he confirmed that he  lived  on
    his own and at Q16 he explained that his daughter did not live with him
    because he moved around a lot and he felt it was better that she stayed
    with his brother.

22. As stated above the Tribunal made it clear that each  case  had  to  be
    considered on its own merits. The FtTJ did not make findings on why the
    child could not be said to form part of the sponsor's family if she was
    living with his brother and there was no examination of that  situation
    or the sponsor's own situation when he lived in Cameroon save the  FtTJ
    found he was living alone and away for periods of time.

23. If this was the only issue to be considered I would have been minded to
    hear further evidence on this so a finding could be made, as I  am  not
    satisfied  on  the  information  before  me  that  this  was   properly
    considered. Even if I found the child came within paragraph  352AA  the
    appeal would still fail because of  my  earlier  finding  on  paragraph
    320(3) HC 395.

24. In summary, I find there is  no  material  error  in  respect  of  both
    appellants.

25.  I  accept  the  FtTJ  erred  in  respect  of  his  assessment  of  the
    relationship between the first-named appellant  and  sponsor.  All  the
    first-named appellant should need to do is to produce a  document  that
    satisfied the respondent as to  his  nationality  and  identity.  As  a
    Cameroonian national it is of course open to him to obtain a passport.

26.  With  regard  to  whether  the  second-named  appellant  comes  within
    paragraph 352AA I accept the FtTJ erred by failing to examine and  make
    findings on the family matrix but before the second-named appellant can
    satisfy paragraph 352AA he would have to satisfy the respondent  (or  a
    judge on appeal) that he was part of the sponsor's family unit and that
    of course could, in  certain  circumstances,  include  being  with  the
    sponsor's brother. That is a matter for a different day.

    DECISION

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law and I uphold the original decision.

28. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was not made in the First-tier and I see no reason to amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 16, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee was payable.



Signed:     Dated: February 16, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
