
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19498/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 February 2016                      |On 15 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Mrs sharanjeet kaur kochar

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells, Counsel instructed by Hudson McKenzie,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on  25  November  1950.  On  1
    August 2013 she made an application for entry clearance as a  dependent
    relative under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  That  application
    was refused in a decision dated 30 September 2013.  The application was
    in fact made at the same time as that of her husband,  Gurcharan  Singh
    Kochar. Sadly, the appellant's husband died after the  application  was
    made.

 3. The appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance came before a panel of the  FtT  consisting  of  Judges
    Church and Kamara, whereby the  appeal  was  allowed.   The  respondent
    appeals against the decision of the FtT asserting errors of law in  the
    FtT's decision.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The FtT noted that it was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.4  (parent  of  sponsor
    requiring long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks as a result
    of age, illness or disability).

 5. The FtT referred to a number of witness statements that it  had  before
    it and set out the evidence of the sponsor.  At [20]-[39] a  number  of
    findings of fact were made, with the  FtT  finding  at  [40]  that  the
    sponsor was a credible witness and that the  written  evidence  of  the
    other witnesses was also credible.

 6. Further findings of fact were made from [44] in terms of the nature  of
    the care that the appellant requires, the availability of that care  in
    India and whether it is affordable.  Article 8  proper  was  considered
    from [65].

    The grounds of appeal and submissions before the Upper Tribunal

 7. The respondent's grounds, in summary, criticise the FtT's assessment of
    the  cultural  imperative  of  the  sponsor,  as  distinct   from   the
    appellant's daughters, caring for his mother.  It is  argued  that  the
    FtT's  conclusions  fail  to  take  into  account  evidence  that   was
    inconsistent with their conclusions in this regard.

 8. Furthermore, the conclusion that there is no personal care available to
    the appellant in India on the basis of the appellant's claim  that  she
    would feel humiliated to ask for such personal care, does not mean that
    care is not available in the appellant's home country.

 9. It is further argued that it was not open to the FtT to  conclude  that
    the sponsor would be unable to pay for the required levels of  care  in
    the absence of evidence on that issue.  In addition, other  members  of
    the family could be asked to assist, including the sponsor's sister who
    had  previously  travelled  from  Canada  to  India  to  care  for  the
    appellant.

10. The asserted errors  on  the  part  of  the  FtT  in  relation  to  its
    assessment under the Immigration Rules are said to be replicated in the
    Article 8 analysis.  In essence, it is argued that the refusal of entry
    clearance would not change the present relationship amongst the  family
    members.  Further, it is contended that  the  FtT  failed  to  consider
    section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002  Act")  in  terms  of  the  impact  on  public  resources  of  the
    appellant's ongoing medical treatments.

11. The  'rule  24'  response  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  rejects  the
    criticisms made on behalf of the respondent,  contending  that  in  all
    respects the FtT made a decision that  was  properly  reasoned  on  the
    evidence and made  findings  that  was  open  to  it.   In  particular,
    attention is drawn to the evidence that the care that had been provided
    by the appellant's daughter  in  the  past  had  been  provided  on  an
    emergency basis.  The FtT had found the  witnesses  credible  and  made
    their assessment on the basis of that evidence.

12. In submissions Ms Pettersen relied on the grounds.  She reiterated that
    care had previously been provided by the  appellant's  daughter  and  a
    neighbour.  There clearly was local assistance available,  for  example
    from the neighbour who provided a witness statement, even if only on an
    emergency basis.

13. So far as Article 8 is concerned, although the FtT concluded that there
    would be significant disruption to the sponsor's  family  life  in  the
    refusal of entry clearance, it was the sponsor's  choice  to  send  his
    wife to look after his mother.

14. Mr Wells referred me to  various  aspects  of  the  FtT's  decision  in
    support of the submission that  the  FtT  had  made  properly  reasoned
    findings.  It was submitted that the FtT  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account cultural issues in terms of the availability of  care  for  the
    appellant.  Including with reference to the  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions ("IDI's").

15. Other care had been provided on an exceptional or temporary basis,  for
    example by the neighbour, Mrs Singh, and the appellant's sister.

16. The respondent's grounds fail to take into account the FtT's reasons as
    a whole.

17. So far as any burden on the NHS  is  concerned,  at  the  time  of  the
    application for entry clearance the sponsor had provided an undertaking
    in that regard to the Secretary of State, which  was  legally  binding.
    The sponsor had also told the FtT that  the  present  arrangements  are
    putting their marriage under considerable strain.

18. In reply Ms Pettersen submitted that the FtT had not set out the extent
    of any separation that the respondent's decision entails  in  terms  of
    care provided to the appellant.  Similarly, the FtT had not taken  into
    account the possibility of the sponsor's wife and child travelling with
    the sponsor if he felt it necessary to visit the appellant  to  provide
    care for her.

    My Conclusions

19. Paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5 provide as follows:
         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.
         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-
         (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who
         can reasonably provide it; or
         (b) it is not affordable."

20. It was conceded on behalf of the respondent  before  the  FtT  that  E-
    ECDR.2.4 was satisfied.  It is  nevertheless,  important  to  recognise
    what the appellant's particular circumstances  were  in  terms  of  her
    needs.  These are set  out  at  [24]-[25]  of  the  FtT's  decision  as
    follows:

         "24. Due to the Appellant's arthritis, limited mobility,  dementia,
             depression, impaired eyesight and  hypertension  she  requires
             help with  intimate  tasks  such  as  bathing,  showering  and
             dressing,  as  well  as  pushing  her   wheelchair,   cooking,
             shopping, housework and other day-to-day activities with which
             she struggles due to her impaired mobility.  She also requires
             encouragement  to  carry  out  day-to-day  tasks  due  to  her
             depression;

         25.   The  Appellant  requires  basic  medical  treatment  such  as
             pharmacological treatment and regular check-ups."

21. The FtT was required to make an assessment of whether the appellant was
    able to  obtain  the  required  level  of  care  in  India.   Under  E-
    ECDR.2.5(a) there are two elements which need to be satisfied.  Firstly
    it must be established that the care is  not  available,  and  secondly
    that there is no person in the particular country  who  can  reasonably
    provide it.  If the appellant is able to establish  that  the  required
    level of care is (i) not available and (ii)  that  there  is  no  other
    person in  India  who  could  reasonably  provide  it,  she  will  have
    established that she meets that requirement of  the  Rules.   Under  E-
    ECDR.2.5(b) (affordability), this is an alternative way of meeting that
    requirement of the Rules.

22. In terms of the FtT's reasons for its decision, it is  to  be  observed
    that the decision is a detailed, careful and thoughtful  assessment  of
    the evidence before it.  On the crucial issue of  the  availability  of
    care in India, between [48] and [59] there is a detailed assessment  of
    the different elements  of  the  appellant's  care  needs.   Thus,  for
    example at [48] there is consideration of "medical care".  At [49]  the
    issue of "non-medical care" is assessed.  From [50] there  is  what  is
    described as the "personal care element", referred to again at [54].

23. The FtT, in summary, concluded that  the  necessary  medical  care  was
    available in India and affordable.  It concluded that  the  non-medical
    care, for example in terms of cooking, shopping and cleaning, was  also
    available and affordable.  In relation to the latter, the FtT took into
    account the sponsor's concerns about strangers being in the appellant's
    house but nevertheless concluded that it would be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant to hire domestic help to assist her with those tasks.

24. In relation to the personal care element, the FtT referred to the IDI's
    and what is said there about  taking  into  account  relevant  cultural
    factors.  In this context it is important to note that at [26]  it  was
    found that in accordance with Indian Sikh culture the sponsor,  as  the
    only son of the family, and his wife, are  expected  to  care  for  the
    appellant, and his sisters are expected to care  for  their  respective
    husbands' parents.  It was also found  at  [27]  that  neither  of  the
    appellant's daughters would be willing or able to provide care for  the
    appellant on a "sustained" basis due to  cultural  considerations.   At
    [51] it was again concluded that the expectation in Indian Sikh culture
    that married daughters should not be  responsible  for  their  parents'
    care was a relevant factor to be  taken  into  account  when  assessing
    whether the appellant's daughters, and in particular the  daughter  who
    lived in Canada, could reasonably provide care.  It was concluded  that
    they could not.

25. At [52] the conclusion was that there was no  close  family  member  in
    India who could reasonably provide the required help and that therefore
    it needed to be considered whether there was another person  who  could
    provide such care.   It  was  decided  at  [53]  that  the  appellant's
    neighbours may be able to provide "emergency care" on an ad  hoc  basis
    when the family network was  unable  to  do  so,  but  they  could  not
    reasonably be expected to do so on a sustained basis.

26. This conclusion in relation to one of the neighbours, Mrs  Asha  Singh,
    reflected her witness statement, referred to by the FtT at [16],  which
    was accepted at [29] in terms of her  not  being  willing  to  continue
    providing care to the appellant on a sustained basis.

27. At [54] the FtT said that at first glance the kind  of  help  that  the
    appellant requires,  that  is  the  personal  care  element,  could  be
    expected to be available at reasonable cost in India.   The  submission
    on behalf of the respondent to the effect that this was 'domestic' help
    was considered.  However, it was noted that the sponsor  had  attempted
    to find appropriate help for his parents in India but all  the  options
    available were inappropriate and it was accepted that the sponsor found
    the prospect of leaving the  care  of  his  parents  in  the  hands  of
    strangers to be inappropriate and unacceptable.

28. Crucially at [56] the FtT said that it had been persuaded that  due  to
    the "intimate nature" of tasks such as washing, bathing  and  dressing,
    the personal care needed to be provided by family members or  at  least
    someone with whom the appellant is vary familiar, such as the neighbour
    Mrs Singh.  It was also noted however, that there was a requirement for
    "conversation  and  encouragement"  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    worsening depression.

29. At [57] reference was made to the appellant's  late  husband's  witness
    statement to the effect that Sikh faith and culture made it  impossible
    for him and the appellant to ask even their own daughters for help  and
    that it would be extremely shameful for them to do  so.   At  [58]  the
    Tribunal concluded that Sikh faith and culture places a great  deal  of
    importance on personal dignity and family honour  and  the  expectation
    that the son of the family  will  provide  whatever  care  his  parents
    needed.  Reference was also made in that paragraph to  the  appellant's
    witness statement in relation to the intimate tasks that  she  requires
    help with; that she would feel very uncomfortable if a stranger were to
    help in that way, that it was already quite humiliating having  to  ask
    someone to help, and that it would be worse if this were not  a  family
    member.

30. At [59] the findings were summarised to the effect that the appellant's
    medical requirements could be met in India, as could her needs in terms
    of shopping, housework and cooking.  It  was  concluded  however,  that
    there is no person in India who could reasonably provide  the  personal
    care element of the appellant's "requirements" at any price.  This  was
    because of  the  "humiliation"  the  appellant  would  feel  at  having
    intimate tasks such as washing, bathing and dressing carried out  by  a
    stranger when, according to Sikh culture, she should be  cared  for  by
    her only son's family.

31. It  was  thus  concluded  that  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5  were
    satisfied.

32. As I have already observed, the FtT's  decision  comprises  a  detailed
    assessment of the evidence.  It seems to me however, that there is some
    conflation of the requirements of the Rules in terms of E-ECDR.2.5 with
    reference to sub-paragraph (a).  This, it seems to me, could have  been
    avoided if the FtT's decision had set out the relevant requirements  of
    the Rules and more obviously  demonstrated  a  methodical  analysis  of
    them.  By this I mean in particular that there is conflation of the two
    requirements I have referred to at E-ECDR.2.5(a),  namely  availability
    of care and no person who can reasonably provide it.

33. Nevertheless, because of the detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence,  in
    particular the helpful separation of  the  different  elements  of  the
    appellant's care needs,  it  is  possible  to  deduce  from  the  FtT's
    decision that it concluded that in fact the required level of care  was
    not available, and that  there  was  no  person  who  could  reasonably
    provide it.

34. Although the FtT took into account the IDI's, that guidance relates  to
    the issue of  whether  there  is  a  person  in  the  country  who  can
    reasonably provide the care, rather than whether the care is available.
     Nevertheless, it was in my view legitimate for the FtT  to  take  into
    account cultural factors in terms of whether the care needed  in  terms
    of the "intimate nature of tasks" was available.  The FtT  was  careful
    to make a distinction between that  element  of  the  appellant's  care
    needs and the other  elements  to  which  I  have  referred.   The  FtT
    concluded that this was more  than  "domestic  help"  as  suggested  on
    behalf of the respondent.

35. The respondent's grounds suggest that the FtT had failed to consider  a
    discrepancy in the evidence as highlighted by the Presenting Officer at
    the hearing in terms of the cultural issue of the availability of care.
     In that respect reference is made in the grounds to a  question  asked
    of the sponsor whereby the sponsor confirmed that if a person does  not
    have a son they would be left to  die  alone  with  no  help  from  any
    daughters.   The  complaint  is  that  the  FtT  did  not  record  this
    information in its decision.  The argument is developed in the  grounds
    in terms of the sponsor's sister having travelled from Canada  to  care
    for the appellant when the UK sponsor was not available.  This,  it  is
    said, is inconsistent with the alleged  cultural  prohibition  on  care
    from daughters, and is inconsistent with the appellant's evidence  that
    a daughter would leave her mother to die rather than offer assistance.

36. In the first place, it was not encumbent on the FtT to  set  out  every
    aspect of the evidence.  Secondly, the Tribunal noted at [15] that  the
    circumstances in which the sponsor's sister who lived in Canada went to
    India  to  care  for  the  appellant  and  her  husband   were   "truly
    exceptional"  in  that  the  sponsor  had  used  up  all  his   holiday
    entitlement at work and his employer would not allow him time  to  take
    any unpaid leave.  The sponsor explained  that  he  had  paid  for  his
    sister's plane ticket because it was his  responsibility  to  care  for
    them.  He also explained that his sister could not be expected to  care
    for his mother on an ongoing basis as her  responsibility  was  to  her
    husband's family in  Canada.  In  any  event,  at  [16]  the  sponsor's
    evidence is noted to the effect that if his mother had had no sons, her
    daughters would still not be expected to  care  for  her.   This  would
    appear to be a reference to the evidence referred to by the  respondent
    in the grounds.

37. The help provided by the neighbour, Mrs Singh, was explained to the FtT
    on the basis that this was not able to be provided on a sustained basis
    as Mrs Singh said in her witness statement.  The FtT  made  a  specific
    finding on this issue at [29]. Again, at [53] it was concluded that the
    neighbours may be available for emergency care on an ad hoc  basis  but
    could not reasonably be expected to provide that care  on  a  sustained
    basis.

38. Although  the  respondent's  grounds  contend  that  every  person  who
    requires hospital treatment or  the  services  of  a  care  home  would
    require the care of strangers, and that this is a  matter  of  personal
    choice, it is clear that the FtT's consideration  of  this  issue  went
    much deeper than merely deciding that this was  a  matter  of  personal
    choice.  It considered the evidence on this issue with great  care  and
    in detail.

39. Once the FtT had decided under E-ECDR.2.5 that the  required  level  of
    care for the appellant in India was not available and that there was no
    person there who could reasonably provide it, issues arising  in  terms
    of affordability under sub-paragraph (b) are neither  here  nor  there.
    The appellant had established that she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

40. In terms of affordability therefore, the FtT's  findings  were  in  the
    alternative, considering that issue on the hypothetical basis that  its
    conclusions in terms of the availability of care were incorrect.

41. Likewise, the Article 8 assessment was  also  made  on  an  alternative
    basis.  Once it  had  been  established  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules, any criticisms of the FtT's  conclusions  in
    respect of Article 8 are not to the point.

42. I am not satisfied that it has been established that there is any error
    of law in the decision  of  the  FtT.   As  already  indicated,  in  my
    judgement its conclusions are soundly based  on  the  evidence,  taking
    into account the competing  considerations  and  reflecting  a  nuanced
    assessment of the appellant's care needs.  What I have referred  to  as
    some conflation of the requirements of the Rules in its  reasons,  does
    not affect its decision and does not constitute any error of law, or at
    least none that is material to the outcome.

    Decision

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            23/03/16



