
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/19935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On July 2, 2015                      |On July 6, 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR YAHYA MOTASHIR EL ENEZY
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Miss Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Adebayo (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant applied for entry clearance under paragraph 352D  HC  395
    but the respondent refused his application on September 18, 2013.

 3. The appellant lodged an appeal under Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on February 4, 2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on February 18, 2015 he allowed his  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent appealed this decision on March 4, 2015 and Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Page gave permission on April 22, 2015

 6. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  both  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The UK sponsor was not in attendance.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not made an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to make an order.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 8. Miss Fijiwala accepted there was no substance to her  first  ground  of
    appeal that the FtTJ  had  considered  documents  submitted  after  the
    hearing without recourse to the respondent.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 9. Miss Fijiwala submitted that the FtTJ had erred because  the  appellant
    had failed to provide evidence to show he was under the age of eighteen
    as at the date of  his  application.  The  articles  provided  did  not
    demonstrate the appellant was under the age of 18 and in the absence of
    any evidence to undermine the respondent's report  the  FtTJ  erred  by
    finding he was under the age of 18.

10. Mr Adebayo argued the FtTJ reached a finding  on  the  appellant's  age
    that was open to him. The respondent's own IDI 's make it clear that in
    assessing age, reliance  should  not  be  placed  on  one  source.  The
    articles showed the calculation used by Dr Aloul was the least accurate
    and the  respondent  wrongly  had  claimed  in  her  grounds  that  the
    appellant was over the age of 19 at the date of hearing when the actual
    report assessed the appellant's age in 2014. At best the  report  would
    say he was over the age of eighteen but that  provided  no  margin  for
    error. The mother had given the child's age when she applied for asylum
    and witnesses had given evidence and confirmed he was under the age  of
    eighteen when he applied.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. Permission was given because Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page
    found it arguable that the FtTJ had decided the case based on  evidence
    that had not been before him when the case was heard.

12. Today Miss Fijiwala conceded that the respondent did have the  evidence
    and had  received  it  before  the  final  hearing.  Her  argument  was
    therefore confined to the second ground.

13. I pointed out to Miss Fijiwala that her second ground was intrinsically
    connected to the first ground because the FtTJ attached weight to  that
    evidence and found the appellant was less than eighteen years old.

14. The doctor's report is from June 2014 and makes clear that as  at  that
    date the appellant was over nineteen  based  on  a  "radiological  bone
    scan". The appellant did not produce his own report  but  produced  the
    respondent's own guidelines and two articles.

15. Miss Fijiwala agreed that age  assessment  reports  are  not  an  exact
    science and she did not disagree with the appellant's  submission  that
    plus  or  minus  one  year  would  not  be  inappropriate  in  any  age
    assessment.

16. The FtTJ considered this submission but he also had regard to the  oral
    evidence of family members and the  fact  the  appellant's  mother  had
    given the appellant's age when she applied for asylum.

17. The FtTJ was satisfied the appellant was less than eighteen as  at  the
    date of application and there is nothing perverse about that finding.

18. The FtTJ considered all of the evidence and the fact  the  respondent's
    own evidence  was  borderline  meant  he  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did.

19. There was no error in law.

    DECISION

20. There was no material error in law. I uphold the FtTJ's decision.



Signed:     Dated: July 6, 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: July 6, 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
