
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19420/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 17th April 2015                       |          On 23rd April 2015      |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             mrs Shukria Haleema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Sky Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 1st September 1983.  On 21st June  2013  she  made  application  for
    entry clearance as a partner  having  regard  to  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  On 23rd September 2013 the Entry Clearance  Officer
    refused  the  application  pursuant  to  paragraph   320(11)   of   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant had used deception in
    stating that she was married in an attempt to  establish  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Additionally the evidence produced by the Appellant to
    the Entry Clearance Officer was not sufficient to satisfy  him  or  her
    that she, the  Appellant,  and  the  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.

 2. On 10th November 2014 the appeal of that decision came before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese but  not  until  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager had had a chance to review the decision of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer in the light of the grounds  bringing  the  matter  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In those grounds it was submitted that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (as opposed  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager)  had
    incorrectly  cited  paragraph  320(11)(iii)   whereas   in   fact   the
    appropriate Rule should have been  320(11)(iv),  the  difference  being
    whether  the  Appellant  had  been  an  illegal  entrant  or  had  used
    deception, although in fact it was  always  the  case  so  far  as  the
    Secretary of State was concerned that deception had been employed.

 3. Judge Abebrese heard evidence  from  the  Sponsor  and  concluded  that
    paragraph 320(11)(iv) applied and in so finding found  that  there  had
    been deception and by  implication  that  there  had  been  aggravating
    circumstances about  which  I  shall  say  rather  more  in  a  moment.
    Additionally Judge Abebrese found  as  a  fact  that  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor  was  not  genuine  and  was  not
    subsisting and then set out at paragraph 12 of his Statement of Reasons
    the explanation for the finding.

 4. Not content with the Decision by Notice dated 19th  December  2014  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There were a  number  of  grounds  but  they  were  premised
    largely on the assertion that Judge Abebrese had  made  findings  based
    upon an interview which had not been provided to the judge.

 5. On 12th February 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission.  He did so giving his reasons as follows:

         "1.  At paragraph 9 the judge has referred to the Tribunal  finding
             that the evidence given during the screening interview was  an
             indication that she [the Appellant]  was  indeed  married  and
             that when she subsequently denied  that  she  had  never  been
             married in the United Kingdom this was an attempt to frustrate
             the authorities further in the use  of  deception.   The  full
             screening interview was unavailable.

         2.   An arguable error of law has arisen in the context of  drawing
             inferences from extracts from an interview given  the  absence
             of the totality of the interview.  The Appellant  was  not  in
             possession of the full copy  of  the  interview  and  was  not
             therefore in a position to argue the construction to be placed
             upon any answer or the totality of the answers.   It  is  made
             perfectly clear at paragraph 5 of the  permission  application
             that a copy of the interview was not served on the Appellant's
             representatives."

 6. Judge Hollingworth did not address the other grounds. Though he did not
    refuse permission in respect of  them,  he  does  not  appear  to  have
    granted it.  Be that as it may, on 24th February 2015 the Secretary  of
    State filed and served a notice  pursuant  to  Rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.  In that reply was  an  extract  of  the
    Presenting Officer's note to the effect that the documents  in  respect
    of which complaint was made to the effect that they had not been handed
    up at the hearing, had in fact been served at the hearing.  Faced  with
    that reply, under cover of a letter of 9th March 2015  the  Appellant's
    solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal filing Amended grounds.

 7. For whatever  reason  those  Amended  Grounds  and  the  correspondence
    attaching to them were not placed before a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
     Very fairly, however, Miss Fijiwala did not take  exception  to  those
    Amended Grounds being relied  upon.   That  is  not  to  say  that  she
    accepted or conceded there was merit in them but she  was  content  for
    the Appellant to have the opportunity to rely upon  them  and  so  they
    fall to be considered, by  consent,  though  in  any  event  under  the
    general management powers under the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 I have power to allow grounds to be amended.

 8. In substance the Appellant now argues that the application  of  320(11)
    or more particularly the approach taken by the judge to it was  flawed,
    because the Rule is in two parts.  The Rule provides as follows:

         "Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way
         to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

         (i)  overstaying; or

         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

         (iv) using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
             to enter or remain or in order to obtain  documents  from  the
             Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
             application (whether successful or not); and (my emphasis)

         there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,  not
         meeting  temporary   admission/reporting   restrictions   or   bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

 9. Rule 320(11) provides grounds on which entry clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom should normally be refused.  It follows that the  Secretary  of
    State had a discretion.  In pursuing this line of  argument  Mr  Jaisri
    placed before me the guidance in relation to 320(11) and reminded me of
    the guidance in the case of  PS  (paragraph  320(11)  discretion:  care
    needed) India [2010] UKUT 440.  It is clear from that guidance  that  a
    judge should turn his or her mind to whether there  is  an  aggravating
    feature and whether the aggravating feature is sufficiently aggravating
    so as to justify refusal.

10. In the instant case the matter was dealt with at paragraph  10  of  the
    Statement of Reasons.  It is not in dispute that  the  Appellant  lied.
    Indeed that is not challenged.  The judge refers to a lie at  paragraph
    7.  Though grounds do not challenge the finding it is fair to say  that
    an explanation was forthcoming.  As to the  aggravating  features  Miss
    Fijiwala on behalf of the Secretary of State points to  the  precarious
    immigration history of the Appellant, though in  fact  the  judge  went
    further in noting that the Appellant  had  already  been  found  in  an
    earlier appeal not to be credible. I put that to one side because  Miss
    Fijiwala  did  not  rely  on  that.   She  pointed  to  the  precarious
    immigration history and relied on that only.

11. I agree with Mr Jaisri that the judge did not  adequately  address  the
    aggravating features. However were I to find  that  that  was  material
    then I note that the Entry Clearance Manager noted that  not  only  had
    deception been used but that the Appellant had failed  to  comply  with
    removal directions and had to  be  removed  at  public  expense  on  an
    earlier occasion. Those were said to be aggravating  circumstances  and
    in fact Mr Jaisri, when we together considered what the Entry Clearance
    Manager had to say, accepted that the Entry Clearance Manager  appeared
    to have addressed the matter rather more than the  judge,  providing  a
    proper basis for the decision.  Were I to remake the decision based  on
    the 320(11) point, given those aggravating features identified  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager I would find that they were sufficient to  find
    that the appeal should be dismissed on that basis subject to any  human
    rights considerations.

12. However, in my judgment any error is not material in this case  because
    it is common ground that the Appellant did not  meet  the  requirements
    generally to rely on Appendix FM so that if she were to have  succeeded
    at all it would have to have been on the basis of the wider application
    of Article 8 ECHR and then in respect of family life.  If there was  no
    family life then there could be no interference with it.  In this  case
    the judge found that there was no genuine and subsisting  relationship.
    It was argued by Mr Jaisri that the judge had had  insufficient  regard
    to the evidence of the Sponsor and had  made  inadequate  findings.   I
    disagree.  It is trite law that a judge does not need to set  out  each
    and every aspect of the evidence but the judge had the  opportunity  to
    assess the Sponsor and the Sponsor gave evidence.

13. It is clear to me reading the Statement of Reasons as a  whole  and  in
    particular paragraph 12 that the judge, contrary to what  is  submitted
    on behalf of the Appellant, did have regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor.  It is also clear to me that the judge  in  making  a  finding
    took into account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  lied  and  was
    therefore a witness whose evidence had to be looked at with some  care.
    She started at a disadvantage but that was  her  own  fault.   She  had
    demonstrated that she was a person who could not be  assumed  to  be  a
    reliable witness.  One had to look elsewhere, in addition of course  to
    the evidence that she gave, and treat it, as I have already said,  with
    care.  As it was, looking at the evidence as a whole, for  the  reasons
    which are set out at paragraph 12 of the Statement of Reasons the judge
    found that the evidence was insufficient, the  burden  being  upon  the
    Appellant to demonstrate  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

14. It is to be borne in mind that it is a question of meeting  a  standard
    of proof.  The evidence was not sufficient on that point.   It  may  be
    that a future application made with better evidence will achieve better
    results so far as the Appellant is concerned.  I do not know but it was
    open to this judge to find as he did.   The  grounds  insofar  as  they
    touch upon the nature of the relationship  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor in fact amount to no more than disagreement with  the  findings
    open to the judge and, absent a finding that the  relationship  existed
    as between the Appellant and the Sponsor, the Article  8  appeal  never
    got off the ground.  It was not necessary  for  the  judge  to  go  any
    further: WK  (Article  8  -  expulsion  cases  -  review  of  case-law)
    Palestinian Territories [2006] UKAIT 00070

15. In the circumstances any error of law in this statement of  reasons  is
    not material.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
