
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20534/2011

                                                               OA/20535/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 May 2013                                  |On 8 July 2013             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                miss s. m. s
                                miss m. m. a.
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - nairobI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr. Cheng
For the respondent:    Mr. Hayes

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Somalia born in 1999 and 2005.  In  July
    2011 they made application for entry  clearance  for  the  purposes  of
    settlement as the children of Ms. S.M.A. (the sponsor) who had obtained
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  family  reunion
    provisions of paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules as the spouse  of
    Mr. S.H.F. who had been granted asylum in the UK.

 2. The applications were refused on 20 July 2011.  The ECO gave reasons as
    follows:

    "You have applied to join  your  mother  in  the  UK  who  was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter as the spouse of a refugee.  A person who has
    obtained their status as the result of being the dependent of a sponsor
    who was  recognised  as  a  refugee  is  not  entitled  to  sponsor  an
    application for family reunion.  The family reunion rules in paragraphs
    352A - 352F clearly state that only a person who has fled their country
    of formal habitual residence, then has been recognised as a refugee  in
    the UK is entitled to have their family members apply to join them.   A
    family member granted entry clearance into the  UK  under  the  refugee
    family reunion rules may not in their own  turn  sponsor  into  the  UK
    other family members under part 11 of the Immigration Rules.   This  is
    because they are not deemed to be refugee for the purposes of the  1951
    Convention.   Therefore  I  am  not  satisfied  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities that you meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  352D(i)-
    (iv)".

 3. The ECO went on to refuse the applications on the basis that he was not
    satisfied that the appellants were related to the sponsor as claimed or
    that they formed part of the sponsor's pre-flight family.

 4. They appealed.  Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on  13  March  2012
    First tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough dismissed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds (Article 8).

 5. The background to the appeal is as follows.  The sponsor arrived in the
    UK on 12 June 2009 under the family reunion provisions.  She had become
    separated from her children in Somalia in late 2007  and  had  fled  to
    Ethiopia in 2008. Her husband, who she had come to join, left her  soon
    after her arrival. She found out in March 2011 that the appellants were
    living in Ethiopia with her brother.  Since making contact  she  speaks
    to them regularly.  She has been unable to travel to  Ethiopia  to  see
    them because of a shortage of funds.  She has sent between $150  -  200
    per month to provide for them.

 6. Neither her brother nor the children have status in Ethiopia  and  fear
    removal.  They live in poor conditions in one room in a  shared  house.
    They do not attend school.  Her money pays for the rent and buys  food.
    She told the judge that they  'sometimes'  have  access  to  water  and
    electricity.  Her brother is unable to work having no status.   She  is
    unemployed and is dependent on public funds at  the  moment.   She  has
    been looking for a job.

 7. The judge found her to be credible 'as regards the matters in issue  in
    the appeal' (at [24]).   They  had  become  separated  in  Somalia  for
    reasons beyond her control in November 2007.  The judge found that they
    did form part of her pre-flight  family.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appeals had to be dismissed under the Rules,  including  paragraph  297
    (iv) and (v).

 8. The judge  then  considered  their  claims  under  Article  8  and  was
    satisfied that a family life continues to exist between them and  their
    mother.  The decisions interfere with that family life [29].

 9. In considering the issue of proportionality regard was had to the  fact
    that they were children.   The  judge  stated  at  [31]  that  although
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 relates
    to children in the UK, international obligations entered into by the UK
    provided that their welfare continues to be a primary consideration.

10. The judge had regard to T (s.55 BCIA 2009 -  entry  clearance)  Jamaica
    [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).  Section 55 was held not to apply to  children
    who are outside the UK. In that case the Tribunal held at paragraph  27
    that in making an  assessment  under  Article  8(1)  the  child's  best
    interests are a primary  consideration.   Reference  was  made  to  the
    sequence of decisions in Strasbourg  and  the  higher  courts  to  this
    effect applying Article 3 of the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of  the
    Child to all administrative decision making.

11. These duties can  be  directly  enforced  by  the  Tribunal  judges  in
    determining appeals.  It is for the judge to decide on all the relevant
    evidence what the best interests of the child  are  in  the  particular
    circumstances of the case, whether there are  compelling  circumstances
    requiring admission and whether if the  case  fails  under  the  rules,
    there remains a lack  of  respect  for  family  life  Article  8(1).  -
    paragraph 28.

12. The Tribunal in T stated at paragraph  29  that  it  was  difficult  to
    contemplate a scenario where a section  55  duty  was  material  to  an
    immigration decision and indicated a certain outcome but Article 8  did
    not.

13. Judge Hembrough found that  the  appellants,  although  separated  from
    their mother are living in  Ethiopia,  a  party  to  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention.  They have reached a place of relative safety.  There is  a
    tolerant government attitude towards refugees.

14. The appellants  have  access  to  housing,  water,  electricity  and  a
    telephone and there was no evidence of their suffering from any medical
    condition or in want of care or particularly  vulnerable  or  at  risk.
    They have a male protector  and  are  maintained  by  their  mother  by
    remittances.  Although it is asserted that they did not  go  to  school
    there was no evidence as to whether this was because  they  were  being
    denied access or was a matter of choice [34].

15. At [36] Judge Hembrough stated that whilst  their  life  chances  would
    undoubtedly be improved if they were admitted to the UK '... I have not
    been satisfied that their  welfare  is  likely  to  be  jeopardised  by
    exclusion as I understand  the  term  "welfare"  to  be  used  in  this
    context.  The test is not one of "best interests" '.

16. The appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  12
    April 2012.  Following the error of law hearing at Field  House  on  17
    August 2012 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Mailer  (having  narrated  the
    background  of  the  application  and  First  tier  judge's  findings),
    continued: '...

      15. Mr. Cheng submitted that there was an error of law with regard to
          the judge's statement at paragraph 36 in  particular.   The  test
          was clearly  their  "best  interests"  and  not  simply  welfare.
          Regarding was had to   T  (s.55  BCIA  2009  -  entry  clearance)
          Jamaica [2011]UKUT 00483 (IAC) as well as the Court  of  Appeal's
          decision in Muse and others v ECO [2012] EWCA Civ 10.   That  was
          similarly an entry clearance application  in  respect  of  Somali
          nationals considered under Article 8.  Toulson L.J. at  paragraph
          25, in referring to Article 8 claims in this context stated  that
          in all such circumstances the  best  interests  of  the  children
          involved are a consideration of  high  importance,  but  are  not
          necessarily  determinative  of  the  outcome.   He  referred   to
          decisions such as ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

      16. Mr. Parkinson submitted that the judge properly directed  himself
          in accordance with T.  In substance the judge has considered  the
          relevant factors in the  proportionality  exercise  and  has  had
          regard to the relevant interest of the children.

      17. Having considered the competing submissions  I  find  that  there
          have been errors of law for the reasons stated  in  the  decision
          granting permission to appeal.

      18. The judge was referred to the decisions in T as well as  Muse  to
          which I have referred.  In both  those  decisions  Tribunals  are
          enjoined to consider the best interests of the children  in  this
          context  as  well.   There  was  specific  reference  to  the  UN
          Convention on the Rights of the Child.   That  was  part  of  the
          written submissions before the judge set out at paragraphs 11  et
          seq.  In particular  considerations  relating  to  their  mental,
          social, physical and moral integrity must also be considered.

      19. It is accordingly incorrect to state as the judge did  that  "the
          test is not one of best  interests".   It  is  evident  from  the
          judge's analysis at paragraph 36  that  there  is  a  distinction
          between  "welfare"  and  "best  interests",  which  he  has   not
          articulated.  As Mr. Cheng submitted  the  lack  of  clarity  and
          reasoning betrayed by that statement is itself an error of law.

      20. The judge has thus not properly had  regard  to  or  applied  the
          duties set out at paragraph 28 of T.

      21. In the circumstances the determination of the judge is set aside.
           The parties agreed that in the event that I so  concluded  there
          should be a Case Management  Review  hearing  in  order  to  give
          consideration to the future conduct of the case.   In  particular
          consideration will have to be given as to whether the  Appellants
          should be interviewed so as to take account  of  their  views  as
          well.'


17. Following further procedure on 31 January 2013 at Field House DUT  Judge
   Mailer gave Directions which included:

              '1. The  following  facts  are  preserved  and  accepted  from
             paragraph 24 of the determination of the First  tier  Tribunal:
             the Appellants are the sponsor's children; they formed part  of
             her pre-flight family.


             2. Paragraph 34 of the determination is  preserved  subject  to
             the qualification regarding water and electricity  referred  to
             at paragraph 19...'


18. Following a Transfer Order the matter came before me for rehearing.


19. In brief proceedings it was agreed by Mr. Cheng and Mr. Hayes  that  the
   First  tier  Tribunal  Judge's  dismissal  of  the  appeals   under   the
   Immigration Rules stood.  Also that the only issue was Article 8 and  the
   consideration therein of section 55.

20. The sponsor S.M.A. was presented for examination.  In chief she  adopted
   her three witness statements (6 March 2012, 18 June 2012 and 26  February
   2013).

21. There was no cross examination and no other witnesses.

22. In brief submissions Mr. Hayes accepted that the best interests  of  the
   children were to be with their parent.   However,  whilst  there  was  an
   unmet need for  their  mother  there  was  no  evidence  that  they  were
   suffering neglect or abuse in Ethiopia.  Stable arrangements had been met
   for their care.

23. In reply Mr. Cheng  also  submitted  that  the  best  interests  of  the
   children were to be with their mother.  The sponsor's evidence  was  that
   the uncle did not want to have care of the children.  Whilst there was no
   indication of neglect, amenities where they were staying appeared  to  be
   basic.  It was not an environment for young girls to be  brought  up  in.
   Were it not for the maintenance provision the  appellants  would  satisfy
   the child dependency rules. Looking at all the circumstances the decision
   to refuse was disproportionate.

24. In relation to Article 8 I approach this in stages by reference  to  the
   five questions which have to be asked as  set  out  in  paragraph  12  of
   Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  an  approach  confirmed  in  paragraph  7  of  EB
   (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 4.

25. I also remind myself that I am not solely concerned with the  rights  of
   the appellants but I must consider the direct impact of  the  refusal  on
   their family members which in this case includes the sponsor (Beoku-Betts
   [2008] UKHL 39).

26. As indicated there was no attack on the sponsor's evidence and I see  no
   reason why I should  not  find  her  account  credible  on  all  material
   matters.

27. In summary, I find that the appellants are the  sponsor's  children  and
   formed part of her pre-flight family. I find that the second appellant is
   the result of the rape of the sponsor in Somalia.  The  sponsor  and  the
   appellants were separated for reasons beyond her control in late 2007 and
   she did not know of their whereabouts until 2011.   The  appellants  have
   been living in Ethiopia with their uncle, the sponsor's brother.  I  find
   also that the sponsor's third child was murdered in Somalia in 2010.

28. The sponsor has wanted to return to Ethiopia to  see  her  children  but
   has not had the funds to travel.  Whatever money she  has  she  sends  to
   them.  She buys telephone cards to speak to them which she  does  several
   times a week.  She misses them greatly and worries about them.

29.  As  for  the  appellants'  circumstances  in  Ethiopia,  they  and  the
   sponsor's brother share a house with other Somalis in Addis Ababa.   They
   live in one room with her brother.  Her money pays for the rent and  buys
   food.  They sometimes have access to water  and  electricity.   They  are
   living illegally in Ethiopia.  The girls do not attend school.   They  do
   not leave the house as they feel they will be caught and could be removed
   to Somalia at any time. Their uncle does not leave the house much  as  he
   feels that if he is caught by the authorities there would be  no  one  to
   look after the children.  He does not work having no status.

30. I also see no reason to disbelieve the evidence that  her  brother,  who
   is 25 years old, is tired of looking after the children as it is a lot of
   responsibility for him and he cannot live his own life.

31. I now apply the law to these facts. The first question is whether  there
   is family life for the purposes of article 8 between the  appellants  and
   the sponsor. I think it is clear that article 8 is engaged in its  family
   life aspect. The European Court of Human  Rights  has  consistently  held
   that, from the moment of birth and by the very fact of it, there exists a
   bond between a child and his or her parents amounting to 'family life'.

32. The effect of the decision to  refuse  the  appellants  entry  clearance
   amounts to an interference with the right to  respect  for  enjoyment  of
   family life. The Court of Appeal  has  clarified  that  the  question  of
   significant interference must not be read as meaning the minimal level of
   severity required is a special or high one (see AG (Eritrea) [2007]  EWCA
   Civ 801, paragraph 27). There is clearly an  interference  of  sufficient
   gravity to require consideration to be given to the remaining steps.

33. The decision is clearly lawful in the sense that it was made within  the
   legal framework of the Immigration Acts and the Immigration Rules and  it
   was made in pursuit of the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
   controls.

34. The real issue for determination in this case  is  whether  the  refusal
   strikes a fair balance between the competing interests of the  appellants
   and the community as a whole, and  was  therefore  proportionate  to  the
   legitimate aim pursued, or whether the appellants'  circumstances  demand
   that a departure be made from the rules given that they cannot be met  at
   present.

35. My approach to the question of proportionality is guided  by  the  House
   of Lords' opinion in Huang and Kashmiri [2007] UKHL11 as follows:


         '20. In an article 8 case  where  this  question  is  reached,  the
         ultimate  question  for  the  appellate  immigration  authority  is
         whether the refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances
         where the life of the family cannot reasonably be  expected  to  be
         enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account  of  all  considerations
         weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the  family  life  of
         the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a
         breach of the fundamental right protected  by  article  8.  If  the
         answer to this question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and
         the authority must so decide.'


36. The House of Lords confirmed the correctness of the  test  that  a  fair
   balance must be struck between the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the
   interests of the community.

37. Section 55 of the 2009 Act  does  not  apply  to  children  overseas  (T
   (Jamaica)). However, as explained in ZH (Tanzania), the best interests of
   children are a primary consideration.  In  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  T
   (Jamaica) the President explained that the child's best interests  are  a
   primary consideration in the assessment  of  article  8  in  an  overseas
   appeal.

38. Lady Hale explained in ZH:

         '23. For our purposes the most relevant national and  international
         obligation of the United Kingdom is contained in  article  3(1)  of
         the UNCRC:

             "In all actions concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by
             public or private social welfare institutions, courts of  law,
             administrative authorities or  legislative  bodies,  the  best
             interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."

         This is a binding obligation in international law, and the  spirit,
         if not the precise language, has  also  been  translated  into  our
         national law. Section 11 of the Children Act  2004  places  a  duty
         upon a wide range of public bodies to  carry  out  their  functions
         having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of
         children. The immigration authorities were at  first  excused  from
         this duty,  because  the  United  Kingdom  had  entered  a  general
         reservation to the UNCRC concerning immigration matters.  But  that
         reservation was lifted in 2008 and, as a result, section 55 of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 now provides that, in
         relation among other things to immigration, asylum or  nationality,
         the Secretary of State must make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that
         those functions "are  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the United
         Kingdom".
         .........


         26. Nevertheless, even in those decisions, the  best  interests  of
         the child must be a primary consideration. As Mason CJ and Deane  J
         put it in the case of Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
         Teoh [1995] HCA 20, (1995) 183 CLR 273, 292 in the  High  Court  of
         Australia:

             "A decision-maker with an eye to the  principle  enshrined  in
             the Convention would be looking to the best interests  of  the
             children as a primary consideration, asking whether the  force
             of any other consideration outweighed it."

         As the Federal Court  of  Australia  further  explained  in  Wan  v
         Minister for Immigration and Multi-cultural Affairs [2001] FCA 568,
         para 32,

             "[The  Tribunal]  was  required  to  identify  what  the  best
             interests of Mr Wan's children required with  respect  to  the
             exercise of its discretion and  then  to  assess  whether  the
             strength of any other consideration, or the cumulative  effect
             of other considerations, outweighed the consideration  of  the
             best  interests  of  the  children  understood  as  a  primary
             consideration."

This did not mean (as it would do in other contexts) that identifying  their
best interests would lead inexorably to a decision in conformity with  those
interests. Provided that the Tribunal did not treat any other  consideration
as inherently more significant than the best interests of the  children,  it
could conclude that the strength  of  the  other  considerations  outweighed
them. The important thing, therefore, is to consider  those  best  interests
first. That seems, with  respect,  to  be  the  correct  approach  to  these
decisions in this country as well as in Australia." '

39. I have therefore treated the appellants' best  interests  as  a  primary
   consideration in my assessment. In line with the findings of fact which I
   have made, I think it is clear that the best interests of the  appellants
   require them to be brought up in a stable home with a loving parent  (per
   Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)).   I have no reason
   to doubt the claim  that  their  separation  in  November  2007  was  not
   voluntary but resulted from an escalation of fighting locally  which  led
   to the appellants fleeing while their mother was away fetching water from
   a nearby village. I have no doubt that they enjoyed each  others  company
   until that time.  Having suffered the trauma of losing their mother  they
   have at least been looked after by a male blood  relative,  namely  their
   uncle.
40.  However, they have no legal status in Ethiopia and  do  not  appear  to
   have any prospect of obtaining it. The only relative they are in  day  to
   day contact with is the uncle who also has no legal  status.  I  have  no
   doubt that he does his best for  them  and  there  is  no  indication  of
   neglect or abuse or of health issues, but I accept he  is  tired  of  the
   responsibility and finds it difficult dealing with young  girls  who  are
   growing up and who need a mother figure at close hand. They do not appear
   to be in education and have no prospects of such. As they have  no  legal
   status they rarely go out. In these circumstances their social and mental
   development is stagnating. They appear to be living in poor housing with,
   at best, limited amenities and dependent on remittances from the sponsor,
   evidence of which  has  been  provided.  Their  situation  could  not  be
   described as stable. I conclude from the evidence that they are,  by  any
   standard, vulnerable.

41. The ECO does not appear to have interviewed them but  their  wishes  are
   manifestly to join  their  mother  with  whom  they  remain  in  frequent
   telephone contact.  The sponsor is willing and able to provide them  with
   a loving home. The sponsor is a woman  who  I  accept  has  suffered  the
   further trauma of  rape  which  resulted  in  the  birth  of  the  second
   appellant and that such led to her husband leaving her when she disclosed
   it soon after her arrival in the UK. Also the murder of her other  child,
   a boy, in Somalia in 2010. It would be unreasonable to expect the sponsor
   with her history to return to live in Ethiopia or Somalia.

42. This is not therefore a case of mere preference as to which country  the
   appellants reside in. It is appreciated also that there are many children
   who  have  fled  Somalia  and  are  living  in  Ethiopia   in   difficult
   circumstances. However, in this case there is a mother who cannot return.
   There are two young girls who are without their mother. I do not see that
   it can seriously be put that  the  girls  be  deprived  for  perhaps  the
   entirety of their childhood from contact, other than by  telephone,  with
   their mother.

43. In my judgement the circumstances of this particular case  point  firmly
   towards an outcome favouring family reunion, which would be in accordance
   with the spirit of the Refugee Convention. The ordinary considerations of
   immigration control,  such  as  the  need  to  show  maintenance  without
   additional recourse to public funds, are waived in cases  concerning  the
   close family members of refugees. Whilst the appellants do not  meet  the
   requirements of the family  reunion  rules  because  their  mother  is  a
   dependent of  a  refugee  rather  than  a  refugee,  the  combination  of
   circumstances behind this case are sufficiently  serious  and  compelling
   and compassionate to require admission. This is  a  family  of  dispersed
   Somalis who have no prospect at present of resettling in their  homeland.
   As such, I do not give decisive weight to the issue of maintenance in the
   proportionality balancing exercise.

44. Looking at all the circumstances and balancing the respective  interests
   of the parties, while treating the best interests of the appellants as  a
   primary consideration, I find that the decision to refuse entry clearance
   amounts to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  family  life  and  I
   therefore allow the appellants appeals on Article 8 grounds.


DECISION
The decisions dismissing the appeals under the Immigrations Rules stand.
The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).
Anonymity direction continued.


Signed                              Date 8 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


