

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20462/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at London Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 January 2015                       |On 3 February 2015                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                benjamin cann
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Charles Prah (sponsor, father of Benjamin Cann)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals to the Upper Tribunal against
    the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid   that   was
    promulgated on 1 October 2014.   Judge  Majid  allowed  the  Mr  Cann's
    appeal against the ECO's decision of 5  November  2013  refusing  entry
    clearance on the basis that he was not satisfied that Mr Prah had  sole
    responsibility for Mr Cann's upbringing.   It  would  seem  that  Judge
    Majid allowed the appeal both under paragraph 297  of  the  immigration
    rules and under article 8 of the human rights convention.

 2. Mr Prah represented his son.  Because Mr Prah is not legally  qualified
    I explained to him the nature of an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  the
    procedures I had to follow and advised him of my role  to  ensure  that
    neither he nor his son would  be  disadvantaged  by  a  lack  of  legal
    knowledge.

 3. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of application.  He reminded  me  that
    the ECO argued that Judge Majid had completely failed to assess whether
    sole responsibility had been demonstrated.  There was no  reference  to
    the factors that should be considered, as set out by the Tribunal in TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.
    Mr Kandola also reminded me that the ECO argued that Judge  Majid  made
    no findings in relation to the issues of maintenance and accommodation,
    which had been one of the reasons for refusing entry clearance.

 4. Mr Kandola also argued that Judge Majid had misapplied article 8.   Not
    only was there no need for him to have considered  article  8  directly
    since he was allowing the appeal under the immigration rules, the Judge
    failed to appreciate that Mr Cann had turned 18  by  the  date  of  the
    immigration decision.  Although paragraph 27 of the  immigration  rules
    meant that the application for entry clearance  could  not  be  refused
    under the immigration rules solely because Mr Cann had passed  the  age
    of majority, no such protection applied  to  article  8.   Judge  Majid
    failed to deal with this issue and failed to explain the nature of  the
    family life between Mr Cann and Mr Prah.  A final problem  with  regard
    to the approach to article 8 was that Judge Majid had  failed  to  have
    regard to the changes introduced by s.19 of the  Immigration  Act  2014
    regarding the weight to be given to the public interest  when  carrying
    out the balancing act under article 8(2).

 5. The issues in this appeal are: (1) whether Judge Majid  considered  the
    relevant legal provisions relating to sole responsibility,  maintenance
    and accommodation as set out in paragraph 297 of the immigration rules,
    and (2) whether Judge Majid applied the law relevant to the  assessment
    of the appellant's protected private and family life rights.

 6. The determination is of such poor quality that I have no hesitation  in
    finding that I can only find that Judge Majid did neither. As a  result
    I find that the determination  contains  numerous  legal  errors  which
    require me to set it aside and to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing where the relevant law is properly considered.   My
    reasons follow.

 7. The Tribunal set out clear guidance as to the approach judges  need  to
    take to  issues  of  sole  responsibility.   These  are  summarised  at
    paragraph 52 of TD (Yemen),  which  I  cite  for  the  benefit  of  the
    appellant.

    52. Questions of "sole  responsibility"  under  the  immigration  rules
    should be approached as follows:

       i. Who has "responsibility" for a  child's  upbringing  and  whether
       that responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to be decided upon
       all the evidence.
       ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should not to
       be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation but rather  as  a
       practical one  which,  in  each  case,  looks  to  who  in  fact  is
       exercising responsibility for the  child.  That  responsibility  may
       have been for a short duration in that the present arrangements  may
       have begun quite recently.
       iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be undertaken  by
       individuals other than a child's parents and may be  shared  between
       different individuals: which may particularly arise where the  child
       remains in its own country whilst the only parent  involved  in  its
       life travels to and lives in the UK.
       iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are  involved  in  the
       upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of  them
       will have sole responsibility.
       v. If it  is  said  that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
       upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be  that  the  other
       has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility. In such cases, it may
       well  be  justified  to  find  that  that  parent  no   longer   has
       responsibility for the child.
       vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just  a  matter
       between the parents. So even if there is only one parent involved in
       the  child's   upbringing,   that   parent   may   not   have   sole
       responsibility.
       vii. In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day responsibility
       (or decision-making) for the  child's  welfare  may  necessarily  be
       shared with others (such as relatives or  friends)  because  of  the
       geographical separation between the parent and child.
       viii. That,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  parent  having  sole
       responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.
       ix.  The  test  is,  not  whether   anyone   else   has   day-to-day
       responsibility, but whether the parent has  continuing  control  and
       direction  of  the  child's  upbringing  including  making  all  the
       important decisions in the child's life. If not,  responsibility  is
       shared and so not "sole".
 8. This reported decision remains the leading case on  the  assessment  of
    sole responsibility.  I am satisfied that Judge Majid  failed  to  have
    any regard to this case or the principles it set out. It is unclear  on
    what basis he concluded that the evidence showed that  the  appellant's
    father had sole responsibility. Judge Majid did nothing to resolve  the
    factual problems that arose from the limited evidence  provided.   That
    failure is an error on a point of law.

 9. In addition, at no point does Judge Majid make any findings in relation
    to  maintenance  and  accommodation.   There   are   strict   financial
    requirements in the immigration rules which  cannot  be  ignored.  Some
    evidence was provided but no findings were made on that evidence.  That
    was also wrong in law.

10. With regard to the arguments relating to article 8, I am satisfied that
    Judge Majid has failed to show that he had any regard to relevant  case
    law or changes to the statutory scheme relating to article 8.  The case
    law cited by Judge Majid has been overtaken.

11. In addition to all these points which clearly  show  that  Judge  Majid
    failed in his judicial functions, Judge Majid did nothing to assist the
    appellant's father who presented the  case.  Mr  Prah  is  not  legally
    qualified and could not be expected to have realised the legal  context
    of assessing sole responsibility or the evidence  needed  to  prove  he
    could adequately maintain and accommodate his  son.   This  failure  to
    assist is contrary to Presidential guidance and  although  perhaps  not
    raising a legal error of itself it raises serious concerns  as  to  the
    fairness of the hearing which contributes to the errors I have found.

12.  I  mention  that  the  issue  of  fairness   perhaps   requires   more
    consideration in this appeal than in others because Mr Cann is over  18
    and will be unable to make any future applications under paragraph  297
    of the immigration rules.  It is appropriate in such instance to  remit
    the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  may  be,  given   the
    complexities arising in this matter, that Mr Prah will consider whether
    he should obtain legal  advice  about  how  to  prepare  for  the  next
    hearing..  But that is a matter for him.





Directions

13. In light of the errors I have decided that not  only  must  I  set  the
    decision aside but I must remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fair hearing.  I make the following directions for  the  remitted
    hearing.

14. Nothing is preserved from Judge Majid's determination.

15. The appeal can be heard by any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    Judge Majid.

16. A date has been fixed for the rehearing (25 June 2015) but this may  be
    subject to change by the First-tier Tribunal, who will issue notice  of
    hearing and any further directions.



Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed  because  the  determination
of Judge Majid contains numerous legal error  that  require  it  to  be  set
aside.

The original appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  afresh
decision on all issues.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
