
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
                                                   OA/20332/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                                Decision
                                             & Reasons promulgated
On 9 October 2014                    On 22 May 2015

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                             Wane Lubosi Imbuwa
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  Pretoria
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by  Irvine  Thanvi
                       Natas Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M
      A Khan promulgated on 10 July 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the decision of the Respondent dated 31 October 2013 to refuse
      entry clearance as a the dependent child  of  a  parent  with  limited
      leave to remain in the UK.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Zambia born on 4 July 2009. He  is  the
      child of Edna Chirwa, also a national of Zambia, born on 16  September
      1975, (hereafter 'the sponsor'). The sponsor had been studying in  the
      UK: she pursued an undergraduate degree in Business Management at  the
      University of East London and at the date of the Respondent's decision
      had achieved a 2.1 and was due officially to graduate on  19  November
      2013. She had applied to do an MBA at the same institution  commencing
      in September 2014. However, for the next year she was planning to work
      as a full-time sabbatical officer of the university's  Student  Union:
      this was an elected position (elections having taken  place  in  March
      2013), and was full-time with a salary of �21,000.  The  sponsor,  who
      had left the Appellant in the care of her parents when she had come to
      study, now wanted him to join her during the period that she undertook
      her work and duties as a sabbatical officer. The sponsor had leave  as
      a Tier 4 (General) Student.


   3. On 2 October 2013 an application was made on  the  Appellant's  behalf
      for entry clearance to join his mother  in  the  UK.  The  Appellant's
      application was refused for reasons set out in a Notice of Immigration
      Decision dated 31 October 2013, with particular reference to paragraph
      319H of the Immigration Rules.  Essentially  the  Respondent  was  not
      satisfied that the sponsor was studying at a level that would  entitle
      her to be joined  by  a  dependent  child.  The  Respondent  otherwise
      expressed himself not to be satisfied that the sponsor had shown  that
      she had been solely responsible for the Appellant, or that there  were
      any serious compelling aspects to the case to  warrant  the  grant  of
      leave.


   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal for reasons set out
      in his determination.


   6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 29 July 2014.




   7. The Respondent has filed a Rule  24  response  dated  13  August  2014
      resisting the challenge to the outcome before the First-tier Tribunal


Consideration

   8. It is contended  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge made two errors of fact.


   9. I accept paragraph 25 of the Judge's decision bears no resemblance  to
      the facts of the case. This was not an application  by  the  Appellant
      "to join his adoptive father who  also  happens  to  be  his  maternal
      uncle". It seems to me most  likely  that  such  a  paragraph  appears
      through some word-processing slip and lack of thorough proof  reading.
      However, in  circumstances  where  the  Judge  has  clearly  otherwise
      identified the nature of the application and addressed the  issues  in
      the appeal I find such a slip not to be material to  the  outcome,  or
      otherwise indicative of a lack of attention to the real issues in  the
      appeal. The error in this regard is not accompanied by  other  errors,
      and is not of similar moment  to  those  identified  in  ML  (Nigeria)
      [2013] EWCA Civ 844.


  10. Further I note it  is  alleged  in  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
      application for permission to appeal that the Judge has proceeded upon
      a factual misconception in stating that the sponsor "has not made  any
      application to the Home Office to change her status"  (paragraph  26).
      It is submitted that this  disregards  the  sponsor's  application  to
      extend her Tier 4 visa as a sabbatical officer following completion of
      her undergraduate degree.


  11. Whilst it may well be that the underlying basis upon  which  the  visa
      was granted altered, the nature of  the  visa  did  not:  the  sponsor
      continued with the same  immigration  status  as  a  Tier  4  student.
      Indeed, contrary to the way in which the case is put in  the  grounds,
      in my judgement the references therein to  the  Secretary  of  State's
      policy guidance in  respect  of  student  union  sabbatical  officers,
      whilst necessarily and inevitably recognising  a  factual  distinction
      between being a  student  in  full-time  study  and  being  a  student
      sabbatical officer in a full-time  salaried  elected  executive  union
      position, do not make any distinction as  regards  the  type  of  visa
      issued to such persons.


  12. Indeed it is the contention that the sponsor as an employed sabbatical
      officer is to be treated  differently  from  a  student  in  full-time
      education for the purposes of her child's entry clearance  application
      that was at the core of the submissions before the First-tier Tribunal
      and in the grounds submitted to the Upper Tribunal.


  13. It seems to me plain beyond any doubt whatsoever that whilst  studying
      and being employed as a  full  time  sabbatical  officer  are  clearly
      different factual scenarios, for immigration purposes the  Immigration
      Rules do not confer different statuses. A student who  interrupts  his
      or her studies for the purpose  of  taking  a  sabbatical  year  as  a
      student union officer does not cease to be a student visa  holder  and
      is not entitled to apply for, and does not become, any  sort  of  visa
      holder more normally associated with full-time employment.  Once  this
      position - inevitable and plain under the Rules - is  recognised,  the
      basis of the Appellant's claim to be  treated  differently  under  the
      Rules from the child of any other Tier 4  Student  is  groundless.  In
      this context it is to be noted that it has never  been  disputed  that
      the sponsor was a holder of anything other than a Tier 4 student visa.
      Nor has it ever been disputed that she has  not  yet  studied  at  the
      requisite level.  Indeed,  albeit  somewhat  reluctantly,  Mr  Coleman
      recognised the difficulty presented to the Appellant's  case  in  such
      circumstances.


  14. As a dependent, the Appellant's immigration status potentially derives
      from his mother's immigration status: it  does  not  derive  from  his
      mother's activities pursuant to her immigration status.


  15. In reality the Appellant's case in this regard is based on an argument
      that the Rules should make a  distinction  between  a  student  and  a
      sabbatical officer. That is in effect a dispute with the way in  which
      the Rules are drafted. Interesting though a debate  on  such  a  topic
      might be, it  does  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  Tribunal's
      jurisdiction to reach a conclusion as to whether the Rules ought to be
      drafted differently in this regard.  Be  that  as  it  may,  any  such
      dispute with the way in which the Rules have been drafted  falls  well
      short of establishing  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the Rules or was otherwise not in accordance with  the
      law.


  16.  In  all  such  circumstances,  whilst  perhaps  in  part  inelegantly
      expressed, the Judge's reasoning at paragraph 26 is essentially sound.
      The sponsor's leave was indeed as a student - for the purposes of  the
      Rules as a Tier 4 student;  she  did  not  have  leave  in  any  other
      capacity relevant to employment; her last course of study  was  indeed
      at NQF level 6, which was below the level at which a  Tier  4  student
      was entitled to be joined in the UK by a dependent child; she had  not
      commenced any higher level of study.


  17. The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal
      also argue that the Judge erred in failing to have regard  to  certain
      documents submitted in support of  the  appeal.  Those  documents  are
      listed at paragraph 3 of the grounds.


  18. However, it seems perfectly plain that the Judge did  have  regard  to
      such documents: see determination at paragraph 27. In any event  these
      documents do not have any bearing on the  immigration  status  of  the
      sponsor, and therefore do not have any bearing on the  decision  taken
      under paragraph 319H.  Their  only  potential  relevance  was  in  the
      context of the issue of 'sole responsibility', which  is  acknowledged
      in the grounds (paragraph 4), and by Mr Coleman before me, not to have
      been a necessary consideration for the purposes of paragraph  319H  if
      the application in any event failed because of the level of  study  of
      the sponsor.


  19. In the circumstances I reject the Appellant's challenge in respect  of
      the decision under the Immigration Rules as pleaded in the grounds  in
      support of the application for permission to appeal.


  20. In recognition of the difficulty faced  by  the  Appellant  under  the
      Rules, Mr Coleman sought to put the case on  a  different  basis  from
      that pleaded, with particular reference  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
      (which was raised only in very  general  terms  in  the  grounds).  He
      submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in  his
      evaluation of the issue of 'sole responsibility',  and  that  such  an
      error meant that the Article 8 consideration was misconceived  in  its
      premises.


  21. In the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal,
      apart from suggesting that it was unnecessary to consider the issue of
      sole responsibility  if  the  Judge  was  upholding  the  Respondent's
      decision premised on the sponsor's status and her level of study  (and
      unsustainably arguing that the fact that the Judge nonetheless did  so
      was indicative of him having concluded in the  Appellant's  favour  on
      such matters), the only challenge to  the  substance  of  the  Judge's
      conclusions in  respect  of  sole  responsibility  was  based  on  the
      supposed failure to have  regard  to  supporting  documents.  For  the
      reasons already given that basis of challenge is unfounded.


  22.  In  my  judgement  Mr  Coleman's  alternative  submission  inevitably
      encounters the same problem. With good reason therefore -  and  indeed
      with merit - Mr Coleman seeks to raise a quite different challenge  to
      the Judge's findings in respect of sole responsibility.


  23. Mr Coleman argues that although the Judge sets out at paragraph 28 the
      relevant test  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  TD  (paragraph
      297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049,  he  does
      not apply it or otherwise provide adequate reasons for the  conclusion
      that  he  was  not  satisfied  "that  the   sponsor   has   the   sole
      responsibility for the appellant" (paragraph 29).


  24. In this context the following matters are to be noted in particular:

(i) The Judge's conclusion ran contrary  to  the  sponsor's  assertion,  and
      necessarily therefore involved a rejection of her evidence of  primary
      facts. However, nowhere does the Judge  make  an  adverse  credibility
      finding in respect of the sponsor, or otherwise offer any reason as to
      why her testimony was to be treated as unreliable or not credible.

(ii) The Judge identifies no adequate reason for rejecting  as  self-serving
      the assertion in the Appellant's father's letter that he has not  been
      involved in the Appellant's day-to-day life (paragraph 27).  The  fact
      that the letter does not state in terms that he was never  married  to
      the sponsor does not sustain such a conclusion.

(iii) The acknowledged fact that the  sponsor's  parents  had  been  looking
      after the Appellant in her absence, and the Judge's finding that there
      was no evidence to demonstrate that  such  an  arrangement  could  not
      continue (paragraph 29), were in no way inconsistent with  the  notion
      that the sponsor had sole  responsibility  for  her  son's  upbringing
      within the meaning of the Immigration Rules. Such  circumstances  were
      not determinative of the issue.

(iv) Accordingly the Judge's reliance  upon  "the  above-mentioned  reasons"
      (paragraph 29) - necessarily being a reference to what had  been  said
      concerning the  Appellant's  father,  and  the  immediately  preceding
      references to the viability of the continuation  of  the  arrangements
      whereby the Appellant's grandparents cared for him in the  absence  of
      his mother - did not sustainably support  the  adverse  conclusion  on
      sole responsibility.


  25. Ms Pal acknowledged that the Judge's reasoning in this regard appeared
      inadequate. She was also prepared to acknowledge that this might  have
      had a potential impact on the assessment under Article 8 of the  ECHR.
      Further, whilst section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
      Act 2009 did not have any direct application to a  child  outside  the
      UK, it was accepted that there was an analogous  duty  in  respect  of
      applications for entry clearance: T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance)
      Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC). The Judge had not  made  any  express
      reference to the best interests of the Appellant.


  26. In such circumstances I find that there was an error  of  law  in  the
      approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal to the issue of Article 8 of
      the ECHR such that the decision in this  regard  requires  to  be  set
      aside and remade. For the avoidance of any doubt, the  decision  under
      the Rules is not set aside and stands.


Remaking the Decision

  27. Both parties agreed that it was possible to remake the decision in the
      appeal in respect of Article 8 before the Upper Tribunal  and  without
      adjourning for a further hearing. To  this  end  I  heard  brief  oral
      evidence from the sponsor, who provided an update as  to  her  present
      circumstances: she was now undertaking a second period as a sabbatical
      officer. (In this regard I have not lost sight of  the  fact  that  as
      this is an entry clearance case I am required to evaluate  matters  as
      they were at the date of the Respondent's decision - even  in  respect
      of ECHR grounds; although it is permissible to take into account post-
      decision evidence and facts these are only relevant in so far as  they
      appertain to circumstances at the date of the Respondent's decision.)


  28. As regards the issue of  'sole  responsibility',  I  accept  that  the
      nature of the relationship between the sponsor and  the  Appellant  is
      inevitably a matter for consideration in the context of Article 8:  in
      considering  the  first,  second,  and  fifth  Razgar   questions   an
      evaluation of the nature and quality of any family life is required.


  29. The sponsor has provided a narrative account of her relationship  with
      the Appellant's father and his consequent lack of involvement with the
      Appellant (witness statement paragraph 5, Appellant's bundle pages  1-
      2). I do not accept that the appearance of the  father  on  the  birth
      certificate  is  evidence  of  any  continuing  involvement   in   the
      Appellant's life. Supporting evidence is provided by way  of,  amongst
      other things, a letter from the hospital where the Appellant was  born
      confirming the lack of involvement of the  father  pre-,  during,  and
      post- delivery; a letter from the sponsor's church in  Lusaka  wherein
      the family pastor refers to having not met the Appellant's father  and
      that to the church's knowledge the sponsor is  a  single  mother  with
      full  responsibility  for  the  Appellant;  correspondence  from   the
      Appellant's kindergarten stating that they have  only  ever  seen  and
      dealt with the sponsor as a parent, and in her  absence  the  maternal
      grandmother.


  30. In the circumstances I find on a balance  of  probabilities  that  the
      sponsor has been  the  only  parent  taking  an  active  role  in  the
      Appellant's life since birth. I find that the  sponsor  has  had  sole
      responsibility for the Appellant from this time. Although the  day-to-
      day practicalities of  care  have  been  undertaken  by  the  maternal
      grandparents whilst the sponsor has come to the UK to pursue  studies,
      I do not find that such an arrangement amounted to a surrender of  the
      sponsor's  parental  responsibilities:  I  find  that  the   important
      decisions in the Appellant's life continue to be made by his mother  -
      albeit that the immediate practicalities of care are undertaken by the
      grandparents.


  31. I take forward into an evaluation of the quality of  the  family  life
      enjoyed between the Appellant and the sponsor my conclusion in respect
      of sole responsibility.


  32. As regards family life I note that Ms Pal accepts that a  family  life
      exists between the sponsor and the  Appellant  as  mother  and  child.
      However, Ms Pal emphasises that they  have  lived  apart  since  2011,
      maintaining family life through visits and telephone communication.


  33. I accept that the Respondent's decision does not materially  interfere
      with the family circumstances that the sponsor voluntarily arranged in
      order to facilitate her choice of pursuing studies in the UK.


  34. I note that the sponsor in her witness statement  has  indicated  that
      she had always hoped that once she  had  established  herself  in  her
      studies in the UK she could arrange for the Appellant to  join  her  -
      and she acknowledges in this regard that the plan was so  to  do  once
      she entered postgraduate study. (In this context it is to be  recalled
      that the Rules would not permit entry  of  the  Appellant  whilst  the
      sponsor was studying at NQF level 6, but would at level 7.) In so  far
      as that original plan has been frustrated, I find it has  been  so  by
      reason of the Appellant's decision to serve as  a  sabbatical  officer
      prior to commencing a level 7 postgraduate course.


  35. Although the sponsor has told me that she thought  the  difficulty  in
      being  joined  by  her  son  was  because  of  the   issue   of   sole
      responsibility rather  than  because  she  was  not  studying  at  the
      appropriate level -  and  indeed  she  offered  this  explanation  for
      pursuing a second year as a sabbatical officer (and thereby preventing
      the Appellant from meeting the requirements of the Rules for a further
      year) - this is to misunderstand the Rules.


  36. It seems to me that I must proceed at least  on  the  basis  that  the
      sponsor had constructive knowledge of the Rules: she  certainly  could
      have accessed them through the Home Office website or otherwise sought
      advice. In any event I do not consider that  ignorance  of  the  Rules
      should sound in a sponsor's or applicant's favour in a proportionality
      balance outside the Rules. In other words, if the Appellant asserts in
      effect that she did not realise taking  a  position  as  a  sabbatical
      officer would prevent her being  joined  by  her  son  in  the  UK  in
      circumstances where if she had proceeded to commence her  postgraduate
      course the Appellant would likely have been granted entry clearance, I
      do not consider that such a mistake should in any way be given  weight
      in considering whether the Rules should in effect be  disregarded  and
      entry clearance be granted  notwithstanding  a  failure  to  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules.


  37. As regards the situation of the Appellant, I  note  that  there  is  a
      letter dated 25 June 2014 from the maternal grandmother  expressing  a
      weariness, and a sense of frustration in her grandson not  being  able
      to  join  his  mother,  the  practical  difficulties  of   having   to
      communicate with the sponsor in respect of any decisions that may need
      to be taken, the expense of calls, and the unsettling  nature  of  the
      sponsor's arrivals and departures when visiting the Appellant. I  also
      note an earlier email (Appellant's bundle page 32) which refers to the
      sponsor's mother having put her retirement plans  of  "moving  to  the
      farm" on hold. However, and whilst acknowledging what is said  in  the
      letter of 25 June 2014 about difficulties in waking early enough every
      morning to prepare the Appellant for school, I do not find that  there
      is anything revealed in this letter or otherwise in the evidence  that
      suggests that the arrangement for caring for the Appellant at the date
      of the Respondent's decision could not have continued at least for the
      period of the sponsor's first year of office with the student union  -
      being one year from 1 July 2013. Indeed the  viability  of  continuing
      the arrangements are underscored by the fact that the sponsor has  now
      chosen to  take  on  a  second  year  in  office  notwithstanding  the
      unresolved nature of  the  Appellant's  case:  I  infer  from  such  a
      circumstance  that  the  sponsor  was   content   that   the   interim
      arrangements  were   sufficient   to   protect   her   son's   welfare
      notwithstanding her own absence.


  38. For essentially the same reasons I find that there is nothing  in  the
      evidence that is indicative of unusual, particularly compassionate, or
      otherwise exceptional circumstances as regards either the  sponsor  or
      the Appellant, or in respect of their mutual family life,  that  would
      warrant departure from the Immigration Rules.


  39. I entirely recognise and understand the additional  possible  benefits
      to the  sponsor  in  terms  of  the  acquisition  of  skills  and  the
      enhancement of her curriculum vitae and  profile  -  as  well  as  the
      element of responsibility and service - inherent  in  undertaking  the
      duties of  a  sabbatical  officer.  However,  ultimately,  the  choice
      between so doing and having the company of her son is a choice for the
      sponsor. Her election to  pursue  the  sabbatical  officer  option  in
      circumstances where the Rules would  not  thereby  permit  her  to  be
      joined by her son does not in  itself  warrant  a  relaxation  of  the
      requirements of immigration  control.  Moreover,  in  the  context  of
      proportionality, where it may be  said  the  circumstances  that  have
      resulted in separation and in  continuing  separation  of  mother  and
      child are essentially matters of personal choice and personal decision-
      making - which in itself speaks to the nature and  quality  of  family
      life enjoyed between the sponsor and the Appellant - I find nothing of
      a compelling or  exceptional  nature  that  renders  the  Respondent's
      decision as disproportionate.


  40. If there were any doubt in this regard - and I emphasise that I do not
      have any such doubt - the matter would in any event be underscored  by
      the fact that the sponsor has elected to take a second  term  (i.e.  a
      further year) out of her studies to continue in her role as a  student
      union officer.


  41. Accordingly, whilst I find  nothing  controversial  in  answering  the
      first two Razgar questions in the Appellant's favour, and there  being
      no issue between the parties in respect of the third and fourth Razgar
      questions, I have no hesitation in concluding that the fifth  question
      - proportionality - is not to be answered in the Appellant's favour.


  42. For the avoidance of any doubt, in reaching my conclusion I  have  had
      regard to the 'public interest considerations' applicable pursuant  to
      section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  I
      note that  no  such  specified  consideration  is  in  and  of  itself
      determinative of the issue of proportionality one way  or  the  other,
      and that the listed considerations are not exhaustive of  the  matters
      that are to be taken into account when considering Article 8.  I  note
      that there is nothing to indicate that the Appellant is anything other
      than able to speak English (117B(2)), and the Respondent took no issue
      in respect of  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Rules  which  is
      indicative of the sponsor's ability to support the  Appellant  without
      recourse to public funds and  therefore  without  being  a  burden  on
      taxpayers (117B(3)). (In this context I  observe  that  the  Appellant
      would  likely  enter  free  education  paid  for  by  the   state   in
      circumstances where the sponsor's income tax payments from her  salary
      as a student union officer are likely to  be  low.  However,  where  a
      sponsoring parent is in postgraduate study - and  quite  possibly  not
      earning anything - the Rules would  not  deny  entry  clearance  to  a
      dependent child because he might enter  state  education  in  the  UK.
      Accordingly, in all the circumstances, I do not attach any  weight  to
      this factor.) Sections 117B(4)-(6) are not applicable.


  43. Section 117B(1) - the maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control
      being in the public interest - is applicable. Indeed, for the  reasons
      given above, in my judgement it is this particular public interest  of
      maintaining effective immigration control through the  consistent  and
      fair  application  of  a  known   set   of   published   rules,   that
      proportionately justifies the refusal of the  Appellant's  application
      for entry clearance in  circumstances  where  he  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules,  any  interference  with  the  family  life
      between him and his mother is essentially a  result  of  the  mother's
      choices rather  than  the  Respondent's  decision  per  se,  and  that
      otherwise no exceptional circumstances have been demonstrated.


  44. Accordingly in all  the  circumstances  I  dismiss  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR. The Respondent's decision was not in breach  of
      the Appellant's or the sponsor's or anybody else's human rights.



Notice of Decision

  45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
      law in respect of the  Immigration  Rules,  accordingly  the  decision
      stands in this regard. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed  under
      the Rules.


  46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
      law in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR, and accordingly the  decision
      is set aside in this regard.


  47. I remake the decision in respect of Article 8: the Appellant's  appeal
      on human rights grounds is dismissed.


  48. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     20 May 2015
