
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/20052/2013
     & OA/20056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport|Determination Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2014             |On 24 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ANTON GEOFF JEREMIAH JEROME SINGH AND
                          ZERAH LETITIA ESTHER TORA
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Ms J Tear (of Counsel), instructed by Wolferstans Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. These combined appeals originate in inter-related decisions made by the
    Appellant, the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  Manila  (hereinafter  the
    "ECO") whereby the applications of the two Respondents  for  settlement
    in the United Kingdom were refused.  The Respondents'  ensuing  appeals
    to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") were allowed.   The ECO  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 2.  The  Respondents'  applications  engage  paragraph  276  AG   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  This is one of the provisions arranged  in  Part  7
    establishing the requirements for the  grant  of  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom. It provides:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom as the child of an armed forces member
         exempt  from  immigration  control  under  section  8(4)   of   the
         Immigration Act are that:


         (i)  He is the child of a parent who  is  an  armed  forces  member
             exempt from immigration control  under  section  8(4)  of  the
             Immigration Act 1971; and

           ii) he is under the age of 18 or has current leave  to  enter  or
               remain in this capacity; and


          iii) he is unmarried and is not a civil partner, has not formed an
               independent family unit and is  not  leading  an  independent
               life; and

           iv) he can and will be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately
               without recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  his
               parent(s) own(s) or occupy exclusively; and

            v) he will not stay in the United Kingdom beyond the  period  of
               his parent's enlistment in the  home  forces  or  posting  or
               training in the United Kingdom; and

           vi) his other parent is being or has been admitted to or  allowed
               to remain in the United Kingdom save where:

             (a)  the parent he is accompanying  or  joining  is  his  sole
             surviving parent or

             (b)  the parent he is accompanying or  joining  has  had  sole
                  responsibility for his upbringing; or

             (c)   there  are  serious  and  compelling  family  or   other
                  considerations  which  make  exclusion  from  the   United
                  Kingdom undesirable and suitable  arrangements  have  been
                  made for his care."

    I have highlighted subparagraph (vi)(b) as it is the provision which is
    germane to the resolution of this appeal.

 3. The material facts pertaining  to  the  family  members  concerned  are
    uncontroversial.  The two children, the respondents  are  now  aged  16
    and 17 years respectively and were born in  Fiji.    Both  parents  are
    also citizens of Fiji.  The Respondents  last  saw  their  mother  (the
    sponsor) in 2006, when she left to embark upon a career  in  the  Royal
    Navy.  They have resided with different grandparents in New Zealand and
    Fiji subsequently.  Their father lives in New Zealand, the relationship
    with the mother having terminated around 2001.

 4. The central reason for the ECO's refusal decisions is  encapsulated  in
    the following extract from the review determination:

         "The applicants have not resided with their mother since  2001  and
         for the majority of the time  since  they  have  lived  with  their
         paternal  grandparents  ....  and  eventually  resided  with  their
         maternal grandmother.  In addition, their father is  clearly  still
         involved in their lives given that he has given written consent for
         them to travel  but  also  because  this  consent  contains  strict
         conditions only under which he will agree to his children moving to
         the UK.  I do accept that their mother has a role  in  their  lives
         but  am  not  persuaded   that   sole   responsibility   has   been
         demonstrated."

    The year 2001 in this passage should,  accurately,  be  2006.   In  the
    preceding decisions of the ECO, to the  final  sentence  in  the  above
    passage the following was added:


         ".... or that there are serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
         considerations  which  make  exclusion  from  the  United   Kingdom
         undesirable."

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing, I pronounced my decision  ex  tempore
    to the effect that the determination of the FtT cannot  be  upheld  for
    the following reasons, in summary:

    (i)   It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  from  the  text  whether   the
         Respondents' appeals were allowed under paragraph  276  AG  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

    (ii) If the appeals were allowed  under  paragraph  276AG,  it  is  not
         possible to deduce from the determination whether the appeals  were
         thus allowed under subparagraph (vi) (b) or (c).

     iii) If and insofar as the appeals  were  allowed  under  subparagraph
          (vi)(b):


         (a)  Such a conclusion is confounded by the unequivocal finding  in
             [30] "I find the maternal grandmother as  she  stated  [in  an
             affidavit]  had  sole  responsibility  for  bringing  up   the
             appellants since 2009".


         (b)  There is no corresponding finding relating to the  key  person
             in the equation viz the Respondents' mother,  the sponsor.


         (c)  The analysis in (a) also applies to the Judge's  statement  in
             [34]  of  the  determination  that  the  mother  ".....    has
             recently not only been supporting  them  financially  but  has
             been making  important  decisions  in  the  appellants'  lives
             together with the appellants' maternal grandmother",  followed
             by "I  find  that  the  sponsor  and  her  mother  have  joint
             responsibility ..."


             The  criterion  of  "sole  responsibility"  is  otherwise  not
             addressed in the key passages of the determination.


         (d)  There are no findings of fact sufficient to underpin  a  "sole
             responsibility" assessment,  or  conclusion,  as  regards  the
             mother.


         (e)  The finding that the mother ".... in the last year or two ....
              has played a far  more  active  role  in  the  [Respondents']
             lives", in  the  absence  of  adequate  particularisation  and
             elaboration and associated specific findings of  fact  on  the
             "sole responsibility" issues raised in the ECO's decisions and
             ventilated during the hearing is not sufficient to underpin  a
             legally sustainable "sole responsibility" conclusion.


         (f)  Having found that the evidence  of  the  Respondents'  father,
             contained in three successive letters,  had  been  effectively
             manufactured by the mother, the determination fails  to  spell
             out the implications of this or to make  any  further  related
             findings.


         (g)  It is impossible to ascertain from the  determination  whether
             the appeals were allowed under Article 8 ECHR, either alone or
             in tandem with one of the provisions of paragraph  276  AG  of
             the Rules.


         (h)  If and insofar as the appeals were allowed  under  Article  8,
             the  determination  is  manifestly  flawed  as  there  is   no
             identification of the public interest/s in play and no  proper
             balancing  exercise.   It  is  further   undermined   by   the
             fundamental infirmity of failing to make clear,  relevant  and
             necessary findings of fact.


 6. Confusion and obscurity are the hallmarks.   The  conclusion  that  the
    determination of the FtT is unsustainable  in  law  in  consequence  is
    irresistible.

DECISION

 7. Giving effect to the above analysis and conclusion:

    (i)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

    (ii) I remit the appeal  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  the
         purpose of remaking the decision.

         (iii)    There is no question of preserving any findings of fact.

    (iv) If the Respondents wish to rely on any further evidence this  must
         be served and filed within  28  days  hereof,  accompanied  by  any
         appropriate procedural application to the FtT.



                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 13 November 2014
