
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/20820/2013





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th October  2014                            |On 21st October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                           mrs minal vijay mepani
                          (Anonymity Order not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms P Solanski (instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Traynor) promulgated on 6th June 2014.

 2. The Appellant had sought entry clearance to the UK as the spouse  of  a
    person  present  and  settled  here.  The   Respondent   refused   that
    application on 4th November 2013 on the basis that the Appellant in the
    Sponsor had not demonstrated that they were involved in a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship which they intended to pursue with  each  other
    and they  had  not  demonstrated  an  ability  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.

 3. The application  is  governed  by  Appendix  FM  and  the  requirements
    contained therein.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal   had  bundles  from  both  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor and heard oral evidence from the Sponsor.

 5. It is clear from the determination (paragraph 24) that having heard the
    Sponsor's oral evidence and taking into account  the  contents  of  the
    Sponsor's bundle of documents the Judge was satisfied that  the  couple
    were in a  genuine  relationship  that  they  intended  to  pursue  and
    therefore met the requirements of Appendix FM-E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10.

 6. That left the financial requirements. The Judge referred himself to the
    contents of the bundle and concluded (paragraph 34) that the  Appellant
    had failed to provide the specified evidence identified in Appendix FM-
    SE - in particular the Sponsor's bank statements and  at  paragraph  30
    found that there was no evidence of the rental income claimed. On  that
    basis he dismissed the appeal.

 7. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in failing to take into  account
    evidence that was before him which indicated that at the  date  of  the
    decision the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules. The Judge had
    applied the wrong part of Appendix FM-SE.

 8. Mr Shilliday accepted that Ground 1 was made out in that the Judge  had
    referred himself to the incorrect part of Appendix FM-SE, in particular
    that in relation  to  employment  income  as  opposed  to  income  from
    employment and/or shares in a limited company. Mr  Shilliday  indicated
    that he had looked at the documents contained in the Appellant's bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal  and  was  satisfied  that  all  of  the
    specified evidence was present.

 9. In applying the wrong part of Appendix FM-SE the Judge   erred  and  he
    erred further in failing to  look  at  all  of  the  documents  in  the
    Appellant's bundle which contained  all  of  the  necessary  "specified
    evidence" that showed the Appellant met the requirements the Rules.  As
    that was determinative of the appeal  the  error  of  law  was  clearly
    material.   I   therefore   set   aside   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination.

10. Based on Mr Shilliday's concession that all the specified  evidence  is
    now present and was present before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  show
    that the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules  at  the  date  of
    decision, I allow the appeal. This is not a case of whether  or  not  a
    discretion should  be  exercised;  the  Appellant   clearly  meets  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and is entitled to succeed under the Rules.



11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. However, on the basis that
    the specified evidence was not before the Entry Clearance Officer,  his
    decision was not incorrect and on that basis I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20th October 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
