

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/21316/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |     Decision and Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 9 February 2016                       |     On 2 March 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                           tewolde berhane wagaye
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (eco), CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 16 August 1983 and claims to be a citizen  of
    Eritrea.  He applied to join his wife, a refugee, but  his  application
    for entry clearance under paragraph 352A of the immigration  rules  was
    refused on 21 October 2013.

 2. The appellant's subsequent appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Hagan on 16 March 2015.  The  appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal against that  decision.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson
    refused permission on 5 June 2015 but after renewing  his  application,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission on 24 August 2015.

 3. At the heart of this case lie the difficulties  the  appellant  has  in
    proving his identity and that he is  married  to  his  wife.   The  ECO
    disputes both claims.  The appellant argues that as he is a refugee  in
    Sudan it is difficult for him to obtain  the  types  of  evidence  that
    would usually be expected and it is clear that this  was  uppermost  in
    the mind of Judge Pitt when granting permission.

 4. Before hearing any arguments, I enquired as  to  what  facts  might  be
    agreed.  Mr Reza confirmed that the appellant was not lawfully  married
    according to Eritrean law and therefore any marriage conducted  by  the
    illegal church is not a marriage for the purposes of English  law.   He
    also accepted that the appellant had not cohabited with the sponsor for
    a period of over two years.  In conceding these facts, it  was  evident
    that the appellant did not satisfy the provisions of  either  paragraph
    352A or 352AA of the immigration rules on their face.

 5. Mr Reza advised me that Home Office  policy  instructions  contained  a
    provision relating to common law marriages and  that  such  a  marriage
    could  be  accepted  as  a  marriage  for  immigration  purposes.   The
    requirements for a common law marriage to be treated as a marriage  are
    that the relationship was entered into by private  agreement,  that  it
    has existed for a long time and  that  it  seems  permanent.   Mr  Reza
    submitted that the appellant should be allowed  to  benefit  from  this
    guidance because of his personal circumstances and those of his spouse.

 6. Mr Harrison and Mr Reza agreed that  whether  the  appellant  benefited
    from the policy guidance depended on whether he was in  a  relationship
    as  claimed.   Having  identified  this  legal   framework,   I   heard
    submissions  as  to  whether  Judge  O'Hagan  had  erred  in  law  when
    determining the appeal.

 7. There is no need for me to set out the competing submissions at length.
     Mr Reza argued that Judge O'Hagan had erred in failing to have  regard
    to the difficulties the appellant and sponsor had in obtaining evidence
    which resulted from their refugee status.  Mr Harrison rebutted this by
    saying that the judge had properly assessed the evidence and  found  it
    to be lacking.  The judge was not  satisfied  there  had  ever  been  a
    marriage of any kind because  there  were  serious  doubts  as  to  the
    reliability  of  the  marriage  certificate  and  because  there   were
    inconsistencies in other parts of the evidence.  Mr Reza conceded  that
    the sponsor's witness statement contained  an  inconsistency  but  said
    that was the result of a drafting error.  He was  unable,  however,  to
    say whether the drafting error had  been  brought  to  Judge  O'Hagan's
    attention.

 8. The grounds of appeal do not, in my opinion, identify any legal  error.
    The grounds seek to  reargue  the  issues  decided  by  Judge  O'Hagan.
    Although the grounds make a number of allegations against the  findings
    made, they are merely dressed up disagreements with those findings.

 9. Having discussed the decision and reasons statement at length with  the
    representatives, I am satisfied that Judge O'Hagan was properly  seised
    of the issues in dispute.  He considered that the marriage  certificate
    was not reliable because it was not reasonably likely that  an  illegal
    church would issue such a  document  that  might  put  itself  and  its
    members at risk.  That is not  a  contradictory  finding  that  such  a
    church might issue a document.  By making the  contrast  the  judge  is
    showing his open mindedness.

10. Judge O'Hagan considered other aspects of the evidence and  found  that
    there was a significant inconsistency in the  sponsor's  evidence  that
    undermine her reliability.  That further weakened any notion  that  the
    couple were married.  The general credibility  issues  undermined  what
    weight could be placed  on  the  appellant's  claimed  Sudanese  issued
    identity  card.   It  merely  recorded  what  the  appellant  told  the
    authorities and did not demonstrate on what basis it was issued.

11. I find no evidence that the judge applied a  disproportionate  standard
    of proof.  He was required to apply the normal civil standard but it is
    evident from his assessment that he was conscious that  standard  might
    need to be lowered for the same reason it has to be lowered  in  asylum
    appeals.  The decision shows care  and  attention  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances and those of his sponsor.  However, it was  not  open  to
    the judge simply to allow the appeal because of what he was told by the
    sponsor and appellant.  The evidence was unsatisfactory  and  for  that
    reason the appeal failed.

12. In reaching these conclusions I  have  considered  Mr  Reza's  skeleton
    argument.  Most is dealt with by the findings I have made but not  all.
    The remaining issues are disposed of easily.

13. Mr Reza suggests that the judge should have  adjourned  to  enable  the
    respondent to verify the Sudanese document.  That would be to shift the
    burden of proof.  There is no explanation why  the  appellant  did  not
    seek his own verification if he thought that was necessary.

14. Mr Reza argues that the appellant should have been given the benefit of
    the doubt but in context that is an argument that the appellant  should
    have been believed  without  question.   No  judge  could  accept  that
    approach.

15. Mr Reza argues that the judge went too far and expected  the  appellant
    to obtain an identity document from the Eritrean authorities.  That  is
    not the case.  Judge O'Hagan found that the  information  from  the  US
    authorities showed that the appellant's explanation for not  having  an
    identity document was doubtful.  It was for the appellant to  muster  a
    stronger  explanation,  particularly  given  the  adverse   credibility
    findings.

16. As I indicated during the hearing, much of the appellant's argument  is
    predicated on the basis that he is a refugee in Sudan.  That  fact  has
    not been established since his ID card is disputed.  If  the  appellant
    is not a refugee in Sudan, then many of  the  arguments  mustered  fall
    away.

17. For all these reasons, I find that there  is  no  legal  error  in  the
    decision and reasons statement and it stands.







Decision

There is no legal error in Judge O'Hagan's decision  and  reasons  statement
and it stands.





                               Signed                     Date






                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
