
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/21388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2015                         |On 16 October 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, new delhi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mrs baljeet kaur
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oxlade (Judge Oxlade), promulgated on 2 April  2015,  in
    which she allowed the Respondent's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    initial decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 31 October 2013,
    refusing her entry clearance  under  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules, in particular in relation to the Dependent Relative route.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. Judge Oxlade found the  evidence  of  the  Respondent's  daughter  (the
    sponsor) to be credible (paragraph 49). This evidence had  included  an
    account of the needs of the Respondent in terms  of  daily  assistance,
    and the importance of family care and emotional support.




 3. Judge Oxlade also found the  medical  report  of  Dr  Singh,  a  doctor
    practising in India, to be accurate and reliable  (paragraph  53).  She
    was satisfied that the author had  known  the  Respondent  for  a  long
    period of time. She clearly accepted that the Respondent was, as at the
    relevant date, suffering from depression. She accepted Dr Singh's  view
    that professional counselling was not readily available in the  Punjab,
    and that the Respondent's family  there  had  been  unable  (or  indeed
    unwilling) to assist. It was Dr Singh's view, accepted by Judge Oxlade,
    that  he  had,  "exhausted  all  reasonable   alternatives   for   [the
    Respondent] there." (paragraph 52). She accepted  Dr  Singh's  evidence
    that the Respondent had had difficulties  taking  sufficient  nutrition
    (paragraph 56).



 4. Judge Oxlade went on to correctly identify  that  the  purpose  of  the
    Dependent Relative route under Appendix FM was not simply to aid family
    reunification: it required satisfaction of two  limbs  (the  provisions
    being E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5  of  Appendix  FM):  the  need  to  show  that
    applicant required long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks;
    and that such care cannot reasonably be provided for in the country  of
    origin by way of alternative means (paragraph 54).



 5. In seeking to construe the meaning of the first limb referred to above,
    Judge Oxlade relied on conclusions of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in the
    unreported decision of Osman  OA/18244/2012.  From  this  decision  she
    extracted the view that personal care had a broad meaning, and was  not
    limited to intimate  care  or  medical  treatment  (paragraph  55).  In
    respect of everyday tasks, the Osman  decision  itself  referred  to  a
    relevant IDI in which the phrase was given a wide meaning, and included
    the management of bodily functions, and communication  and  interaction
    with others (paragraph 56). Judge Oxlade concluded that the  Respondent
    required long-term personal care with everyday tasks by reason  of  her
    depression. Thus, the requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 were met.



 6. Turning to the second limb of the substantive requirements of  Appendix
    FM, Judge Oxlade found that, based upon the evidence of Dr  Singh,  the
    necessary treatment for the Respondent's  depression  was  not  readily
    available. The care  required  by  the  Respondent  would  need  to  be
    provided by her family because for  cultural  reasons  assistance  from
    outside agencies would be unrealistic or insufficient  (paragraph  61).
    The judge found that none of the  Respondent's  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom could be expected to go and live in India (paragraph 62). Thus,
    E-ECDR.2.5 was also deemed to have been met.



 7. In view of her findings, Judge Oxlade  concluded  that  the  Respondent
    satisfied the requirements of Appendix FM and allowed the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules. The appeal was dismissed under Article 8 outside
    of the Rules on the basis that there was no family life as between  the
    Respondent and her United Kingdom-based family (paragraph 64).



The Appellant's grounds of appeal

 8. There are two grounds of appeal, both narrowly drawn. The  first  is  a
    challenge to Judge Oxlade's assessment of  E-ECDR.2.4  of  Appendix  FM
    (the  personal  care  limb),  in  conjunction   with   the   evidential
    requirements of paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE.




 9. The second ground asserts that the  judge  erred  in  relying  upon  an
    unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal (Osman)  in  the  absence  of
    compliance with paragraph 11 of the Practice Directions.




10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  on
    11 June 2015.



The hearing before me

11. Ms Holmes relied on both grounds. She added that  Dr  Singh's  evidence
    was inadequate and that Judge Oxlade had erred in relying upon it.




12. Miss Qureshi submitted that the judge had been entitled to rely  on  Dr
    Singh's evidence. She had directed herself properly in law. The medical
    evidence had not been challenged by the Appellant at the hearing before
    Judge Oxlade. In respect of ground 2, if there was an error it was  not
    material. There was no binding authority to contradict  Judge  Oxlade's
    interpretation of the relevant provisions of Appendix FM.





Decision on error of law

13. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I found there  to
    be no material errors of law  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Oxlade.  My
    reasons for this conclusion are as follows.




14. Ground 1 relies upon the evidential requirements  in  paragraph  34  of
    Appendix FM-SE. These stipulate that evidence relating to the need  for
    long-term personal care with everyday tasks "should" come from a doctor
    of other health professional. There has never been any challenge to  Dr
    Singh's status as a doctor, and Judge Oxlade was perfectly entitled  to
    rely upon his evidence. The ground of challenge appears in  reality  to
    be an assertion that the  medical  evidence  was  simply  incapable  of
    supporting the judge's conclusions:  in  other  words,  Judge  Oxlade's
    findings were perverse. Whilst I  appreciate  that  Dr  Singh's  report
    focused in the main upon the absence of treatment  for  the  Respondent
    and the importance of the family in providing care, there was  evidence
    contained therein which entitled Judge  Oxlade  to  conclude  that  the
    Respondent had neglected to eat properly. It  was  clearly  permissible
    for the judge to take the view that eating properly (as opposed to  the
    fact of cooking) was a "task" arising  in  "everyday"  life  (paragraph
    56). There is nothing before me to suggest that a particular number  of
    tasks cannot be performed without care in order for  E-ECDR.2.4  to  be
    satisfied.




15. Judge Oxlade directed herself correctly  as  to  the  law  and  reached
    findings that were open to her.



16. Although not strictly necessary for the  purposes  of  my  decision,  I
    would add that in my view it was also open  to  Judge  Oxlade  to  have
    regard to the evidence of the Respondent's daughter as a  supplementary
    source of information capable of informing  a  conclusion  on  both  E-
    ECDR.2.4. The opening line of paragraph 34  of  Appendix  FM-SE  states
    that evidence of a need for personal care  to  perform  everyday  tasks
    "should" emanate from a doctor of other health  professional:  it  does
    not stipulate that such evidence "must" derive from  these  sources.  I
    note that the  mandatory  term  "must'  is  used  in  other  evidential
    provisions within Appendix FM-SE (see, for example paragraphs A1-2).



17. Turning to ground 2, I find that Judge Oxlade did err in permitting the
    unreported decision in Osman to be  adduced  and  relied  upon  in  the
    absence of compliance with paragraph 11  of  the  Practice  Directions.
    There  does  not  appear  to  have  been  proper  application  by   the
    Respondent's representative to have the decision admitted. The Practice
    Directions cannot be overlooked or ignored.



18. However, the error is not material. The interpretation placed upon  the
    meaning of "personal care" and "everyday tasks" by  Judge  Oxlade  were
    open to her even in the absence of any reliance on Osman. There  is  no
    reported decision on the terminology, and the  words  are  not  defined
    within the Rules themselves. Therefore, absent  the  procedural  error,
    the outcome of the appeal would have been the same.



19. The judge's application of E-ECDR.2.5 has not been  challenged,  and  I
    need say nothing more about it.  There  has  been  no  cross-appeal  in
    respect of the decision on Article 8 outside of the Rules,  and  I  say
    nothing more that either.



Anonymity

20. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate in this case.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. The Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore
dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date: 15 October 2015


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE APPELLANT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  maintain  that
decision.


Signed                                       Date: 15 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

