
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/21889/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Tower, Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 30th June 2015                |21st July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J PERKINS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C J HANSON
               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL R F MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                             FARJANA AKHTAR EVA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Khurram (Solicitor - Khurram & Co.)
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Smart (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judges Andrew and Asjad promulgated  on  the  13th  November
       2014.

  Background

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on the 15th May
       1991.

    3. On the  21st  August  2013,  the  Appellant  had  applied  for  entry
       clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. On
       the 21st  September  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
       application for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom  with
       her husband, Mr Md Samad  Rasul,  under  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  (d)  of
       Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, with reference to paragraphs E-
       ECP.2.6 and 2.10. It was found that the lack of evidence  of  contact
       between the Appellant and her  sponsor  was  not  consistent  with  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship and that the minimal and sporadic
       nature of the money transfers from her husband to the Appellant  were
       insufficient evidence of a genuine and subsisting  relationship.  The
       Respondent  was  therefore  not  satisfied   that   the   Appellant's
       relationship with her husband was genuine and subsisting or that they
       intended to live together permanently in the United Kingdom.

    4. The Appellant appealed to the First-Tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
       Asylum  Chamber)  and  that  appeal  was  heard  at  Sheldon   Court,
       Birmingham by First-tier Tribunal Judges Andrew and Asjad on the 23rd
       October 2014. Although they  found  that  the  marriage  between  the
       Appellant and sponsor was genuine and  subsisting,  they  found  that
       they were not satisfied that the Appellant and  sponsor  intended  to
       live together permanently in the United Kingdom as husband and  wife.
       They found at paragraph 7 of their decision that whilst  the  sponsor
       had appeared before them and indicated how anxious  he  was  for  the
       Appellant to come to the United Kingdom, they said that they  had  no
       evidence at all before them from the Appellant telling them what  her
       intentions were and that they had no statement from her telling  them
       why she wanted to leave her own country to come to the United Kingdom
       and live with the sponsor here. They therefore dismissed the appeal.

    5. The Appellant submitted an in time application to the Upper  Tribunal
       against that decision on the 10th December 2014.

    6. In the grounds of appeal, it was argued that the First-tier  Tribunal
       Judges erred in law in reaching their decision. It is argued that the
       only issues in the case were whether or not the marriage was  genuine
       and subsisting and whether the Appellant intended to live permanently
       with the sponsor in the UK, which was said to form a single rule  and
       that the First-tier Tribunal Judges incorrectly assumed that the  two
       limbs of the single rule were mutually exclusive. It was argued  that
       within the Respondent's bundle there was evidence from the  Appellant
       regarding her intention to  permanently  live  in  the  UK  with  the
       sponsor. It was submitted that in her application for entry clearance
       the Appellant had applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as
       a wife at question 70, which application was said to have  been  duly
       signed by her and that at Appendix 2 it was argued that the Appellant
       had confirmed that she had applied as the spouse of a settled  person
       at  question  1.1;  that  she  intended  to  live  with  her  sponsor
       permanently at question 1.18 and that she planned to  live  with  her
       sponsor at 33 [ - ] Street, Walsall at question 2.1. It  was  further
       stated that there was a letter dated  the  15th  May  2014  from  the
       Appellant confirming that her relationship was genuine and they  both
       wanted to be with each other and live together. It  was  argued  that
       this evidence was  disregarded  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
       without giving any reasons.

    7. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers granted permission  to  appeal  on
       the 22nd January 2015, on the basis that it was arguable that it  was
       not reasonably open to the Tribunal to find against the Appellant  on
       the question of her intentions for her marriage after it had found in
       favour of the Appellant in respect of her marriage  being genuine and
       subsisting, and further that it was arguable that  the  Tribunal  had
       failed to take account or address material which might have led  them
       to conclude that the Appellant's intentions  for  the  marriage  were
       sufficiently established. It was on this basis that the appeal  comes
       before us.

  Submissions

    8. Mr Khurram on behalf of the Appellant accepted that the  letter  that
       was said to have been from the Appellant dated the 15th May 2014  was
       not in fact signed and that in such  circumstances  no  weight  could
       properly have been attached to the same.

    9. Mr Khurram asked us to find that there was a material error of law in
       the determination of First Tier Tribunal Judges  Andrew  and  Asjad's
       determination decision and asked us to set aside that decision and to
       re-make the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.

   10. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judges had materially erred in
       law in stating at paragraph 7 of their  decision  that  they  had  no
       evidence at all before them  regarding  the  Appellant's  intentions,
       when there was  evidence  before  them  from  the  Appellant  in  her
       application  for  entry  clearance  where  at  question  70  she  had
       confirmed that she was applying for entry clearance to settle in  the
       United Kingdom as a wife, and in  Appendix  2  where  she  again  had
       confirmed that she applied as the  spouse  of  a  settled  person  in
       answer to question 1.1; that she had ticked the box  indicating  that
       she intended to live with her sponsor permanently  at  question  1.18
       and had stated that she planned to live with her sponsor at 33 [ -  ]
       Street, Walsall in answer to question 2.1, but  he  argued  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judges had completely disregarded that evidence.

   11. Mr Smart on behalf of the Respondent  relied  upon  the  Respondent's
       Rule 24 response. Although Mr Smart questioned  whether  or  not  the
       application form  had  in  fact  been  completed  personally  by  the
       Appellant and whether it had been actually signed by her, he conceded
       that the application form was itself  evidence,  and  that  questions
       regarding who completed the application form and as to whether or not
       the Appellant herself signed it were matters going to the  weight  of
       the evidence, rather than the existence of  the  evidence.  Mr  Smart
       further quite properly conceded on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that
       First-tier Tribunal Judges Andrew and Asjad were wrong at paragraph 7
       of their determination to state that they  had  no  evidence  at  all
       before them regarding the Appellant's own intentions  in  respect  of
       the issue to whether or not she intended to  live  with  her  husband
       permanently in the United Kingdom.

  Error of Law

   12. Although it was argued within the Grounds of Appeal on behalf of  the
       Appellant that the requirements  for  the  relationship  between  the
       Appellant and her partner to be genuine and subsisting formed part of
       a single rule, together with the requirement that they must intend to
       live together permanently in the United Kingdom,  that  argument  was
       not pursued before us by Mr Khurram at the  appeal  hearing.  In  any
       event, we reject any such submission. The requirement under paragraph
       E-ECP.2.6 of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  that  the
       relationship between the Appellant and her partner  must  be  genuine
       and subsisting is completely separate to the requirement at paragraph
       E-ECP.2.10 that  the  applicant  and  partner  must  intend  to  live
       together permanently in the United Kingdom. They do not form part  of
       a single rule and are separate requirements. It  therefore  does  not
       follow that simply because  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Andrew  and
       Asjad accepted that the relationship between the  Appellant  and  her
       husband was genuine and subsisting, that they could not then go on to
       consider the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  did
       genuinely intend to live permanently in the UK with her husband, as a
       separate requirement.

   13. However, given the concession made on behalf of the Respondent by  Mr
       Smart that the First Tier Tribunal Judges were wrong at  paragraph  7
       of their decision when they found that they had no  evidence  at  all
       before them from the Appellant telling them what her intentions  were
       regarding whether or not she  intended  to  live  together  with  her
       husband permanently in the United Kingdom, we accept  and  find  that
       the decision did include a material error of law. This is not a  case
       where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  considered   the   evidence
       regarding the Appellant's intentions within  the  application  notice
       and what was said to be a letter from her dated the 15th May 2014 and
       found the same to be insufficient,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
       stated specifically that there was no evidence at  all  from  her  in
       this regard. As  Mr  Smart  properly  conceded,  questions  regarding
       whether or not the Appellant actually completed the  application  for
       entry clearance and accompanying Appendix 2 herself or whether it was
       completed on her behalf and as to whether or not she did in fact sign
       the same personally, were questions that would go to  the  weight  of
       that evidence, but that it was still evidence that should  have  been
       considered. Further, he agreed although the letter dated the 15th May
       2014 was not signed by the Appellant, and  therefore  would  properly
       have been given no weight, again, this  was  not  considered  by  the
       First Tier Tribunal Judges in reaching their decision.

   14. We find that the decision does contain a material error of  law  when
       the First-tier Tribunal Judges stated at paragraph 7 that they had no
       evidence at all before them from the Appellant telling  them  of  her
       intentions regarding whether or not she intended  to  live  with  her
       husband permanently in the United Kingdom  and  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judges failed to take account of material evidence contained
       within the application for entry clearance and accompanying  Appendix
       2, regarding her intention. We accept that the application for  entry
       clearance was on the basis that she had applied for  entry  clearance
       to settle in the UK as a wife at question  70  and  that  further  in
       Appendix 2, she had again indicated that she applied to come  as  the
       spouse of a settled person in answer to question 1.1 and  had  ticked
       the box indicating  that  she  intended  to  live  with  her  sponsor
       permanently in answer to question 1.18 and that she had  stated  that
       she planned to live with her sponsor at 53 [ - ] Street, Walsall,  in
       answer to question 2.1 of Appendix 2. This was  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal, together with the letter of the 15th May 2014,  the  weight
       of which should have been assessed by them. Their failure  to  do  so
       amounts to a material error of law capable of affecting  the  outcome
       of the appeal and accordingly we set aside that decision.

   15. Having indicated at the appeal hearing that we intended to set  aside
       the decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judges  Andrew  and  Asjad,  Mr
       Khurram on behalf of the Appellant sought permission pursuant to Rule
       15 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended,
       to adduce and rely upon a short further affidavit from the  Appellant
       regarding her intention to move to the UK and live with  her  husband
       as husband and wife. However, we consider that in  the  interests  of
       justice, the case should be  decided  again  in  to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal in order that the Appellant can provide detailed evidence in
       respect of the remaining issue in the appeal.  It  may  be  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal think that the Appellant had not appreciated  the
       importance of proving both that the marriage was subsisting AND  that
       she and her husband intended to live permanently together and will be
       sympathetic to a Rule 14 application, but that is a  matter  for  the
       Tribunal to decide if an application is made. We therefore set  aside
       the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal and direct that the  case  be
       decided again in the First-tier Tribunal. Clearly, the rehearing must
       take place before First-Tier Tribunal Judges other than either First-
       Tier Tribunal Judge Andrew or First-Tier Tribunal Judge Asjad.

  Notice of Decision

       The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judges Andrew and Asjad contained
       material errors of law and is set aside. The case is  to  be  decided
       again in the First Tier Tribunal sitting in Birmingham. The  case  is
       to be reheard by First-tier Tribunal Judges other than either  First-
       Tier Tribunal Judge Andrew or First-Tier Tribunal Judge Asjad.

       The First-Tier Tribunal shall give  directions  as  to  what  further
       evidence is to be adduced at the rehearing.

       The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 13  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration and  Asylum
       Chamber) Rules 2014 and no application for  an  anonymity  order  was
       made before us.


  Signed
  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty   Dated 1st July 2015
