
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/21328/2013
     OA/18260/2013, OA/21334/2013
     OA/21329/2013, OA/21332/2013
     & OA/21330/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Stoke                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 9 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                adel alkhalil
                               safaa al dairi
                                 katana nada
                               kenan alkhalil
                               bashar alkhalil
                               maher alkhalil
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BEIRUT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, the sponsor's father, step-mother/aunt, grandmother and
    three brothers, are nationals of Syria. They have been given permission
    to appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Row
    dismissing their  appeals  against  the  respondent's  decisions  of  7
    October 2013 to refuse them entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  for
    family reunion.

 2. The appellants applied, in June 2013, for entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom to join the sponsor,  Aalae  Alkhalil,  who  had  been  granted
    refugee status in April 2013 after leaving Syria in 2008  in  order  to
    study for a Ph.D in the United Kingdom. Their applications were refused
    by the respondent on 7 October 2013 on the grounds that they could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 319V of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    that there were no exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules.

 3. In their grounds of  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision,  the
    appellants  relied  upon  the  deteriorating  situation  in  Syria   in
    asserting that the decisions were in breach of the sponsor's right to a
    family life under Article 8 of the ECHR and asserted that the financial
    circumstances of the family were not  relevant  in  considering  family
    reunion.

 4. The appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Row on 10  December
    2014 and were dismissed in a decision promulgated on 2 January 2015. It
    was conceded before the judge that the appellants could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  since  there  was  no  financial
    dependence by the appellants upon  the  sponsor.  The  judge  found  in
    addition that the accommodation and  maintenance  requirements  of  the
    Rules could not be met. It was submitted before the  judge  that  there
    were exceptional compassionate  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules, given the war in Syria and the danger in which
    the family found themselves as a result of being  associated  with  the
    medical profession (the sponsor's father was a plastic surgeon and  her
    brothers were medical students) and as a result of the area from  which
    they originated. The judge found, in effect, that there was  no  family
    life for the purposes of Article  8,  but  in  any  event  went  on  to
    consider  proportionality  and  concluded  that   there   was   nothing
    compelling or compassionate in the appellants' circumstances so  as  to
    justify a grant of entry clearance outside the Immigration  Rules.  The
    appeals were accordingly dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  on  the  grounds
    that the judge had failed to  consider  the  application  of  the  Home
    Office policy, aside from an Article  8  consideration,  and  that  the
    Article 8 assessment was inadequate.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 4 March 2015  in  relation  to  the
    family reunion concession.

Appeal hearing and submissions

 7. The appeal came before me on 6 July 2015. I sought initially to clarify
    the nature and existence of the family  reunion  policy  to  which  the
    grounds and the grant of permission referred,  but  neither  party  was
    able to assist and it did not appear that there was any such policy  or
    concession.

 8. Mr Jafferji submitted that in  any  event  there  was  an  exercise  of
    discretion by the respondent outside the rules, as was  made  clear  by
    the entry clearance officer's decision and that of the entry  clearance
    manager, and that  that  discretion  had  been  exercised  wrongly.  He
    submitted that the only reason given by the respondent  for  concluding
    that the appellants' case  was  not  exceptional  was  that  relocation
    within Syria or to a neighbouring country  was  not  an  insurmountable
    option, whereas the appellants' evidence and that of  the  sponsor  was
    that relocation was impossible. The appellants were persecuted  and  at
    risk in Syria. Accordingly discretion should have been exercised in the
    appellants' favour and the appeals should be allowed on that basis.  He
    submitted that the same issue had not been considered properly  by  the
    judge in assessing Article 8.

 9. Mr McVeety submitted that there was no relevant policy and the ECO  had
    not referred to such a policy. It was merely a matter of  consideration
    outside the Rules. The judge could not have done any more than he  did.
    It was for the appellants to make an  asylum  claim  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom and that was  not  a  matter  for  the  judge  in  these
    appeals.

10. Mr Jafferji reiterated his earlier submissions in response.

Consideration and findings.

11. I do not find that the judge made any errors of law  in  his  decision.
    The appellants have not identified or produced the policy to which they
    refer and the term appears to have been used loosely. There is in  fact
    no relevant policy. Whilst I am aware  that  a  family  reunion  policy
    existed in the past there is no indication of it  having  survived  the
    introduction of the new Immigration Rules and under  Appendix  FM.  The
    question of the respondent's decision not being in accordance with  the
    terms of her policy, as considered in detail in  the  case  of  AG  and
    others (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunal's  powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UKAIT 00082, is therefore not one which arises here.

12. It is submitted  that  the  judge  nevertheless  erred  by  failing  to
    consider the exercise of  discretion  by  the  respondent  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. However the respondent's exercise of discretion  was
    not a matter with which he was entitled to  interfere,  other  than  in
    considering Article 8 outside the scope of the Rules, which is what  he
    did.

13. The judge properly found, or at least indicated, that Article 8 was not
    even engaged, since there was no dependency and no  established  family
    life between the appellants and the sponsor. Thus, whilst he went on to
    consider proportionality there was in fact no need for him to do so and
    the matter ended there. In any event, in  considering  proportionality,
    he was fully entitled, and indeed required by case law and statute,  to
    take into account the appellants' inability to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules and public interest considerations.  He  properly
    found, at paragraphs 24 and 25 of his decision, that  this  was  not  a
    case of a family seeking to be reunited but was in effect an attempt to
    escape the  war  which,  as  understandable  as  that  may  be  in  the
    circumstances, was not a situation that would or could justify a  grant
    of leave outside the Rules on the basis of family reunion. Plainly  the
    judge was fully aware of the appellants' circumstances and the problems
    which they faced in Syria but was nevertheless properly  aware  of  the
    limits of his jurisdiction  and  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellants' circumstances were not such as to entitle them  to  succeed
    under Article 8.

14. For all of those reasons I find that the  judge  took  account  of  all
    relevant considerations and matters and was entitled to conclude as  he
    did. He did not err in law.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeals stands.






                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
