
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21092/2013
                                                               OA/21095/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 4 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                 XIUMING LIN
                                QUIPING GUAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh, Counsel instructed by Stephen & Richard
Solictors
For the Respondents:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on  27  October
    2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thomas  which  refused  the  appeals
    against refusal of entry clearance dated 28 October 2013.

 2. The appellants are citizens of China. They  are  mother  and  daughter.
    They applied for entry clearance to join  Mr  Hogsen  Guan,  a  British
    national. He is the husband of Mrs Lin (the first appellant) and father
    to Ms Guan (the second appellant).

 3. The applications for entry clearance were  refused  on  a  very  narrow
    point. The respondent did not accept that Mr Guan was who  he  said  he
    was. This was because the date of birth in  his  marriage  certificate,
    household register and Chinese passport was 22 June 1970 and  the  date
    of birth in his UK immigration status document was 19 May 1970.

 4.  Mr  Guan  provided  a  statutory  declaration  indicating   that   the
    immigration status document had the wrong date of  birth  as  this  had
    been wrongly recorded when he had applied for  asylum.  The  respondent
    did not find this sufficient to show that he was the  person  shown  in
    the marriage certificate, household documents and Chinese  passport  as
    the husband of the first appellant.

 5. This was the sole reason given for finding that it had not  been  shown
    that the first appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with the sponsor. Her  application  was  refused  under  paragraph  EC-
    P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM with reference to E-ECP 2.6 and 2.10.

 6. The application was also refused as it was not found that  the  English
    language requirement had been met as of the date of the decision.

 7. The second appellant's  application  was  refused  solely  because  her
    mother's application had been refused  with  no  independent  reasoning
    relating to her application being provided.

 8. Judge Thomas found that Mr Guan was who he said he was and that he  was
    the person shown as the husband of the first appellant  and  father  of
    the second appellant. This followed a concession to  that  effect  from
    the respondent; see [3] and [11].

 9. It might be thought where that concession as to Mr Guan's identity  was
    made that nothing remained in dispute other than the  English  language
    test issue. However, Judge Thomas  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    "subsistence of the relationship" was in issue beyond the  fact  of  Mr
    Guan's identity as well as the English language certificate;  see  [3].
    She went on to find that the first appellant and Mr Guan were not in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship where they had lived apart for many
    years and there was insufficient evidence of intervening contact.

10. It is my view that this was a procedural error where  no  case  on  the
    point had been put to the appellants prior to the hearing, the  refusal
    prior to that being on an entirely different basis. Even though it  was
    known to the respondent prior to the hearing that the point on identity
    would be conceded, no notice was given  and  no  application  or  other
    formality followed to amend the reasons for refusal.

11. In addition, Judge Thomas found at [12] that she could  not  admit  the
    two English Language certificates dated 24 October and 29 October  2013
    as "These documents must accompany the application." She did not  refer
    at all to the arguments put  to  her  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    Immigration Rules or other legislation requiring the  English  language
    test certificate in a spouse entry clearance application to be provided
    with the application or  stating  it  to  be  inadmissible  on  appeal,
    contrary to the provisions  of  section  85A(4)   of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

12. Further, the English language  requirement  was  not  relevant  to  the
    second appellant's application. After the identity issue was  conceded,
    there were no extant reasons for refusing entry clearance to the second
    appellant.  Even if her mother's claim failed, she was accepted  to  be
    the daughter of a British national and was entitled to have  her  entry
    clearance appeal  considered  on  that  basis,  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules potentially covering  her  circumstances,  Article  8
    certainly being relevant. The Article 8 assessment  for  the  child  at
    [13] is flawed, however, where it is built on the procedural unfairness
    identified above,  and because Judge Thomas finds the second  appellant
    to be the sponsor's "adult" daughter which, as she applied when she was
    a minor was not a correct approach.

13. For all of these reasons, I found that the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed a material error on a point of law such that it  had
    to be set aside to be re-made de novo.

14. The errors in determining the genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of  the
    marriage and failing to determine the  second  appellant's  independent
    appeal amount to procedural irregularity such that the matter should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal; see paragraph 7.2 of Part 3 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside  to  be  re-made  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Directions

17. No later than 28 days prior to the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the respondent is directed to file with the Tribunal and serve  on  the
    appellants a skeleton argument setting out the legal position that will
    be pursued.

18. No later than 7 days prior to the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellants are directed to file with the Tribunal and serve on  the
    respondent  a  consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  of   all
    materials relied upon together with a skeleton argument.

Signed:  [pic]    Date: 2 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

