
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/21349/2013
     OA/21351/2013
     OA/21355/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 July 2015                                |On 7 August 2015              |
|Prepared 2 July 2015                          |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                ECO - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A A A
                                   D A S A
                                   M S A M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Continued)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Brissett, Counsel, instructed by Aden & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Respondents are referred to as the  Claimants  and
    ECO Nairobi is referred as the ECO.

2.   The Claimants, nationals of Somalia, dates of birth 25  February  1997,
    10 August 1998 and 2 October 1996, appealed against  decisions  of  the
    ECO to refuse entry clearance on or about 19 November 2007 as  children
    of a relative with limited leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a refugee.   The applications were refused with reference to
    paragraph 319X of the  Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

3.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer (the  judge)
    who dismissed their appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed
    them under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Permission to appeal  that  decision
    was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly in  January  2015.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 20 March 2015 I found that the judge  had  made
    an error of law in that he had failed to address  the  public  interest
    and also had failed to address the provisions of Section 117A and  117B
    of the Immigration Act 2014 as amending the NIAA 2002.

4.   Accordingly I gave directions that the matter be remade on the  Article
    8 issue in the Upper Tribunal on the assessment of  proportionality.  I
    had assumed the exceptional circumstances  of  the  separated  siblings
    justified consideration outside the rules

5.   In this appeal it was argued that although at the  date  of  the  ECO's
    decision, it being an  out  of  country  appeal  and  Article  8  being
    considered at that date, nevertheless it fell to the judge to  consider
    the later provisions and requirements of Section 11A  and  11B  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, particularly in connection with the assessment of
    public interest issues.  I was satisfied given  the  terms  of  Section
    117A and 117B that although that legislation did not exist at the  date
    of the ECO's decision, the considerations arising under them fell to be
    considered nonetheless by the judge when he heard the appeal.

6.   If I was wrong in that view nevertheless the public  interest  and  the
    considerations, ultimately reflected in sections 117A and 117B  of  the
    2014 Act, were the very same  considerations  that  would  have  fallen
    under Article 8  in an out of country appeal as  at  the  date  of  the
    ECO's decision when assessing proportionality.

7.   Having heard the submissions, the following points seemed clear  beyond
    doubt. First, if the Claimants came to the United  Kingdom  they  would
    undoubtedly have to learn English in order to be properly educated  and
    to develop their lives in the United Kingdom.  Secondly, teaching  them
    English would be a cost as would schooling which would be met by the UK
    tax payer.  Thirdly, as illustrated by their siblings  already  in  the
    United Kingdom, they would be a burden upon the tax payer  since  there
    would inevitably be some uplift in  the  working  tax  credits  or  its
    equivalent or substitute to which the Claimants'  father  would  become
    entitled.  There would also be, it is  arguable,  an  increase  in  the
    total child benefit to be paid.  Fifthly,  there  would  inevitably  be
    some call over time on the National Health Service through either a  GP
    surgery or a hospital. Sixth, there was no  immediate  requirement  for
    the Claimants to leave their carers or home and  they  were  not  being
    removed.

8.    Miss Brissett produced a range of post-decision  evidence  which  went
    to show the greater prosperity of the Sponsor and how  with  his  work,
    together with working tax credits and any other allowances, he would be
    in a position to financially support the Claimants.  Mr Melvin made the
    fair point that the current level of earnings  which  the  Sponsor  was
    obtaining had increased in a manner which really could  not  have  been
    predicted from the date of decision and  therefore  current  levels  of
    earnings which are high are not demonstrably applicable to the date  of
    the respondent's decision and nor were they in  contemplation  at  that
    time.  In addition, although  it  related  to  the  same  premises  the
    acceptability of the Claimants residing there.

9.   I find that the public  interest  in  terms  of  burdens  upon  the  UK
    taxpayer must be  given  substantial  weight.    Similarly  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration controls.  I also take  into
    account the uncertainty of their status as Somali nationals in Ethiopia
    but to date I do not understand removal steps being taken against them.
    I take into account the financial support that the Sponsor has provided
    them whilst they have been in the care of others in Ethiopia.

10.  It seemed to me that the accommodation that the Claimants have  was  on
    the face of it suitable for the Claimants and thus, although I  do  not
    have the information as to the mix of ages of  the  children  it  would
    seem that they could be accommodated for a period of time.

11.  Looking at the Sponsor's bank balance,  bearing  in  mind  his  income,
    whilst at the end of a month he may have funds which would meet some of
    running costs of children, nevertheless  the  likelihood  is  that  for
    Claimants of this age they were going to be a significant cost  to  the
    Sponsor.

12.  I do not have the Sponsor's income/outgoings relevant to the  Sponsor's
    earnings at the date of the ECO's decision.  I am therefore  not  in  a
    position to reach any conclusions as to  whether  at  that  date  those
    costs could have been met by the Sponsor.

13.  In the circumstances I find, weighing the considerations  as  supported
    by the evidence at the date of the ECO's decision, show that the public
    interest was not outweighed by the  considerations  of  the  children's
    needs to be in the UK in more settled circumstances than they currently
    have.  The ECO's decisions were not disproportionate.

Anonymity Order

14.  Given the ages of  the  Claimants  I  find  an  anonymity  order  being
    continued is appropriate.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimants and to the ECO.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 2 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
