
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21659/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 March 2014                           |On 25 March 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                             MS QUYNH TRUC TRAN
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Miss A Seehra of
           Counsel instructed by Sparrow and Trieu
                            For the Respondent: Mr Whitwell a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 27  March  1996.
      She has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Molloy  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision of 10 October  2012  to  refuse  her
      entry clearance for settlement in the  UK  as  the  dependent  of  her
      mother under the provisions of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.


   2.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
      financially supported by her  mother  or  that  her  mother  had  sole
      responsibility for her upbringing. At  the  least  responsibility  had
      been shared with her grandmother.


   3. The appellant appealed. At a preliminary hearing before the FTTJ on  2
      August 2013 at which both parties were represented the  appellant  was
      permitted to amend her grounds of appeal to argue that she could bring
      herself within paragraph 297(i)(f) on the basis that she was suffering
      domestic violence at the hands  of  her  uncle  and  that  there  were
      serious and compelling family or other considerations which  made  her
      exclusion undesirable. Suitable arrangements had  been  made  for  her
      care. The full hearing before the FTTJ took place on 7 November  2013.
      Both parties were  represented,  the  appellant  by  Miss  Seehra  who
      appeared before me.


   4. The FTTJ heard oral evidence from the appellant's mother and two other
      witnesses all of whom gave evidence through an interpreter. At the end
      of the evidence and it being late in the day the  FTTJ  directed  that
      submissions should be made  in  writing.  Those  from  the  respondent
      should be submitted no later than 5 pm on 14 November 2013  and  those
      from the appellant's representatives no later than 5 pm on 21 November
      2013.


   5. The FTTJ concluded that the appellant had  not  established  that  she
      could bring herself within the provisions  of  paragraph  297  of  the
      Immigration Rules. He  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. He went on to consider  the  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      concluding that balancing the  factors  in  favour  of  the  appellant
      against the  public  interest  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
      interference with her right to respect for family life to  refuse  her
      entry clearance.


   6. The FTTJ prepared his written  determination  which  he  signed  on  6
      December 2013. In an addendum to that determination dated 11  December
      2013 he recorded that within an hour of his signing the  determination
      on 6 December 2013  he  was  handed  the  appellant's  representatives
      written submissions prepared by  Miss  Seehra.  These  were  dated  20
      November 2013 and had been  sent  with  a  letter  of  the  same  date
      although it appeared that the  letter  had  been  delayed  because  of
      inadequate prepaid postage.


   7. Having studied the appellant's submissions the FTTJ wrote an  addendum
      to his determination which was signed and dated 11 December 2013.  The
      addendum maintained the  decision  in  the  earlier  determination  to
      dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8  human
      rights grounds. The  original  determination  and  the  addendum  were
      promulgated together on 17 December 2013


   8. The appellant applied for and was granted permission  to  appeal.  The
      grounds argue that the FTTJ erred in law in a number of ways. Firstly,
      by failing to consider relevant evidence or to give any or  sufficient
      reasons when assessing sole responsibility. Secondly, by giving  undue
      emphasis to the interview with the  appellant's  grandmother,  failing
      properly to assess that evidence  or  to  give  clear  and  sufficient
      reasons. Thirdly, by failing to consider relevant evidence as  to  the
      violence which the appellant claimed to have suffered at the hands  of
      her uncle. Fourthly, failing to consider the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant who was a child as a primary consideration. Fifthly, failing
      to take into  account  admissible  post  decision  evidence.  Sixthly,
      making a flawed assessment of the Article  8  grounds.  Seventhly  and
      finally, making a procedural  error  by  effectively  determining  the
      appeal without first considering the appellant's written submissions.


   9. There is a Rule 24 reply from the respondent dated 20  February  2014.
      It is unfortunate that all or most of the large  number  of  documents
      which were before the FTTJ had disappeared from the Tribunal  file  by
      the time it came to me. Between  them  Miss  Seehra  and  Mr  Whitwell
      provided me with copies of some of  the  important  documents  at  the
      beginning of the hearing. Subsequently the appellant's solicitors have
      sent me duplicates of the appellant's two bundles (333  and  76  pages
      respectively) which were before the FTTJ. I believe that  I  now  have
      all the material that was before the FTTJ.


  10. Miss Seehra relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.  She  added  that  her
      instructions were that  the  appellant's  mother  did  not  have  dual
      nationality.  She  only  had  a  British  passport.  The  COIR  report
      indicated that Vietnamese citizens  were  not  allowed  to  have  dual
      nationality. This was not a point raised by the FTTJ at  the  hearing.
      Had it been it would have been addressed. Furthermore, the appellant's
      mother had a long-term partner in  this  country  who  was  a  British
      citizen of British origin. Ground five was not addressed in  the  Rule
      24 reply. In relation to ground six  Miss  Seehra  submitted  that  on
      receipt of the appellant's submissions the  FTTJ  should  either  have
      rewritten the determination so that what emerged was a single coherent
      determination or, if he considered that there were issues which needed
      to be addressed, adjourned for a further hearing.


  11. Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule 24 reply. He argued  that  it  was  not
      incumbent on the FTTJ to  chase  up  the  appellant's  representatives
      submissions. To deal with these in an addendum was a  permissible  and
      appropriate approach. The FTTJ directed himself properly  and  in  the
      addendum made it clear that he was addressing the  best  interests  of
      the appellant as a primary consideration.


  12. In her reply Miss Seehra submitted that the addendum was not a  proper
      holistic approach. All the evidence was not reassessed in the light of
      the  submissions  as  it  should  have  been.  There   were   material
      differences  between  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the   submissions
      reflecting the submissions made by the  respondent's  representatives.
      The best interests of the child were not mentioned until the addendum.


  13. I reserved my determination.


  14. I find that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to make a  clear  finding
      in relation to the issue of financial support. Whilst, in line with TD
      (Paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049
      financial support is not, as the grounds concede, a conclusive  factor
      it is an  important  one.  There  was  evidence  before  the  FTTJ  of
      financial support provided by the appellant's mother on which  finding
      should have been made.


  15. The FTTJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  address  the  issue  of  sole
      responsibility in the light of the appellant's mother's evidence which
      was referred to in the respondent's written submissions of 13 November
      2013; that there was only one school in the area where  the  appellant
      was living so that there was no real choice made by  her  grandmother.
      It was not sufficient to reject this evidence by saying that there was
      no further evidence from the grandmother to support  what  the  mother
      was saying (paragraph 103).


  16. I will address the fourth ground of appeal  in  conjunction  with  the
      last.


  17. I find that in paragraphs 19 and 124 of  the  determination  the  FTTJ
      erred in law by excluding consideration of all post decision evidence.
      He should have considered the circumstances appertaining at  the  time
      of the decision which, in the light of the starred determination in DR
      (ECO:  post  decision  evidence)  Morocco  [2005]  UKIAT   00038   and
      Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT
      00038 (IAC) established that whilst evidence of  post  decision  facts
      was precluded neither the admission of further evidence  to  establish
      what the true picture was  at  the  time  of  the  decision  nor  post
      decision  evidence  adduced  to  demonstrate  the  reliability  of  an
      assessment of future intentions was precluded.


  18. I find that the FTTJ erred in law because there is a  real  perception
      of unfairness amounting to a procedural impropriety arising  from  the
      way in which he  dealt  with  the  late  receipt  of  the  appellant's
      representatives submissions. It is  clear  that  these  were  received
      after  the  FTTJ  had  signed  his  determination  but   before   that
      determination had been promulgated. Once he accepted  that  there  had
      been a  sufficient  explanation  for  the  delay  in  the  submissions
      reaching him and that he was going to consider them  the  FTTJ  should
      have rewritten his observations on both sets of  written  submissions,
      his assessment of the evidence in the light of those  submissions  and
      his reasoning and conclusions.  To  issue  the  determination  in  the
      original form in which he had addressed only the  written  submissions
      from the respondent and dismissed the appeal followed by  an  addendum
      addressing the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  and  then
      reaching the same conclusion gives the strong impression of seeking to
      justify  conclusions  already  reached  and  not  making  a   balanced
      assessment in the light of both sets of submissions. The perception is
      exacerbated by a factor arising from the fourth ground of appeal.  The
      FTTJ did not deal with the  best  interests  of  the  appellant  as  a
      primary consideration in the original determination,  only  addressing
      it in the addendum.


  19. I find that the errors of law as such that the determination falls  to
      be set aside. The question  of  how  the  decision  should  be  remade
      presented Miss Seehra and those instructing her with a dilemma. On the
      one hand the appellant and her mother wants the Tribunal  to  consider
      all relevant evidence whilst on the other there  are  the  factors  of
      delay and additional expense. Miss  Seehra's  final  instructions  and
      submissions were that if I found there to be errors  of  law  and  set
      aside the decision then the appellant  would  wish  to  call  evidence
      relating to the appellant's mother's relationship  with  her  partner,
      evidence as to  her  lack  of  dual  nationality  and  to  recall  the
      witnesses who gave evidence before the FTTJ where it was thought  that
      there were  no  sufficiently  clear  findings  in  relation  to  their
      evidence as to financial support.


  20. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and  can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  21. In all the circumstances and taking into account the directions of the
      Senior President I conclude that the appellant has not  had  a  proper
      hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal and I direct that  this  appeal
      be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal by a judge other than First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Molloy.










      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 17
      March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

