
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/21666/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 19 February 2016                  |On: 8 April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                   |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between
                         MR AKEEM MORENIKEJI OGUNADE
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr C Emesez Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  19  April  1966.   He
      appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decisions  of  the
      respondent  dated  29  October  2013   to   refuse   his   application
      forregistration certificate  entry clearance  as  the  spouse  of  his
      sponsor, a British citizen under paragraphs EC-P.1.  of Appendix FM.



   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kanith dismissed the appellant's appeal in a
      determination dated 20 August 2015.  Permission to appeal was  granted
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ramsey in a  decision  dated  21  January
      2016, stating that it is arguable that the Judge fell  into  error  in
      not granting the  appellant  an  adjournment  set  against  the  facts
      available to the Judge as referred to in the decision.



   3. Thus the appeal came before me.



The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

4. The First-tier Tribunal refused to give the appellant an  adjournment  on
   the following basis which I summarise.  On the day of  the  hearing,  the
   appellant's  legal  representatives  did  not  attend.   The  appellant's
   solicitors were contacted by the Tribunal clerk.  He was advised that the
   solicitor representing the appellant,  Mr.  Emezie  would  not  be  in  a
   position to attend today because of the  train  strike.   The  Judge  and
   noted that the Tribunal subsequently received a faxed letter at 10:56  AM
   which stated that due to the train strike, "our client has been unable to
   reach the court. in the interest of justice for our client, we kindly ask
   that the case scheduled to be heard today be adjourned".



5. The Judge noted in his determination that "the appellant  explained  that
   she spoke to her legal representative over the telephone yesterday.   She
   was at a loss how she was going to arrive at  the  hearing  centre.   She
   said that she would arrange for a taxi and that is how she  attended  the
   hearing centre to date.  The appellant stated that she  was  not  advised
   that her legal representatives would not be in a position to  attend  the
   hearing centre today.  She did not seek an application to adjourn and had
   a copy of the relevant papers in front of her.



6. The Judge noted "in connection with  the  London  underground  industrial
   action, it has been well publicized  for  over  a  week  that  industrial
   action was to commence from 18.30 hours...  I am therefore  perplexed  as
   to why the appellant's legal  representative  did  not  make  alternative
   arrangements to ensure that the appellant was represented.   The  sponsor
   has made arrangements to arrive at the Tribunal centre in good time".



7. The Judge noted, "the appellant's  legal  representatives  have  shown  a
   lack of pre-planning and disregarding making appropriate arrangements  to
   attend the hearing centre.  At the very least,  once  they  realize  that
   they may face difficulties with  respect  to  nominating  an  alternative
   advocate to attend, they should have contacted the Tribunal as  a  matter
   of urgency and in advanced of the hearing date.



8. The Judge concluded "upon the careful consideration of the above  factors
   I determine that it would be appropriate to proceed with the  appeal  and
   that there would be no prejudice to either the appellant or his sponsor.



The grounds of appeal




9. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  state  that  the  Judge  had  by  not
   allowing the application for an adjournment fell into material error.



The hearing


10. At the hearing I heard submissions from both  parties.   Mr.Emesie  said
   that he lives in Essex and it would have been impossible for him to  have
   reached Hatton Cross even by a taxi.  He said in any event it was not the
   appellant fault and he should not be prejudiced.



11. Mr. Tarlow on behalf of  the  respondent  stated  that  there  are  many
   discrepancies in the appeal and even if the legal representative had been
   at the hearing, it would not have made any difference to the outcome.



Decision  as  to  whether  there  is  a  material  error  of  law   in   the
   determination



12.  The  appellant  complains  that  the  Judge  should  have  granted   an
   adjournment because his legal representative  he  could  not  attend  the
   hearing because of a tube strike. Therefore,  the  issue  raised  by  the
   appellant in his grounds of appeal is procedural fairness.



13. The appellant made an application for an adjournment on the  bases  that
   there is a tube strike.  Therefore, he relied on evidence in  support  of
   that application which he was bound to  do.  The  Judge  considered  this
   evidence and decided that he would not grant a late  application  for  an
   adjournment, as the appellant's  legal  representative  would  have  made
   alternative arrangements to attend court notwithstanding the tube strike.



14. The Judge stated  that  there  would  be  no  prejudice  either  to  the
   appellant or  his  sponsor  to  continue  with  the  appeal  without  the
   appellant's legal representative.  He gave no reasons for why the absence
   of a legal representative to put forward the appellant's case, would  not
   prejudice the appellant.



15. I do not accept  the  respondent's  response  that  even  if  the  legal
   representatives would have been present, it would have made no difference
   to the appeal given the inconsistencies in the evidence.  Where there has
   been procedural unfairness, the merits or lack thereof cannot remedy  the
   error.



16. The Judge did not consider the overriding objective carefully  and  warn
   himself that there is a need to ensure  fairness  on  both  parties  when
   deciding adjournment request and to seek flexibility and avoid  formality
   and that the interests of the parties to the proceedings  and  the  wider
   public interest must be considered.  Failure by  the  judge  to  consider
   whether lack of representation would be unfair  to  the  appellant,  fell
   into material error.



17. I therefore set aside the decision and  remit  it  to  the  First-  tier
   Tribunal for a full hearing.



            DECISION


Appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed by



A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
                                                 This 20th day of March 2016






