
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/21118/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 4th November 2015             |On the 23rd November 2015             |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-(BEIJING)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MISS YEYI HUANG
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent/Claimant: Ms Monica Mac (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Respondent's the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi  promulgated  on  the
    18th May 2015 in which she allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse Entry Clearance to the Appellant  as  a
    child in order for her to settle in the United Kingdom with her  father
    Mr Ye under paragraph 297 (1) (E) of the  Immigration  Rules.  For  the
    purposes of clarity, throughout this decision Miss Huang is referred to
    as "the Claimant".

 2. Permission to appeal case been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
    on the 1st September 2015 on the grounds that it was arguable  that  it
    had not been demonstrated that the Appellant  qualified  for  Leave  to
    Enter under the Rules, as it had not been shown that there were serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which made  exclusion  of
    the Appellant from the UK undesirable and it was  arguable  that  there
    was no evidence of sole responsibility.

 3. In his submissions before me Mr Walker properly conceded that  although
    he was not in a position to concede the appeal,  he  was  not  able  to
    point to any material error of law within the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rastogi. He accepted on behalf of the Appellant that  in
    fact First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi had heard oral evidence from the
    sponsor, and that he was not perusing the argument within  the  Grounds
    of Appeal that there needed to be corroborative evidence.  He  conceded
    that at [9] the  Judge  had  given  careful  consideration  as  to  the
    question of sole responsibility both in respect of  the  responsibility
    of the Appellant's mother and also her grandmother and that at [33] the
    Judge had given consideration to the responsibility of Mr Ye for making
    decisions about the Appellant in terms of choosing  her  schooling  and
    that  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Rastogi   also   considered   the
    responsibility of Mr Ye for taking the other important decisions in the
    Appellant's life. He again agreed that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had considered the evidence of the Appellant's mother going for the DNA
    test and the TB test as part of the evidence that supported  a  finding
    of Mr Ye having sole responsibility for the Appellant,  in  that  these
    tests were carried out solely so that the Appellant could come  to  the
    United Kingdom, rather than remain in China with her mother.

 4. Ms Mac on behalf of the Claimant relied upon her skeleton argument  and
    argued that she made full submissions within the skeleton argument  and
    that the Judge had made adequate  and  appropriate  findings  regarding
    sole responsibility and that there was no material error of law.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

 5. In respect of the argument in the Grounds of Appeal that the Judge made
    inadequate findings by accepting the oral evidence of  the  Sponsor  in
    the absence of supporting documentary evidence, there  is  in  fact  no
    requirement for the oral testimony of the sponsor to be corroborated by
    documentary evidence in this case. It was perfectly open to  the  Judge
    to accept the oral evidence of the sponsor on these issues. It  is  not
    an error of law for a Judge to  believe  a  witness.  Further,  to  the
    extent that the  Grounds  of  Appeal  argue  that  without  documentary
    evidence there is no evidence to show the Appellant and Sponsor are  in
    fact related as claimed, the fact that they were related as claimed  in
    terms of being father and daughter was proved by the DNA evidence  from
    the DNA Diagnostics Centre which established that they were related  as
    father and daughter with a  probability  of  99.999999999%,  which  was
    accepted by the Entry Clearance Officer within the refusal decision.

 6. Further, the argument that the  entry  and  exit  endorsements  on  the
    Sponsor and his cousin's passport did not prove  who  they  visited  or
    that they had brought funds specifically for the Appellant and there is
    no independent evidence confirming  the  mother's  signature  as  being
    genuine on the letter from her or that  she  actually  did  consent  to
    relinquished responsibility,  misses  the  point  that  the  judge  was
    perfectly again entitled to  accept  the  sponsor's  evidence  in  this
    regard. There was no evidence before the Judge to show that the  letter
    from the mother was forged or that there were  any  concerns  regarding
    its validity.

 7. In respect of the Grounds of Appeal that the mother had been trying  to
    maintain  contact  with  the  Appellant  and  had   demonstrated   some
    responsibility for the Appellant by  accompanying  her  to  the  DNA/TB
    testing, the Judge  had  again  given  perfectly  clear,  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons for his findings at [34] that a parent would have to
    accompany the child for such a procedure, in light of the fact  it  was
    being carried out in order that the child could leave the  country.  It
    also was clear that the Appellant's mother was required to  attend  the
    DNA testing as samples were also taken from her. The  Judge's  findings
    in regards to why the mother attended at  those  tests  were  therefore
    perfectly open to him, as was his finding that this  did  not  in  fact
    give rise to her accepting responsibility for the Appellant.

 8. In a very thorough  determination  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Rastogi gave full and  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  that  the
    Appellant had been abandoned by her mother and was  residing  with  her
    paternal grandmother, as a result of the mother having got married  and
    her new husband not wishing for the Appellant to live with her and that
    the sponsor Mr Ye had  taken  over  financial  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant since 2010. In his decision between [26]  and  [28]  he  also
    gave clear sufficient and adequate reasons for his  findings  that  the
    sponsor had visited the Appellant on numerous occasions including for a
    period of 26 weeks in 2009 and  had  set  out  fully  and  clearly  the
    reasons why he found that the sponsor did make all of  the  substantial
    decisions in the Appellant's life including schooling and which  clinic
    she was to go to when ill.  The  Judge  also  properly  considered  the
    reasons why he found that the mother had abandoned  responsibility  for
    her and why although the Appellant lived with her grandmother, she  was
    simply responsible for the Appellant's  care  on  a  day-to-day  basis,
    rather than having responsibility for her and that sole  responsibility
    did in fact lie with the  sponsor  Mr  Ye.  The  fact  that  the  Judge
    accepted Mr Ye's evidence regarding sole responsibility does  not  mean
    that there was no evidence in this regard. It was perfectly open to the
    Judge to accept the sponsor's oral evidence which he did, and  he  gave
    adequate and sufficient reasons for doing  so.  There  is  no  material
    error in this regard.

 9. In respect of the submission that there were no serious  or  compelling
    family or other circumstances made the Appellant's exclusion  from  the
    UK undesirable, it is further clear from the  Judge's  decision  having
    found that Mr Ye was solely responsible for the  Appellant  he  allowed
    the appeal under paragraph 297 (i) (e) of the Immigration Rules, and at
    [45] stated that he did not therefore need to go on to consider whether
    or not the Appellant was able to meet the requirements of paragraph 297
    (i) (f) in terms of whether or not there were  serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  made  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and whether suitable arrangements had  been  made  for  the
    child's  care.  These  subparagraphs  under  paragraph   297   are   an
    alternative basis for granting indefinite Leave  to  Enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a child of a parent, and having  found  sole  responsibility
    under paragraph 297 (i) (e) the Judge did not need to go on to consider
    297 (i) (f).

10. In such circumstances, given the concession properly made by Mr  Walker
    that the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi did not disclose
    a material error of law, and  given  my  findings  in  respect  of  the
    grounds of appeal  above,  I  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rastogi does not contain a material error of law and the
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rastogi  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and shall stand;

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  and  no
such application for an anonymity direction was made before me. I  therefore
do not make any such order.


Signed      Dated 4th November 2015
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty

