







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22137/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Promulgated                          |
|On: 2 March 2015                     |On: 13 April 2015                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal judge Mailer


                                   Between

                             Mr Yogendra Mohara
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer: New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, of counsel (instructed by NC Brothers
and Co)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal   Judge  Nixon,  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated 22 November 2014, refusing  his
    application for entry clearance to the UK for settlement as a dependent
    adult son of a former Gurkha soldier.

 2. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge
    erred in her approach to  the  question  of  whether  family  life  was
    established.

 3. The appellant claimed before the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  had  no
    other family in Nepal. His  brother  was  settled  in  the  UK,  having
    successfully appealed against the refusal of his application.

 4. The appellant was totally reliant financially on his  father,  and  was
    living in rented accommodation paid for by  him.  He  had  no  wife  or
    children in Nepal. Until his parents came to the UK he had always lived
    with them.

 5. The appellant could not meet the  requirements  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and confined his  appeal  to  Article  8  grounds.  The  evidence
    contained in the witness statements was not challenged.

 6. The Judge found at  paragraph  14(4)  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant was financially dependent on his father.  However,  that  was
    qualified on the basis that  such financial dependency is  expected  in
    Nepalese culture and did not indicate any particular dependency.

 7. At paragraph 14(7), the  Judge  stated  that  the  critical  issue  was
    whether the appellant had shown that  there  is  "sufficient  emotional
    dependency" on his parents to justify the conclusion  that  they  enjoy
    family life. She found that he had failed  to  show  this.  Whilst  the
    appellant was financially dependent  on  his  father,  she  found  that
    although the usual  emotional  bonds  between  parents  and  child  are
    present, the requisite degree of emotional dependency is absent. He had
    therefore failed to show that family life, pursuant to Article  8,  was
    engaged.

 8. Mr Howells on behalf of the appellant submitted that the  qualification
    of the appellant's financial dependency  on  the  basis  that  this  is
    expected in Nepalese culture was 'irrational and  unreasonable'.  There
    was no basis for the finding that this is a cultural  expectation,  and
    in any event, this did not undermine its probative value in relation to
    the question of dependency.

 9. Further, the finding at paragraph 14(7) artificially isolated the issue
    of emotional dependency from the evidence of financial  dependency  and
    the other factors, including the fact that  the  appellant  had  always
    lived in a family home and had not formed an independent life.

10. The Judge wrongly set  the  bar  for  emotional  dependency  too  high,
    treating this single  issue  as  the  sole  determinative  factor  when
    assessing whether family life exists. He asked  somewhat  rhetorically,
    that if the bond between parent and child is not enough,  what  exactly
    would be enough in this regard?

11. He submitted that the proper approach as to whether an adult  dependent
    child can establish that they enjoy family life with their parents, has
    been clarified since the decision in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 in the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Ghising  (Family  Life  -  Adults  -
    Gurkha Policy) Nepal [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC).  It  was  accepted  that
    Kugathas had been  interpreted  too  restrictively  in  the  past.  The
    critical question is whether the  adult  child  has  formed  their  own
    independent life and/or whether they  remain  part  of  their  parents'
    family unit, together  with  the  practical,  emotional  and  financial
    dependence that usually brings.

12. He also relied on the approach approved by  Lord  Dyson  MR  in  Gurung
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at 45-46. It depends on the facts as  to  whether  or
    not an adult child still resides with his parents for the  purposes  of
    establishing family life.

13. A period of separation does not necessarily split the family unit.  The
    Gurkha settlement policy presupposed that the Gurkha himself  had  come
    to the UK alone initially to make the application  for  settlement  and
    therefore presupposed a period of separation of the family unit.

14. Ms Everett submitted that this case, like others, was  fact  dependent.
    There was nothing in the Judge's reasoning to indicate that  the  wrong
    test was applied. She contended that the sponsor had  been  in  the  UK
    since 2009 and that the appellant was leading an  independent  life  in
    Nepal.  She accepted however after it was drawn to her attention,  that
    the correct date as to when the sponsor first arrived in the UK, was in
    2011, and accordingly they had been living together as  a  family  unit
    for a period of 18 months only and not several years.

15. Mr Howells submitted that family life in fact  continued  to  exist  in
    Nepal when the mother remained there until she came in 2011 and  family
    life has not been severed since then.

    Assessment

16. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  not  adequately  engaged
    with relevant  jurisprudence and has  not  applied  the  current  legal
    approach relevant to the issue of whether  family  life  in  this  case
    existed between the appellant and his family in the UK,  including  his
    mother, father and brother.

17. The correct approach has been to move on  from  the  earlier  case  law
    requiring that it be demonstrated that something more  than  the  usual
    normal emotional ties existed.

18. The authorities relating to the nature of family life under  Article  8
    (1) were  fully  considered  and  analysed  in  Ghising,  supra,   from
    paragraphs 41 onwards.  There was in particular reference to Kugathas v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31. It was noted that  in  that  case,  Sedley  LJ
    accepted the submission that "dependency" was not limited  to  economic
    dependency. He added: "....but if dependency is read  down  as  meaning
    'support' in the personal sense, and if one adds echoing the Strasbourg
    jurisprudence  'real'  or  'committed'  or  'effective'  to  the   word
    support', then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum of what
    family life implies." The Court also referred to the comments of  Arden
    L.J., at paragraphs 24-25.

19. It was thus accepted in Ghising that the  judgements  in  Kugathas  had
    been interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought to be read  in
    the light of  subsequent  decisions  of  the  domestic  and  Strasbourg
    courts.

20. The Tribunal referred to a number of cases (from paragraph 57  onwards)
    in which it has been recognised that family life may  continue  between
    parent and child even after the child has attained his majority. Regard
    was also had to RB (Zimbabwe) and another v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  825,
    at paragraph 6, where Sedley LJ stated that it  would  be  "unreal"  to
    dispute that the 23 year old appellant enjoyed  family  life  with  her
    parents when she "had lived pretty well continuously with  her  parents
    and siblings all her life." The Court of Appeal  also  found  that  the
    second appellant, who was 25 years old, enjoyed family  life  with  his
    parents since he was "economically and emotionally... a member  of  his
    immediate family, all of whom - that is his parents and two  sisters  -
    are now lawfully resident here."

21. The Tribunal also had regard to AA v UK  (Application  no  8000/08)  at
    paragraph 61, referring to the conclusion  at  paragraph  49,  that  an
    examination of the Court's case law would  tend  to  suggest  that  the
    applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with  his  mother
    and has not yet founded a family of his own can be regarded  as  having
    "family life".

22. The headnote in Ghising, supra, is to the effect that a review  of  the
    jurisprudence discloses that  there  is  no  general  proposition  that
    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  can  never  be
    engaged when the family life it is sought to establish is between adult
    siblings living together. Rather than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children, each case  should  be  analysed  on  its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists within  the  meaning
    of Article 8(1). While some generalisations are possible, each case  is
    fact sensitive.

23. I find that there has been a measure of artificiality in isolating  the
    issue of emotional dependency from the evidence of financial dependency
    and other factors. That includes the undisputed fact that the appellant
    had always lived in the family home and  as  yet  had  not  formed  any
    independent  life.   The   evidence   relating   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances  were  set  out  in  witness  statements  from  both  the
    appellant and his sponsor. There had been no challenge to that evidence
    relied on by the appellant.

24. The above approach was approved by Lord  Dyson  MR  in  Gurung,  supra,
    where he recognised as a matter of law that where an adult child  still
    resides with their parents and has not yet founded a family of his own,
    this may establish family life. It all depends on the facts.

25. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of a material error on a point of  law.  I
    accordingly set aside the determination and re-make it.

26. In the appellant's witness statement dated 23 July 2014, he stated that
    he was dependent on his father for support. His  brother's  appeal  had
    been allowed. I was informed that his brother had also appealed  as  an
    adult dependant in the UK. He had come to the UK on a student visa  and
    made his application for settlement prior to the expiry of his leave.

27. The appellant is a student at a  college  in  Kathmandu.  He  has  some
    outstanding examinations to sit.

28. His accommodation, which he is renting, is  paid  for  by  his  father.
    Without this financial support he would not be able to study or live on
    his own in Nepal. There are no facilities that assist people of his age
    to become independent.

29. The reason his father did not apply for him to join him earlier in  the
    UK as his dependant was as a result of poor advice by a Nepalese lawyer
    who informed him that as he was over the age  of  18,  his  application
    would not succeed. His father was advised to travel to the UK first  to
    ensure that he is "well settled there" before  making  the  application
    for his son to join him.

30. He is completely dependent on his father. When he is not  studying,  he
    spends his father's money.  He  has  access  to  his  father's  pension
    payments in Nepal which he uses if and when the need arises. His father
    regularly sends him money via transfer agencies.

31. He will not be able to find suitable employment  in  Nepal.  The  caste
    system plays a very important role in that regard. Nepal is one of  the
    poorest countries in the world.

32. After his father  retired  from  the  Army,  he  stayed  in  Nepal.  On
    completion of a work contract in 1996 in  Hong  Kong,  he  returned  to
    Nepal to be with the family. They all lived as a family unit until 2011
    when both his father and mother had by then migrated to the UK.

33. He has no other relatives in Nepal to whom he can turn for emotional or
    financial assistance.

34. He is emotionally dependent on his parents as he is the  youngest  son.
    He has never lived apart from them and they have  always  looked  after
    him. He has no family of his own. He has nobody else  to  turn  to  for
    such support and company. He has never had a girlfriend  or  any  other
    relationship  and  his  emotional  dependency  on  his  parents   still
    continues.

35. His father visited him in August 2012 as he was missing him. He  stayed
    for about three weeks and then returned  to  the  UK  because  of  work
    commitments.

36. Although his father's house is in Dharan, he has no friends  or  family
    members to return to there.

37. He was born in Hong Kong whilst his father was serving in the Army. Had
    his father been given the opportunity to settle after his  service,  he
    would have taken that opportunity for the appellant's future and  today
    they would be living as one family.

38. His family is well settled in the UK. His father  is  employed.  He  is
    able to maintain and accommodate him without recourse to public funds.

39. They are a very close family and have always intended to live  together
    as before. They continue to speak to each other on a regular basis.

40. The appellant's father's witness statement dated 23 July 2014  confirms
    the contents of the appellant's statement.

41. Had he been given the option to live in the UK when he retired from the
    British Army, he would have taken that chance. That would have  allowed
    his children to live in a society where they would benefit from a  real
    potential to prosper in life. The appellant would only  have  been  six
    years old when he retired from the army. He was however not allowed  to
    settle in the UK until he was 18 years old.

42. He asserts that it is not correct that his son is  independent  of  him
    simply because he is over 18 years old.  He  has  no  other  source  of
    income.  He  has  never  worked  for  a  living.  He  has  never   been
    independent.

43. In deciding whether the family life continued to exist  since  2011,  I
    have had regard to the approach as set out in Ghising, supra,  in  this
    regard. A period of separation does not necessarily  split  the  family
    unit. In Ghising, a period of over two and a half years  did  not  have
    the effect of splitting the family unit  as  the  dependency  continued
    during that period and they resumed living together when they were able
    to.

44. As noted in the appellant's skeleton, Tomlinson  LJ  recognised  in  UG
    (Nepal)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  58,  that  the  Gurkha  settlement   policy
    presupposed that the Gurkha himself had come to the UK alone  initially
    to make the application for  settlement  and  therefore  presupposed  a
    period of separation of the family unit.

45. I was also informed that the appellant remained living with his  mother
    until she came to the UK in 2011. His father had come to the UK in 2010
     - ahead of his mother. Their other son also came in 2011. That son was
    26 years old when he came. The appellant's brother came  on  a  Tier  4
    student visa in 2011 which expired in 2013. His  mother  came  about  a
    month later.  Prior to his mother's arrival in  the  UK  in  2011,  the
    appellant continued living with her in the same house as  part  of  the
    family unit.

46. Having regard to the unchallenged evidence, I find that  the  appellant
    has shown  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  he  has  remained
    emotionally attached to his parents and they remain a close family.

47. I find from the evidence that the appellant has not formed a family  of
    his own which can be regarded as family  life.  Moreover,  he  has  not
    formed his own independent life. He  continues  to  be  supported  both
    economically and  emotionally  by  his  family.  He  has  remained  and
    continues to remain a part  of  his  parents'  family  unit.  That  has
    resulted in practical, emotional and financial dependence arising  from
    that unit.

48. The fact that he has been separated for about 18 months has not in  the
    circumstances had  the  effect  of  splitting  the  family  unit.  Both
    financial as  well  as  emotional  support  including  telephone  calls
    between them has regularly persisted. Moreover, the sponsor has visited
    the appellant in Nepal on occasion.  The family relationships have thus
    not been severed.

49. The historic injustice and its consequences  carry  significant  weight
    when assessing proportionality. This reduces the potency of the  public
    interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy.   There  are  no
    countervailing  factors  outweighing  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
    appellant.

    Decision

    The appeal is allowed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Date 31 March 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
