
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22877/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 15 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                            DAVID AYOMIKUN KOIKI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh dismissing his appeal against the
    decision of the respondent, made on 9 October 2012, to refuse to  grant
    him entry clearance into the United Kingdom as the child of a  relative
    present and settled  in  the  UK  pursuant  to  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules, as amended.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  16  January  2007.   His
    case is that his mother, Miss Olajumoke Koiki, died on  1  April  2012.
    Following her death, a sister, his maternal aunt, Miss  Kuye  Olufolake
    Olubusola, who is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  has  been
    responsible for his care.  The Entry Clearance Officer noted  that  the
    birth  certificate  which  had  been  submitted  in  support   of   the
    application, purporting to  officially  record  the  appellant's  birth
    details was dated 13  April  2012,  five  years  after  his  birth  and
    approximately twelve days after the death of his mother.

3.   The respondent observed that there was no  explanation  for  the  delay
    registering the appellant's birth, there was no  photographic  evidence
    that  the  appellant  had  met  his  sponsor,  or  that  she  had  been
    responsible for the appellant following the death of  his  mother.   It
    was also noted that at  the  time  of  his  application  the  appellant
    continued to reside with his father  in  Nigeria,  notwithstanding  his
    current ill-health referred to by a letter from Lagos General Hospital.
     Most significantly, was the fact that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    provide supporting evidence that he was in fact the nephew of Miss Kuye
    Olufolake  Olubusola.   In  those  circumstances  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

4.   On 17 April 2013,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  (ECM)  reviewed  the
    appellant's application.  He had the  benefit  of  further  documentary
    evidence in the form of  copies  of  the  sponsor's  mortgage  account,
    payslips, correspondence with Lagos General  Hospital,  photographs  of
    the  appellant  and  his  sponsor,  copies  of  passport  details   and
    confirmation of  travel  tickets  where  the  sponsor  and  her  mother
    travelled to Nigeria.

5.   The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied,  having  regard  to  the
    grounds of appeal and the additional evidence that the sponsor had sole
    responsibility of the appellant, as he continued  to  reside  with  his
    father.  He noted that the  appellant's  father  continued  to  receive
    regular  out-patient  treatment  from  Lagos  General  Hospital  for  a
    condition that existed prior to the appellant's mother.  The  condition
    the appellant's father suffered from at the date of  the  decision  was
    asthma and hypertension.  The Entry Clearance Officer  remained  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant and the sponsor were in  fact  related  as
    claimed.

6.   At the hearing Ms Olubusola said that she and  the  appellant's  mother
    were sisters.  Prior to the death of her sister, she felt there was  no
    need to bring the appellant to  the  UK.   She  regularly  visited  the
    appellant and his mother and would travel to Nigeria two or three times
    a year.  Following the death of her sister,  she  was  prepared  to  do
    whatever she could to keep the appellant safe and  maintain  him  until
    the age of majority.  To date she has sent regular remittances  to  the
    appellant to meet his  living  expenses  including  his  attendance  at
    formal college.

7.   She is employed as a nurse.  She was confident  that  her  mother,  the
    appellant's grandmother, would support her in caring for the appellant.
     She has three dependent children, aged 17  and  twins  aged  15.   The
    appellant would be accommodated within her  family  home,  a  5-bedroom
    privately owned semi-detached house.  She was questioned about formally
    adopting the appellant, she said she was concerned that the appellant's
    father would feel marginalised and in the circumstances decided against
    the course of action.

8.   The sponsor subsequently obtained a DNA report dated 21  February  2014
    which concluded that the evidence provides weak support for the claimed
    relationship between Olufolake Olubusola Kuye and David Ayomikun Koiki.
     The DNA said that the most likely relationship is aunt and  nephew  or
    grandmother and grandchild or more distantly related.  The DNA  results
    are 2.6 times more likely if Olufolake Olubusola  Kuye  is  related  to
    David Ayomikun  Koiki as an aunt or grandmother or more likely  distant
    relative than if they were unrelated.

9.   In addition to the  DNA  evidence  Miss  Olubusola  produced  a  school
    report.  It was noted by the school that the appellant required support
    academically and that since the death of his mother  his  concentration
    at school has deteriorated and his appearance at school diminished.   A
    letter from Shokem Private School recommended that the appellant should
    be cared for by his maternal family.

10.  The appellant's father, Mr Koiki Oluwasegun Lateef  provided  a  letter
    of  consent  expressly  permitting  the  sponsor   and   the   maternal
    grandmother to have the day-to-day care of his son, David.   He  stated
    that due to his ill-health he was unable to give the  appellant  proper
    care.  He referred to his diagnosis of asthma and hypertension  as  the
    debilitating condition which prevented him from caring for his son.

11.  There was a letter from the Okiki Clinic and Maternity  Hospital  dated
    26 November 2013 in which the medical specialist confirmed a history of
    ill-health and a diagnosis of Cerebro Vascular Accident  (stroke).   It
    was confirmed that he was placed on  medication  and  at  the  time  of
    writing Mr Lateef was still suffering from paralysis of the  left  half
    of his body.

12.  The judge  found  the  sponsor  Ms  Olubusola  to  be  a  credible  and
    consistent witness.  The judge  noted  that  the  DNA  report  although
    inconclusive, indicated that the evidence of the proposition  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were related as aunt  and  nephew  was  weak.
    The sponsor could not explain why the  results  had  indicated  a  weak
    support of the relationship claimed.

13.  The judge found that the appellant has a surviving  parent  in  Nigeria
    and was at times supported by his maternal grandmother when she visited
    Nigeria.  The school reports indicated  that  the  appellant  has  been
    adversely affected by the death of his mother.  However, there  was  no
    evidence as to what impact separation from his father may have  on  the
    appellant.  Consequently she found that the appellant  failed  to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 297.

14.  The judge then considered the appeal in accordance with Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and what  is  in  the
    best interest of the child.  The sponsor  said  in  evidence  that  she
    would be able to care for the appellant with the support of her  mother
    and children.  There was no evidence from  the  respondent  to  suggest
    that the sponsor was unable to provide good enough practical  care  for
    the application.  However the judge found  that  it  is  not  simply  a
    matter of the practical care required by the appellant  but  there  are
    also emotional aspects which should be taken into account.   She  found
    that in the absence of expert evidence to the contrary, it  is  in  the
    best interest of the appellant to remain  in  the  care  of  his  birth
    parents.  The appellant's surviving parent remains in Nigeria  and  the
    appellant is able to reside with him save for  one  occasion  when  his
    father was hospitalised  for  a  period  of  two  weeks.   The  sponsor
    confirmed in  evidence  that  her  mother,  the  maternal  grandmother,
    returned to Nigeria and during her holiday provided supporting care for
    the appellant.  She found that the appellant is able to reside with his
    birth father in Nigeria and is emotionally and financially supported by
    his extended family.  In the circumstances she found that there are  no
    serious  and  compelling  reasons  which  make  the  exclusion  of  the
    appellant undesirable.

15.  With regard to Article 8 the judge found  that  the  appellant  has  an
    established life  in  Nigeria  with  his  father  and  extended  family
    members.  The decision to refuse the appellant entry clearance  is  not
    in breach of the Immigration Rules and does not give rise to  a  breach
    of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Human Rights Act.

16.  Counsel relying on the grounds argued that the judge relied on the  DNA
    evidence which was inconclusive as  to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  Nevertheless the judge should have gone  on
    to  consider  other  evidence  such  as  the  sponsor's  evidence,  the
    affidavit of the appellant's grandmother and the letter of consent from
    the appellant's father which would have enabled her to  find  that  the
    sponsor and the appellant are related as claimed, that  is  nephew  and
    aunt.

17.  It was further argued that the judge was wrong to find that  there  are
    no serious and compelling reasons  which  make  the  exclusion  of  the
    appellant undesirable.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant's  father
    provided a letter of consent for the sponsor and  grandmother  to  have
    the day-to-day care of the appellant due to  his  ill-health.   In  the
    appellant's bundle was a letter showing that the appellant has been  in
    and out of hospital following his stroke.  The letter dated 26 November
    2013 said that the father is partially paralysed.  Because he is in and
    out of hospital he is unable to give practical or emotional care to the
    appellant.  The conclusion should have been that  on  the  evidence  he
    could not care for his son.

18.  With regard to the first point, I accept Mr Jarvis's argument  that  it
    is a red herring.  This is because if the judge  had  not  treated  the
    relationship as that of being aunt  and  nephew  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f), she would not have gone on to consider the  second
    requirement which is whether there are serious and compelling family or
    other considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable  and
    suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care.

19.  The judge found that the  appellant's  exclusion  was  not  undesirable
    following concentration of all the evidence that  was  before  her.   I
    find that evidence of the appellant's father's stroke was  given  in  a
    letter dated 26 November 2013.  That  was  the  day  it  was  said  the
    appellant's father suffered a stroke and  became  partially  paralysed.
    This evidence post-dated the respondent's decision which was made on  9
    October 2012. At the date of decision the appellant's  father  suffered
    from asthma and hypertension.  That was the evidence contained  in  his
    letter of consent which was before the Entry Clearance Officer and  the
    letter dated 10 April 2012 from the Lagos State General Hospital.  That
    letter stated that he had suffered three episodes of  asthmatic  attack
    in the last two months following recurrent exposure to dust  which  led
    to his admission in hospital for two weeks.  The  letter  said  he  was
    unfit but did not expand on this.  The letter did not say that  he  was
    unfit to look after his son.

20.  The judge accepted in the absence of evidence from the respondent  that
    the sponsor is able to provide  good  enough  practical  care  for  the
    appellant.  The judge found in the absence of expert  evidence  to  the
    contrary that it is in the best interests of the child to remain in the
    care of his surviving parent which  is  his  father  with  whom  he  is
    residing.  I find on the evidence that the judge made  a  finding  that
    was open to her.

21.  I find that on the evidence before the judge,  her  decision  does  not
    disclose an error of law.  Whilst the  evidence  that  his  father  has
    suffered a stroke and is now partially paralysed,  might  have  made  a
    difference  to  this  decision,  that  evidence  postdated  the   Entry
    Clearance Officer's  decision.   The  judge  could  only  consider  the
    evidence that was before the respondent at the date of his decision.

22.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

