
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22156/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th May 2015                              |On 23rd June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           Mrs Kalsoom Abdul Aziz
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Syed instructed by the Immigration Advisory
                    Service.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer but nonetheless for  the
    purposes of this decision I will hereinafter refer to  the  parties  as
    they were described before the First Tier Tribunal, that is Mrs Kalsoom
    Abdul Aziz as the appellant and the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th  January  1978  and
    she applied for admission to the United Kingdom as a family  member  of
    an EEA Dutch national exercising treaty rights in the  UK,  namely  her
    husband, Mr Azizi Abdul Aziz, (the sponsor).  On 14th November 2013 the
    respondent refused the application under Regulation 12  with  reference
    to Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 as she found that the appellant's marriage to the sponsor was  one
    of convenience.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 14th November 2013  states
    that there was no  evidence  to  show  the  sponsor  was  visiting  the
    appellant when he came to Pakistan and a letter  from  the  Immigration
    Advisory Service stated that he communicated with his sponsor via Skype
    and telephone.  They had not provided evidence to show  that  this  was
    the case.  The Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied that the appellant
    was a party to a marriage of convenience and therefore she  was  not  a
    family member of an EEA national.

 4. The appeal came before Judge Scott, who allowed the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Regulations.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  on
    the basis that the respondent maintained that  there  was  insufficient
    documentation to show there was any connection  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor even though the sponsor may have travelled to Pakistan.

 6. It was contended that it was not  unreasonable  to  expect  documentary
    evidence to consist of more than just  six  wedding  photographs  taken
    over eight years ago.

 7. There was no financial support  produced  as  found  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 13 of the decision and the records of  claimed  communication
    between the couple were non-specific and did not identify  the  parties
    involved.

 8. Despite this lack of  evidence  the  judge  accepted  the  relationship
    without giving adequate reasons.

 9. In early October 2014 the appellant gave birth to a child of  whom  the
    sponsor maintained he was the biological father although there  was  no
    evidence of this.  He now stated he was more desperate than ever to get
    his wife and child out of Pakistan.  This  suggests  that  the  sponsor
    expected the appellant would bring the  child  with  her  if  she  were
    allowed entry clearance.  This is not an option as the child was not  a
    party to this appeal and an appropriate application would  need  to  be
    made.  It was submitted that the judge had erred by not giving adequate
    reasons for finding in favour of the appellant.

10. Mr Tarlow, at the hearing before me, relied on the written grounds  and
    maintained the reasoning was inadequate.  The judge had identified that
    the documentary evidence was sparse and thus far gave no reason  as  to
    why this was not a marriage of convenience.

11. Mr Syed by contrast argued that the judge  had  considered  the  matter
    adequately.  This  was  not  an  entry  clearance  application  but  an
    application for a family permit.  The appellant had provided details of
    his passport and details of his travel with his wife to  Dubai  in  the
    form of visa copies and tickets and had noted  that  the  marriage  was
    contracted in 2006 and before the appellant was an EEA national.

12. Mr Tarlow confirmed that there was no challenge by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer as to the marriage validity, or the documentation, save that it
    was a marriage of convenience.

Conclusions

13. The judge stated, at paragraph 5 of the decision, that  the  burden  of
    proving a marriage is not a marriage of  convenience  rested  with  the
    appellant,  once the respondent has discharged the evidential burden of
    showing that there are matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage
    is in fact one of convenience.  However, this approach did  not  appear
    to have been followed by the judge as he did not initially set  out  or
    assess  the  cogency  of  any  suspicions  (save  for   recording   the
    explanation of the refusal).  Nonetheless this was to the  respondent's
    advantage and therefore not a material error.

14. When assessing the relationship the judge clearly took into account all
    of the evidence including the documentary  evidence  and  the  passport
    containing the visas  to  Pakistan  and  the  original  travel  tickets
    together with the Viber call history for the period of May  to  October
    2013 and pages of telephone records for the period of 2nd May  2013  to
    30th June 2013.  The judge set out his findings in paragraphs 11 to 15.

15. The judge in particular made a finding with regard to the evidence from
    the sponsor and stated at 11:

         "I found the sponsor to be an honest, earnest and credible witness.
          I accept his evidence, together with the documents submitted,  all
         of which I find to be consistent and reliable."

16. The judge went on to note that "the documentary evidence  is  a  little
    sparse" at paragraph 12 but nevertheless was satisfied on  the  balance
    of probabilities that the marriage of the appellant and the sponsor was
    genuine.

17. The judge in particular made reference to the evidence at paragraph  13
    and found:

         "I find it significant that the parties  have  been  married  since
         2006, four years before the sponsor acquired the Dutch  nationality
         which is the  basis  of  the  appellant's  application.   There  is
         evidence that the sponsor has visited Pakistan on several occasions
         and I accept that he did so to visit the appellant.  The records of
         the Viber and telephone communications  are  non-specific,  in  the
         sense that they do not identify the parties involved, but  again  I
         accept the sponsor's evidence that  they  represent  communications
         between him and the appellant.  On behalf of the respondent, it was
         pointed  out  that  those   records   post-date   the   appellant's
         application, which is true, but  they  also  pre-date  the  refusal
         decision and I am able to take them into account as  casting  light
         on the nature of the parties' marriage, although they were not seen
         by the respondent."

18. Neither the Entry Clearance Officer nor Mr  Tarlow  on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  at  the  hearing  before  me  challenged  the
    validity of the marriage itself and it was this  significant  piece  of
    evidence which went to the length of the marriage that the judge  found
    most telling and relevant.

19. Although the records of the  Viber  telephone  communication  are  non-
    specific in the sense that they do not identify the  parties  involved,
    following Goudey (subsisting marriage -  evidence)  Sudan  [2012]  UKUT
    00041 evidence of telephone cards is capable of being corroborative  of
    the contention of the parties that they communicate by telephone,  even
    if such data cannot confirm  the  particular  number  the  sponsor  was
    calling in the country in question.  It is not a requirement  that  the
    parties also write or text each other.

20.  This  case  also  refers  to  the  fact  that  where  there   are   no
    countervailing factors generating suspicion as to the intentions of the
    parties, such evidence may be sufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof on the claimant.

21. That said, as I stated earlier, Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) establishes that  there  is
    only  an  evidential  burden  on  the  claimant  to  address   evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for
    the predominant purpose of securing residence rights.  The   judge  did
    not appear to address this within the decision  but  proceeded  on  the
    basis that the burden of proof was on the appellant but I repeat  I  do
    not find this error to be material.

22. The  judge  also  pointed  out  at  paragraph  4  that  the  evidential
    requirements are not restricted by Section 85(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Further to Boodhoo and  another  (EEA
    Regs:  relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346   evidence   which   is
    postdecision may be taken into account.  The judge  took  into  account
    those records which were supplied by the parties to substantiate  their
    assertions that they contacted each other via Skype and telephone.   It
    is a matter for the judge as to  the  weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    evidence.

23. The judge did have regard to the fact that a child  had  been  born  to
    both appellant and her sponsor and although there was  a  challenge  to
    this  in  the  permission  to  appeal,  the  judge  clearly  found  the
    appellant's sponsor to be an honest and credible witness and this added
    to the genuineness of the marriage.  In particular the  judge  had  the
    opportunity of assessing the oral evidence  of  the  sponsor  which  he
    found  believable  and  the  judge  took  into  account  the  sponsor's
    production at the hearing of a letter from a  gynaecologist  confirming
    the pregnancy.   The fact that the child is not included as a party  to
    the appeal does not disclose an error of law in the  decision  made  by
    Judge Scott.  He confined himself to the appeal of Mrs Kalsoom Aziz.

24. Further to Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 85, although  there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue  the  reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the  judge.   That  is  the  case  in  this
    instance.  I find that the application for permission to appeal is,  in
    essence, a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

25.  I find no error of law which would affect the outcome and the decision
    shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 14th June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





