
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Oa/22177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2015                        |On 6 October 2015               |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     master christian dom rapisura real

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Karen Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Ms Nicola Braganza, Counsel, instructed by E2W UK LTD



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Majid)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on  15  November  2013  to
    refuse an application for indefinite leave to enter the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  on  11  November
    1995. He applied to join his father, Mr Narciso Carnay ("the sponsor"),
    who is a British citizen born on 11 June 1971. The sponsor has been  in
    the UK since 2000.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that there was insufficient evidence that the
    sponsor had sole responsibility. The respondent had  never  lived  with
    the sponsor and had lived with his mother for all of his life.  He  had
    never previously applied to join the sponsor or even to visit him.  The
    fact that the mother wished to go to Saudi Arabia to work was a  matter
    of choice. There were no compassionate circumstances of a  serious  and
    compelling nature such as to make exclusion undesirable.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 18 March 2015. He was represented  by  Mr  D
    Bazini. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility  for  the  respondent  and  that  the  requirements   of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were met.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that there was sole responsibility given that  the  judge  also
    found that the mother retained an interest in the respondent's welfare,
    was committed to  his  welfare,  still  talked  to  him  and  made  her
    contribution where she could.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White  on
    19 May 2015. It was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons under the  Rules  and  failed  to  identify  why  there  was  a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8 in this case.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Ms Pal submitted that the challenge focusses  on  sole  responsibility.
    The judge found that the mother still talks to the respondent and makes
    a contribution. There are inadequate reasons for  the  conclusion  that
    the sponsor has sole responsibility. The mother is still involved.  The
    judge has failed to resolve the conflict in the evidence.

10. Ms Braganza  submitted  that  this  is  a  reasons  challenge  and  the
    submission that the judge was not entitled to find sole  responsibility
    is not sustainable. The judge directed himself as to the law; there can
    be some involvement by the other parent. The reasons  are  listed  from
    paragraph 10 of the decision onwards. The  judge  only  needs  to  give
    sufficient and adequate reasons. The parties know why they have won and
    lost. The affidavit in the original bundle from  the  mother  makes  it
    clear that she has delegated full responsibility to the father. All  of
    the issues in the refusal letter were dealt with by  the  judge.  There
    was a positive finding in relation to  the  sponsor's  credibility.  No
    other paragraphs have been highlighted to indicate a lack of reasoning.
    There can always be more in a decision but  the  test  is  whether  the
    Tribunal has applied the correct law to the facts. Paragraph 52(ix)  of
    TD applies; the mother is marginal and there  is  no  conflict  in  the
    evidence.

11. I have considered the findings of fact. The judge found at paragraph 10
    of the decision that the sponsor was the person who  had  been  helping
    the respondent during the lives of the wife's parents and actively when
    the care of the appellant was taken over by his own parents. All of the
    decisions relating to the respondent were taken by  the  sponsor  whose
    money was used by his elderly mother to  see  the  respondent  properly
    schooled, etc. The mother still talked to the respondent and  made  her
    contribution where she could but her contributions to the  respondent's
    welfare were marginal and  the  sponsor  was  fully  dedicated  to  the
    respondent's welfare. Crucially, the judge found at paragraph  16  that
    he was persuaded that the sponsor had been  doing  everything  for  the
    respondent.

12. I reject the submission that there is any conflict in the evidence. The
    role of the mother is identified by the judge as marginal but  she  was
    still in contact with the respondent. I have considered  TD  (Paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.   In  this
    case, the mother does not reside with the respondent and  there  is  no
    finding of regular contact or involvement in decision making  regarding
    the respondent. I find that the factual matrix described by  the  judge
    falls into paragraph 52(v) of TD  (paragraph  52(ix)  is  about  shared
    responsibility between one parent and  someone  other  than  the  other
    parent).

13. The finding of fact in paragraph 16 of the  decision  is  clear  -  the
    sponsor had been doing everything for the respondent.  That  must  mean
    that the mother was effectively doing nothing and  that  is  consistent
    with the evidence before  the  judge  that  the  mother  had  abdicated
    responsibility for the respondent's upbringing. Contact and a  marginal
    supporting role does not mean  that  the  mother  is  involved  in  the
    upbringing of the child and it was open to the judge to find  that  the
    mother no longer had responsibility. From paragraph 52(ii) of  TD,  the
    term "responsibility" looks to who in fact is exercising responsibility
    for the child.  The  judge  unambiguously  answered  that  question  at
    paragraph 16 of the decision.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Rules did not involve the making of an  error  of  law
    and its decision stands.



Decision

15. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.




Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 3 October 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


