
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/22512/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           miss abulaiti gulimire
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, beijing
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thompson
                    and Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Steer (Judge Steer), dated 24 March 2015, in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against a decision of
    the  Respondent,  dated  18  October  2012,  refusing  to  grant  entry
    clearance to join her family in the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant is a Chinese national, born  on  23  February  1995.  The
    application for entry clearance was made on 4  July  2012.  She  was  a
    minor as at the date of the Respondent's decision.

 3. The Appellant sought to join her parents and two  younger  siblings  in
    this country.  Her  father,  Mr  Abulaiti  Maikiniyazi,  is  a  Chinese
    national who now has Indefinite Leave to Remain  (ILR)  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as do her mother and  siblings.  At  the  time  of  the  entry
    application and decision thereon, the  father  only  had  Discretionary
    Leave to Remain. The ILR had been belatedly granted in 2014 following a
    protracted judicial review challenge by his solicitors.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on several bases. First, that  a
    false birth certificate had been submitted and so Paragraph 320(7A)  of
    the Immigration Rules applied. Second, that Paragraph 301 of the  Rules
    could not assist, as the father  did  not  have  settled  status  here.
    Third, that Article 8 would not be breached.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was  originally  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Easterman. By a decision promulgated on 2 January 2014 he allowed
    the appeal under the Rules and on Article 8 grounds. He also found that
    Paragraph  320(7A)  did  not  apply.  This  decision  was  successfully
    challenged  by  the  Respondent,  Deputy   Upper   Tribunal   Appleyard
    concluding that Judge Easterman had erred in respect of his  assessment
    under the Rules and Article 8. He  found  that  the  Paragraph  320(7A)
    issue had been properly considered by Judge Easterman. The  appeal  was
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a new decision on  Article
    8 only.

The decision of Judge Steer

 6. Judge Steer found that there was family life as between  the  Appellant
    and her family in this country  (paragraph  25).  She  found  that  the
    Respondent's decision interfered with that  life  to  the  extent  that
    Article 8 was engaged (paragraph  26).  The  core  issue  was  that  of
    proportionality. In  this  regard,  Ms  Easty  (who  appeared  for  the
    Appellant then as now) had submitted that  the  Respondent's  delay  in
    granting the father ILR was relevant to the balancing exercise: if  the
    delay had not occurred, the Appellant  could  have  applied  for  entry
    clearance  under  the  Rules  and  almost  certainly  would  have  been
    successful. Therefore, the Respondent's  delay  diminished  the  weight
    attributable to the need to maintain effective immigration control.

 7. At paragraph 33 Judge Steer rejected an element of this submission that
    was predicated upon the decision in AP  (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  89.
    Judge Steer stated that AP (India) was relied on as being, in effect, a
    decisive factor in the case before her, but that this was misconceived.
    However, and importantly, she also acknowledged that delay is a  factor
    relevant, "to be weighed against the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration controls", and she cited EB (Kosovo) [2008]  UKHL
    41 to this end. Judge Steer goes on in paragraph 34 to take account  of
    the financial support from the Appellant's parents, and the ability  to
    maintain contact with the siblings through the telephone and visits. In
    paragraph 35, it is said that the Appellant "is now an adult, aged  20.
    She is living an independent life as a student, in Malaysia."

The Appellant's grounds of appeal

 8. Ms Easty drafted the grounds of appeal.  They  take  issue  with  Judge
    Steer's alleged failure to attach any weight to the Respondent's delay,
    or to give any reasons for why she was not attaching any  such  weight,
    if this was the case. Further, it is said that Judge Steer erred in her
    conclusion that the Appellant had been leading an independent life.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    19 May 2015.

The hearing before me

10. Ms Easty relied on her grounds. She  submitted  that  the  delay  point
    related to the time taken for the Respondent to finally  grant  ILR  to
    the family, a grant that should have  occurred  years  previously.  The
    fact that the judicial review proceedings were  ultimately  settled  by
    consent (on the basis that the Respondent would grant ILR) indicated an
    acceptance by the Respondent that she had  acted  erroneously  in  only
    granting Discretionary Leave in 2011. Judge Steer had  failed  to  deal
    with the delay issue properly. This was material because of the  errors
    relating to the finding on independent life in paragraph 35.

11. Mr Duffy suggested that Judge Steer had dealt adequately  with  the  AP
    (India) issue, and that as this was what the Appellant's complaint  was
    really concerned with there was no error. He did acknowledge that Judge
    Steer appeared to have erred in taking into account post-decision facts
    when concluding  that  the  Appellant  was  an  adult  and  leading  an
    independent life in Malaysia.

Decision on error of law

12. I find that Judge Steer did err in law in respect of the delay issue.

13. I acknowledge Mr Duffy's point that the  Appellant's  delay  submission
    could have been expressed in somewhat different terms, or that what has
    been expressed could be read in different ways. However, I am satisfied
    that the Appellant's argument before Judge Steer was put, at  least  in
    large part, on the basis that the Respondent's delay in respect of  the
    father's case was a relevant factor in the assessment of proportionally
    under Article 8 (see, for example, paragraphs 27-28 of the decision and
    paragraph 6 of Ms Easty's second supplementary skeleton  argument).  To
    that extent, the argument was not simply a reliance on the  AP  (India)
    decision (or indeed on Rashid [2005] EWCA Civ 744, a case which has not
    found favour of late).

14. Judge Steer was bound to have dealt with this factor  when  undertaking
    the balancing exercise. Indeed, she clearly acknowledges that delay  of
    the sort relied on by the Appellant was a  relevant  factor  (paragraph
    33). The problem is that she then fails to attach  any  weight  to  the
    factor, or to provide any reasons as to why she was declining to attach
    any such weight, if that was her view.  These  failures  constitute  an
    error of law.

15. Is this material? In my view, yes. This is  because  Judge  Steer  also
    erred in respect of her conclusion that the  Appellant  was  living  an
    independent life. Primarily, the error lies in her taking into  account
    the fact that the Appellant was an adult as at the date of  hearing,  a
    fact that obviously arose some two and half years  after  the  date  of
    decision. She was bound to consider the facts as at the  earlier  date,
    at which time the  Appellant  was  still  a  minor.  Her  minority  was
    indicative (although not conclusive) of the absence of  an  independent
    life. The chronological error  was  therefore  material.  In  addition,
    Judge Steer appears to have overlooked the mother's evidence  that  the
    Appellant  was  completely  financially  dependent  upon  her   parents
    (paragraph 10), or at least does not attempt to resolve any conflict in
    the evidence as regards what the father said  at  paragraph  14.  Judge
    Steer's assessment of the evidence before her is therefore flawed.

16. In light of the above, I set aside the decision of Judge Steer.

Re-make decision

17. Both representatives were agreed that I could and should go on and  re-
    make the decision myself, based upon the evidence now before me. It was
    also agreed that the sole issue  to  be  decided  now  is  whether  the
    Respondent's refusal of entry clearance constituted a  disproportionate
    interference with (or lack of respect for) the Appellant's family life.
    The issue is narrowly defined because it  is  rightly  accepted  by  Ms
    Easty that Paragraph 301 of and Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules
    cannot not assist the Appellant in her appeal. In  addition,  Mr  Duffy
    acknowledges that Judge Steer's finding  that  there  was  family  life
    between the Appellant and her family members in the United Kingdom, and
    that the refusal was a sufficiently serious interference with (or  lack
    of respect for) that life, had not been challenged and should stand for
    the purposes of my reconsideration of this case.

18. I agree with the position adopted by both representatives.

19. In re-making the decision I have regard to the following evidence:

      a) The Respondent's original appeal bundle (RB);

      b) An Appellant's bundle (AB1), indexed and paginated 1-358;

      c) A recent statement from the Appellant, dated 1 August 2015;

      d) A full chronology of events.

20. The Appellant's mother gave very brief oral evidence  to  confirm  that
    the Appellant had been studying in Malaysia  as  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision, but these were entirely funded by  the  parents.
    In addition, at that time the Appellant had not yet  met  her  siblings
    face-to-face, although this had changed subsequently.

21. By way of submissions, Ms Easty acknowledged  the  high  threshold  for
    Article 8 cases involving entry clearance, as stated by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Congo) and Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  (SS  (Congo)).
    However, the Appellant was a minor at the relevant time. She was wholly
    dependent upon her parents. Her maintenance and accommodation if in the
    United Kingdom were not in issue. Importantly, the  Respondent's  delay
    in dealing  with  the  father's  asylum  claim  and  then  the  further
    representations led directly to the consequence that he was not granted
    ILR when he should have been, and that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    obtain entry clearance through the Rules, a route that would, submitted
    Ms Easty, have almost certainly have been successful. The fact that the
    Respondent agreed to grant the ILR following the judicial review  claim
    strongly  indicated  an  acknowledgement  of   previous   failings   in
    administrative processes. The three skeleton arguments were relied  on,
    but only the third now has relevance to the issue before me.

22. Mr Duffy reiterated the threshold set out in SS (Congo). The  Appellant
    had  been  left  behind  by  her  parents,  and  this   was   not   the
    responsibility of the Respondent. The Appellant  had  developed  family
    life with her grandparents  as  well.  At  the  date  of  decision  the
    Appellant  was  in  Malaysia  and  moving  towards  independence.   The
    Appellant was a minor, but  nearing  the  age  of  eighteen;  thus  her
    position was not as strong as if she had been a young child.

23. In respect of the  proportionality  issue,  I  take  into  account  the
    following matters.

24. I should begin with the Appellant's best interests as being  a  primary
    consideration: she was, after all, a minor at the relevant time. I find
    that these lay in being  reunited  with  her  parents  and  having  the
    opportunity to develop ties with her siblings (whom  she  had  not  yet
    met). I fully acknowledge the fact that she  had  not  lived  with  her
    parents in a full-time single  unit  since  2001.  However,  there  was
    significant direct contact after that time, both  with  the  mother  in
    Turkey (see, for example 8 and 25 of AB1, and  the  Appellant's  recent
    statement) and her father, once he  obtained  travel  documentation  in
    this country. The Appellant remained fully dependent upon  her  parents
    at all material times. This state of affairs was recognised in part  by
    Judge Steer when concluding that family life existed. In terms  of  the
    nascent relationship with the siblings, her best interests  encompassed
    this aspect of the family life found to exist by Judge Steer.

25. Of course, the best interests are by no means a trump card in  this  or
    indeed any case. However, I regard it as a compelling factor.

26. Next, the need to maintain effective  immigration  control  is  in  the
    public  interest  and  represents  a  very  weighty   factor   in   the
    Respondent's  favour.  This  is  clear  from  section  117B(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In addition,  SS  (Congo)
    sets the bar for a successful Article 8 claim in  entry  cases  outside
    the Rules relatively high:

         "40.In the light of these authorities, we consider that  the  state
         has a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to
         be satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with  the  position
         in relation to decisions regarding LTR for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR. The LTE Rules therefore maintain, in general terms, a
         reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in  the
         ordinary run of cases. However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can  be  established
         outside the Rules. In our view, the appropriate general formulation
         for this category is that such cases will arise where an  applicant
         for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist (which are not
         sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to require  the  grant
         of such leave.

         41. This formulation is aligned to that proposed in Nagre  at  [29]
         in relation to the general position in respect of the new Rules for
         LTR, which was adopted in this court in Haleemudeen at [44]. It  is
         a fairly demanding test,  reflecting  the  reasonable  relationship
         between the Rules themselves and the proper outcome of  application
         of Article 8 in the usual  run  of  cases.  But,  contrary  to  the
         submission  of  Mr  Payne,  it  is  not   as   demanding   as   the
         exceptionality or "very compelling circumstances"  test  applicable
         in the special contexts explained in MF  (Nigeria)  (precariousness
         of family relationship and deportation of foreigners  convicted  of
         serious crimes)."

27. A significant aspect of this public interest factor is that  applicants
    should show themselves able to satisfy the Rules for  the  purposes  of
    obtaining entry into the United Kingdom.  The  Rules  are  the  primary
    basis upon which immigration is effectively controlled. A person who is
    unable to meet the relevant Rules will usually fail in a separate claim
    under Article 8.

28. In the Appellant's case, she was unable  to  meet  the  Rules  (whether
    Paragraphs 297 or 310, or Appendix FM) because of  the  nature  of  her
    father's leave at the time. He was not a person present and settled  in
    the United Kingdom, his Discretionary Leave was not a  status  with  "a
    view to settlement", and that status was not  obtained  under  Appendix
    FM. Other than this, it is clear to  me  that,  having  regard  to  the
    evidence as a whole and the decisions of previous Tribunals during  the
    protracted course of this appeal, an application under the Rules  would
    almost certainly have succeeded, as no  other  relevant  criteria  have
    ever been determined against the Appellant.

29. It is therefore important to examine the reason why the father did  not
    have ILR at the time, a status which would have effectively allowed the
    Appellant to meet the Rules.  This  is  where  the  Respondent's  delay
    becomes relevant. There were, I find, two periods  of  unexplained  and
    significant delay: first in respect of the father's asylum claim, which
    took three years to consider; second, the additional six years it  took
    to consider the further representations submitted in October 2005  (and
    quite properly chased-up by his solicitors). My own  view  of  this  is
    fully supported by the Respondent's file note of 22 September  2011  at
    41 AB1. As a direct consequence of  the  first  period  of  delay,  the
    father was placed in a class of persons in respect of whom,  all  other
    things being equal, a grant  of  ILR  would  very  probably  have  been
    forthcoming. As a direct consequence of the second period of delay, the
    father's position was  not  considered  until  after  the  Respondent's
    policy on granting ILR had changed in July 2011 to a position in  which
    only Discretionary Leave was given. In addition to this,  I  accept  Ms
    Easty's submission that the Respondent's grant of ILR to the father  in
    2014 following the judicial review challenge due to what were described
    by her as "exceptional circumstances" (see 252 AB1) was  indicative  (I
    put it no higher) of an acknowledgement of past failings in his case. I
    conclude that the Respondent's delay, in  particular  relating  to  the
    second period, is another compelling factor in this appeal. This is not
    simply because of the impact it  had  on  the  father,  but  much  more
    importantly because of the knock-on effect it had  on  the  Appellant's
    ability to be reunited with her family, via the Rules and in accordance
    with what have always been her best interests.

30. In respect of Appendix FM, limited leave to remain  can  be  sufficient
    under E-ECC.1.6, however, the leave must have been  granted  under  the
    Appendix itself. Therefore, even with the Discretionary Leave  he  had,
    the father was precluded from acting as a sponsor. Whilst this may  not
    amount to a compelling circumstance, it is something  that  was  wholly
    outwith the control of either the  father  or  the  Appellant.  It  had
    nothing to do with choice, or any adverse conduct.

31. Mr Duffy was right to say that the Appellant's case would  be  stronger
    if she had been younger at the date of decision. There is a qualitative
    difference between the situation of a seven year old  and  a  seventeen
    year old. However, in my view, this argument  only  goes  so  far.  The
    Appellant was still a child who was, I find, desperate to be  with  her
    parents and siblings. The fact that the case could have  been  stronger
    does not mean that it is nonetheless not strong enough to succeed.

32. The Appellant was in Malaysia at the relevant time. It  is  right  that
    this would indicate a greater degree of independence than  if  she  had
    been living a secluded life back in China  with  her  grandparents.  It
    does not follow, and I do not find, that she was living an  independent
    life. She was simply a minor student in a foreign country. I accept her
    own  written   evidence   that   she   felt   vulnerable   and   alone,
    notwithstanding interaction  with  other  students  (see  5  AB1).  Her
    location does not, I conclude, detract materially from the strength  of
    her claim.

33. In respect of the Appellant's relationship with her grandparents I find
    that there was,  perhaps  unsurprisingly,  a  good  bond.  However,  as
    expressed in her statement at 4 AB1, the  Appellant  clearly  felt  the
    need for her parents. There were obvious difficulties in terms  of  the
    practical ability  of  ageing  family  members  to  care  for  a  young
    teenager.

34. Having regard to section 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act, I  find  that
    the Appellant had an ability to express herself in English at something
    close to a reasonable level. I infer this primarily from her statement,
    which I find was composed by her, at 4-5 AB1.  Although  it  post-dates
    the Respondent's decision by some eleven months, I infer that there was
    a pre-existing  ability.  Maintenance  and  accommodation  are  not  in
    dispute. The fact that the Appellant would not be a drain on the public
    purse does not enhance her own claim, but nor does it detract from it.

35. There has never been any suggestion from the Respondent that the United
    Kingdom-based family could be expected to relocate to China.

36. Bringing all of the above together, I conclude  that  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse  entry  clearance  amounted  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with, or lack of respect for,  the  Appellant's  right  to
    family life under Article 8. In particular, I have  identified  what  I
    deem to be the two compelling factors of the Appellant's best interests
    and the Respondent's delay. These factors are not the most  compelling,
    but that it is not the applicable test. It  is  right  also  that  that
    public interest is only outweighed in this case by a relatively  narrow
    margin. But no greater margin need be shown.

37. The combination of the two compelling factors and the absence of  other
    adverse matters leads to the success of this appeal after what has been
    a very lengthy appellate process.

Anonymity

38. No direction has been made previously, and none was sought  in  respect
    of my decision. I see no good reason to  make  one,  and  therefore  no
    direction is made.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds


Signed      Date: 21 August 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 21 August 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
