

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: OA/23350/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 25th June 2014                                  |On 27th June 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                          ABDIJABBAR ABDULLE HASSAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Mahmood, Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on  1st  January  2003.  He
      appeals against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 6th
      February 2014 dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's  decision
      of 22nd October 2012 refusing entry clearance under paragraph 319X  of
      the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.



2.    At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  conceded  that
      the Appellant could not satisfy the maintenance  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The appeal was considered under Article 8.

3.    The Appellant was now 11 years old and had applied to join  his  aunt,
      Jamilo Hasan Duale, the Sponsor. She had been granted limited leave as
      a refugee until 28th March 2017. The Sponsor's husband,  Ali  Mohamed,
      had also made an application to join her, but his appeal  against  the
      refusal of entry clearance was dismissed by Judge  Cohen  in  December
      2013. The Sponsor gave evidence in his appeal and  Judge  Cohen  found
      that she was not a credible witness.

 4.   In the Appellant's appeal,  Judge  Hembrough  relied  on  the  adverse
      credibility findings in the determination of Judge  Cohen.  She  found
      that the Sponsor's evidence was equally vague and lacking in  candour.
      The Appellant and Sponsor had lost contact in 2008,  the  year  before
      the Sponsor married Mr  Ali.  The  Appellant  was  not  named  in  the
      Sponsor's asylum interview and, looking at all  the  evidence  in  the
      round, the Appellant had failed to show  that  he  was  the  Sponsor's
      nephew or that he was part of her pre-flight  family  in  Somalia.  In
      light of these findings  the  Judge  found  that  Article  8  was  not
      engaged.

5.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Nicholson on 8th May 2014 on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough erred in law  in  relying  on  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen against  which  permission
      to appeal had been granted.

6.    At  the  hearing  before  me,  I  gave  the  parties  a  copy  of  the
      determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on  28th
      May 2014. Judge Alis found that there was no material error of law  in
      the determination of Judge Cohen and the decision promulgated on  18th
      December 2013 should stand.

7.    Mr Mahmood was aware of the decision in Ali Mohamed  and  stated  that
      an application for permission to appeal was pending. He submitted that
      although Judge Hembrough could rely  on  the  determination  of  Judge
      Cohen, it could not be a determinative factor. It would appear that  a
      lot of weight was attached  to  Judge  Cohen's  credibility  findings.
      Judge Hembrough's  credibility  findings  were  not  independent;  the
      Appellant was different and the relationship was different.

8.    Mr Mahmood submitted that the Sponsor's statements were not vague  nor
      was her oral evidence. She had responded to all the questions  put  to
      her and there was no indication in the record of proceedings that  she
      was evasive or vague. She was asked a  number  of  questions  and  had
      provided a full response. This pointed to the fact that the Judge  had
      not reached his credibility  findings  independently  and  significant
      weight was attached to Judge Cohen's decision.



9.    The Sponsor referred to her  nephew  twice  in  the  asylum  interview
      (Questions 4 and 34) and she was not asked to supply his name. In fact
      she did not mention anybody's name, so  she  should  not  be  unfairly
      criticised. It was unfair of the Judge  to  rely  on  her  failure  to
      mention that she had brought up the Appellant with her own  child,  at
      paragraph 26 of the determination, when she was not asked about  this.
      The appeal should be reconsidered.

10.   Mr Parkinson submitted that at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal the decision of Judge Cohen was valid and had  not
      been overturned. Judge Hembrough was entitled to rely on the  findings
      therein.  According  to  Judge  Cohen's   determination   there   were
      significant adverse credibility  findings  and  at  the  date  of  the
      Appellant's appeal there was no  decision  on  whether  there  was  an
      arguable error. Ground 3 was without merit. In any  event,  any  error
      was not material as Judge Cohen was upheld by Judge Alis.

11.   Grounds 1 and 2 were in  relation  to  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
      evidence. He was entitled to rely on Judge Cohen's  determination  and
      there was no strict rule as to how to approach findings  of  fact.  It
      was open to the Judge to start with the determination of Judge  Cohen.
      This did not  indicate  that  he  had  made  his  mind  up  before  he
      considered the evidence before him.

12.    It  was  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant  could   not   meet   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules and  therefore  the  appeal  was
      decided under Article 8. The Judge looked holistically at the evidence
      before him. He found that there was evidence that  a  forged  document
      had been submitted in relation to the  application  by  the  Sponsor's
      husband and the birth certificates were dated a few  days  before  the
      application. There were considerable inconsistencies in the  Sponsor's
      evidence before Judge Cohen and there was no adequate evidence to show
      that the Appellant was part of the Sponsor's pre-flight family.

13.   The statement from the Sponsor's son took the matter no further  given
      the adverse credibility findings.  The  Appellant  had  to  prove  his
      relationship with the Sponsor to succeed under Article  8.  There  was
      little evidence in the  Sponsor's  asylum  interview  of  the  claimed
      relationship; that the Appellant was in essence the Sponsor's  adopted
      child. The two references  to  a  nephew  were  insufficient  for  the
      Appellant to show  that  he  had  established  family  life  with  the
      Sponsor. The appeal must fail under Article 8.

14.   I asked Mr Mahmood why the decision would be disproportionate even  if
      the Appellant's case was accepted. He submitted that the Judge  should
      have taken into account the Appellant's living conditions in Ethiopia:
      the lack of water, electricity, permission to work and schooling,  and
      the fact that the Sponsor paid the rent.

15.   Mr Mahmood submitted that there was clear evidence of family  life  in
      the statement from the Sponsor's son and the Judge had failed  give  a
      reason for rejecting this evidence. This indicated that the Judge  had
      failed to consider the evidence in  the  round  and  had  just  placed
      reliance on Judge Cohen's decision.


Discussion and conclusions

16.   I find that Judge Hembrough was entitled to rely on the  determination
      of Judge Cohen in assessing the Sponsor's credibility. He was entitled
      to rely on the inconsistencies in her account  and  the  fact  that  a
      forged document had been submitted with her husband's application. The
      weight to be attached to those findings was a matter  for  the  Judge.
      There was nothing wrong with the Judge's approach to the  evidence  in
      adopting the determination of Judge Cohen as a starting point.

17.   In addition, the Judge assessed the Sponsor's evidence  given  in  the
      Appellant's appeal taking into account all  the  evidence  before  him
      (paragraphs 7 and 27). The Judge found that the Sponsor was vague  and
      lacking in candour. The Judge gave adequate reasons for coming to this
      conclusion at paragraphs 23 to 26 of the determination.

18.   Mr Mahmood's submission  that  the  record  of  proceedings  indicated
      otherwise amounted to a disagreement with the Judge's findings and did
      not disclose an error of law. The Judge's finding that the Sponsor was
      not a credible witness was not perverse as alleged in the grounds.

19.   The grounds also contend that the Judge failed to  take  into  account
      the witness statement of the Sponsor's 10-year old son, Mohamed  Haned
      Abdirahman. At paragraph 7 the Judge specifically stated that  he  had
      taken into account the evidence in the Appellant's bundle.

20.   I find the failure to specifically refer to the witness  statement  of
      the Sponsor's son in the subsequent findings was not material  to  the
      decision given that the Sponsor did not  name  the  Appellant  in  her
      asylum interview and she did not state that she  had  brought  him  up
      with her own son. In her screening interview the Sponsor was asked how
      many children she had. She replied that she had a child from her first
      husband and named her  son,  Mohamed.  She  made  no  mention  of  the
      Appellant whom she now claimed was more like a son and she had  looked
      after him since he was three months old, prior to the birth of her own
      son.  The Judge had not acted unfairly in relying on this  failure  to
      mention  the  Appellant  when  specifically  asked  in  her  screening
      interview, at paragraph 26 of the determination.

21.   Judge Hembrough found that the Appellant had failed to  show  that  he
      was related to the Sponsor as claimed or that he was the  nephew  from
      whom she claimed to have been separated in 2008 or that he formed part
      of the pre-flight family in Somalia. In view of these findings Article
      8 was not engaged. These findings  were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence before him.




22.   In any event, the appeal was brought under Article 8, and  taking  the
      Appellant's claim at its highest, the refusal of entry  clearance  was
      not disproportionate in the circumstances.  The  Appellant  could  not
      satisfy the maintenance requirements of the Immigration Rules. He  had
      lost contact with the Sponsor in 2008 and, at best,  had  been  living
      with her son until 2012, when Mohamed came to the UK. He was not alone
      or destitute. He lived in a rented room with electricity and the water
      supply was intermittent. The Appellant was not allowed to go to school
      and the  Sponsor's  son  missed  him  very  much.  In  the  particular
      circumstances of the Appellant's case the refusal of  entry  clearance
      did not breach Article 8. There was no material error of  law  in  the
      Judge's determination.

23.   I find that Judge Hembrough made no error on any point  of  law  which
      might require the determination to be set aside.  The  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal is dismissed.   The  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dated 6th February 2014 shall stand.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
26th June 2014
