
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23217/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 February 2014                             |On 28 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                         MASTER Humayun Halim Rosid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                       Entry Clearance Officer - Dhaka
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who is said to have been  born
    on 2 January 1995.  He  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join his parents.   His  application  was  assessed  against
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The  application  was  refused
    and the appellant appealed.  That appeal was unsuccessful as  a  result
    of which the appellant sought permission to appeal that decision.  At a
    hearing before me on 5 December 2013, for reasons that I set out  in  a
    decision dated 16 December 2013, I found a material error of law in the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination. I directed that there  be  a
    resumed hearing and that took place on 11 February 2014  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. As set out in my error of law finding, the appeal was  dismissed  under
    the Rules on three bases.  Firstly, because of the failure to establish
    that there would not be additional recourse  to  public  funds  if  the
    appellant were to be granted entry clearance; secondly that it had  not
    been shown that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the  appellant;
    and thirdly that it had not been shown that the appellant was under the
    age of 18 at the date of application.

 3. At the resumed  hearing  I  heard  no  live  evidence  and  the  matter
    proceeded by  way  of  submissions.   Mr Karim,  who  represented  the
    appellant,  submitted  that  although  at  one  time  the   appellant's
    parentage was a live issue it was no longer because there were DNA test
    results which showed to a very high degree that  the  sponsor  and  his
    wife are indeed the parents  of  the  appellant.   I  agree  with  that
    submission.  There is DNA evidence in the file from "Cellmark" which in
    its summary states as follows:-

         "The DNA evidence supports the claimed relationship  between  Abdul
         Jalil and [the appellant].

         The DNA  evidence  supports  a  family  relationship  between  [the
         mother] and [the appellant] but the tests are  inconclusive  as  to
         the  true  nature  of  the  relationship.    While   the   proposed
         relationship is statistically more likely other available  evidence
         should be considered in this case."

 4. That evidence appears to be somewhat inconclusive. However, the  report
    later concludes that the most likely relationship between the appellant
    and his claimed parents  is  99.99%.   In  the  absence  of  any  other
    evidence therefore to the contrary it is safe to make  a  finding  that
    the appellant is the son of the sponsor and his wife.

 5. The witness statement of Mr Abdul Jalil  which  was  prepared  for  the
    hearing before me refers to the appellant's birth certificate which was
    an issue that was raised by the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
    Jalil who is the father of the appellant said that in Bangladesh  birth
    registration became compulsory in 2006 and people only used  to  obtain
    birth certificates as and when required.  From the statement it appears
    that  several   educational   documents   independently   confirm   the
    appellant's date of birth.

 6. Looked at in isolation I can well understand that a  birth  certificate
    issued many years after the  asserted  date  of  birth  may  not  carry
    weight.   However,  viewed  in  the  round  and  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities, which is the appropriate standard in this appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was born on the date claimed.  Firstly, he
    has three siblings, two sisters aged 20 and 19 and a brother  aged  16,
    so that it is perfectly possible for the appellant to be  aged  18  and
    fit in with the  known  biological  possibilities.   Although  one  may
    perhaps not place much weight on a passport showing his date  of  birth
    if only the birth certificate was used to prove date  of  birth,  there
    are school certificates that are at least consistent with  his  claimed
    date of birth.  Furthermore, a cursory glance at a  photograph  showing
    the appellant with his family shows him  to  be  of  the  sort  of  age
    claimed.  Mr Melvin had no serious challenge to the claimed  date,  the
    birth date has been maintained throughout as that of the appellant  and
    on the balance of probabilities I accept that he was born on that date,
    i.e. 2 January 1995.  It is perhaps pertinent also that as I  found  in
    my material error of law decision, the appellant's date  of  birth  was
    not a matter that appeared to be of concern to the judge who heard  the
    previous appeal in 2011.  The focus of the refusal of that  appeal  was
    more about the alleged  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor (and his wife) than about the appellant's actual date of birth.

 7. In relation to accommodation, Mr Melvin did not take issue in  relation
    to it.  There is a tenancy agreement and a letter from "Grand Solutions
    Lettings" confirming the tenancy agreement that appears in  the  bundle
    of documents before me and that the sponsor Mr Jalil  has  been  paying
    rent consistently.  It is said that there is  sufficient  room  for  an
    additional resident to occupy the property, "the client has  sufficient
    space in the  property  for  an  additional  person  to  live  in  good
    welfare".  Although that letter in terms  does  not  confirm  that  the
    addition of the appellant to the household  will  not  cause  statutory
    overcrowding, the property is a three bedroom one.  The bedrooms  would
    be occupied by the sponsor and his wife, their  two  daughters  in  the
    second bedroom, and the appellant and the sponsors' son in  the  third.
    On balance therefore accommodation is satisfactory.

 8. Mr Melvin also had no  proper  challenge  regarding  the  statement  of
    income and expenses and benefit and tax credit rates  produced  by  the
    sponsors on behalf of the  appellant.   The  statement  of  income  and
    expenditure was backed up by a considerable amount of documentation.

 9. On the evidence provided I accept that Mr Jalil, his  wife  and  elder
    daughter are all working and contributing to the family "pot" available
    for maintenance. As set out in the material error of  law  decision  at
    paragraphs 10 and 11 there needed to be an analysis undertaken  of  the
    statement of weekly income and  expenses  that  had  been  provided  to
    assist the Tribunal as referred to in paragraph 1 of  the  headnote  of
    Ahmed (benefits: proof of receipt; evidence) [2013] UKUT  00084  (IAC).
    On such analysis on balance I find that  there  is  sufficient  income
    available to this family such  as  would  not  require  or  necessitate
    recourse to additional public funds as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    presence in the United Kingdom.  Mr Melvin in submissions  stated  that
    there was nothing in the schedule provided that he would want  to  take
    issue with.

Conclusions

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  set  aside  for
    reasons already provided.  At the resumed hearing and for  the  reasons
    set out above,  I  find  that  on the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of HC 395 have been met by the appellant
    such that the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

