
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23875/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 28 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

      THE HON LORD BANNATYNE, SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                MR RONAK TANK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Dogra, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India.   On  31  October  2012  the
    appellant's application for entry  clearance  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a  child  of  a  parent  present  and  settled  pursuant  to
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  was  refused.   The  appellant
    sought to exercise his rights of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.
     His appeal was refused.  He sought to exercise his right of appeal  to
    this Tribunal and permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant  thereafter  sought  permission  to
    appeal from this Tribunal and received permission from  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jordan.

Background

2.   The appellant was born on  16  August  1994.   On  11  June  2007,  the
    appellant's mother, Mrs Gurprit  Kaur  Baing,  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on a valid student visa.

3.   In 2007 and 2009, applications were made  for  the  appellant  and  his
    father, Mrs Baing's ex-husband and the appellant's  biological  father,
    to join Mrs Baing in the UK; both of these applications  were  refused.
    Throughout the period in which these applications had been made,  there
    had been a continuous breakdown in the relationship between  Mrs  Baing
    and her husband and between the appellant and his  father.   A  further
    application for the appellant alone was made  in  2010;  this  was  the
    application that was later dealt with in 2011.

4.   In March 2010, Mrs Baing married Mr Ravindra Yeshwant Baing.

5.   The application made by the  appellant  in  2010  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 24 November 2010.  In the refusal, the respondent  stated
    that he was not satisfied that Mrs Baing had  sole  responsibility  for
    the applicant and felt that there would be no breach of Article 8  ECHR
    as Mrs Baing could return to India.

6.   The 2010 refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  appeal  on  4
    August 2011.  At the hearing it was conceded by the appellant  that  at
    that stage the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied  and  therefore
    only Article 8  grounds  were  relied  upon.   In  their  determination
    promulgated on 12 August 2011 (the "2011  determination"),  the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that no breach would occur by refusal as Mrs  Baing
    could return to India for the period  that  the  appellant  remained  a
    minor (see paragraph 34 of the 2011 determination).

7.   On 19 April 2013, Mrs Baing was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  At the date of the hearing on 4 August  2011,  Mrs
    Baing had limited leave to remain until 14 May 2012 (see: paragraph  11
    of the 2011 determination).

8.   On 5 July 2012, the current application which is the  subject  of  this
    appeal was made.  The application was refused by the respondent  on  31
    October 2012.  On refusing the application, the  respondent  relied  on
    the findings of the 2011 determination.  An appeal was  lodged  against
    this refusal and came before the First-tier Tribunal on 7 October  2013
    and was refused in a determination promulgated on 22 October 2013  (the
    "2013 determination").  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeals
    both under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 (see: paragraphs 30 - 38
    of the 2013 determination).

The Legal Framework

The Immigration Rules

        "297.     The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
              leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
              parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted
              for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:


              (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
                  parents or a relative in one of the following
                  circumstances:


                  ...


              (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                  or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
                  has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing;
                  or


              (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
                  United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                  settlement and there are serious and compelling family or
                  other considerations which make exclusion of the child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for
                  the child's care;"

Submissions for the Appellant

9.   The appellant sought to bring three issues  before  this  Tribunal  and
    they were these:

    (i)  Was the First-tier Tribunal in the 2013 determination  correct  to
        find that the issue of  sole  responsibility  was  not  a  relevant
        issue? (see: paragraph 34 of the 2013 determination).

    (ii) Further to Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan's views at paragraphs 6 - 8
        of his decision granting permission  to  appeal,  was  the  correct
        approach taken in any event when considering paragraph 297(i)(f) of
        the Immigration Rules?

    (iii)     Was Article 8 properly considered in the whole circumstances?
        (see: paragraph 38 of the 2013 determination).

10.  With respect to the first issue the submission in short was this:   the
    First-tier Tribunal in its 2013 determination was wrong  in  concluding
    that in  light  of  the  2011  determination,  it  could  not  consider
    paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.

11.  Counsel submitted that it was implicit that the First-tier Tribunal  in
    so concluding had sought to follow the approach to be taken when  faced
    with a previous determination as laid down in Devaseelan v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2002] UKAIT 00702.

12.  However, what the First-tier Tribunal had failed to have regard to  was
    the material difference in the current appeal between the situation  as
    it existed at the time of the 2011 determination and the  situation  as
    at the 2013 determination.  This material difference was: Mrs Baing was
    now a settled person having been granted indefinite leave to remain  on
    19 April 2013,  prior  to  the  2013  application  being  made  to  the
    respondent.  This in conjunction with the fact that the appellant was a
    minor at the time of the application meant that paragraph 297(i)(e)  of
    the Immigration Rules should have therefore been considered and failure
    to do so amounted to a material error of law.

13.  Secondly, it was submitted  by  Counsel  that  in  the  course  of  its
    holding that paragraph  297(i)(f)  was  not  satisfied  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in its 2013 determination had failed to consider the following
    relevant factors:

    (a)   Whether  the  cultural  and  social   conditions   within   India
        established that a 17-year old was old enough to be able  to  work,
        accommodate himself and live  without  the  requirement  for  adult
        protection and;


    (b)  Whether the particular circumstances of the case established  that
        the appellant, though a minor, was in comfortable circumstances and
        not at any risk of harm.

14.  Thirdly,  as  regards  the  Article  8  assessment  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the 2013  determination  Counsel's  position  was  that  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had relied on the same grounds as in  the  2011  determination
    plus the fact that the appellant at the time of the  decision  was  now
    over 18 years old.

15.   In  the  2011  determination,  at  paragraph  31,  in   dealing   with
    proportionality, the First-tier Tribunal referred to the fact  that  at
    that time Mrs Baing had limited leave to remain, at  the  time  of  the
    present application that situation had now changed with Mrs  Baing  now
    having indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

16.  At paragraph 33 of the 2011 determination the First-tier Tribunal  then
    referred to the limited lives  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Baing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Counsel went on to submit that it could clearly be seen  from
    the bundle submitted before the First-tier Tribunal in 2013, that there
    was ample evidence that that position had materially altered  and  that
    Mr and Mrs Baing's financial resources and community ties to the United
    Kingdom, which were not disputed in 2013, were of some materiality  and
    yet no consideration appeared to have been given to this  in  the  2013
    determination.

17. The fact that at the time of the 2013 hearing the appellant was over 18
    had to be seen in the context that at the time the application was made
    he was under the age of 18.  It was clearly established that  the  best
    interests of a child were normally best served by being with  at  least
    one parent; what was also before the First-tier Tribunal  in  2013  and
    was not before the 2011 Tribunal was confirmation that the  appellant's
    father could not care for or support the appellant and was  content  to
    give custody of the appellant to Mrs  Baing.   Counsel  submitted  that
    this should have been considered in conjunction with the evidence of Mr
    and Mrs Baing regarding the behaviour of the  paternal  father  towards
    the appellant and the lack of care that he had shown since Mrs  Baing's
    departure, which evidence the Tribunal had found  credible.   It  could
    not reasonably be said that it would be in  the  best  interests  of  a
    child to stay with a parent in these circumstances.  Against that whole
    background it was submitted that the Article 8 assessment had not  been
    properly carried out.

Reply on Behalf of the Respondent

18.  It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that  there  was  force  in
    each of the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellant.

19.  It was conceded that the First-tier Tribunal in the 2013  determination
    had failed to grapple with the issues raised in terms of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules or in  terms  of  Article  8.   It  was  further  not
    disputed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to  have   considered
    Immigration Rule 297(i)(e) and had not done  so.   Overall,  Ms  Holmes
    found that she could not seek to support the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal in 2013.

Discussion

20.  We are, without any difficulty, persuaded:

    (1)  That the First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly  directed  itself  when  it
        failed to consider whether the appellant satisfied Immigration Rule
        297(i)(e);


    (2)  Failed to consider relevant matters when  considering  Immigration
        Rule 297(i)(f) and;


    (3)  Failed to consider relevant matters when assessing the  Article  8
        claim, which resulted in their having been no proper evaluation  of
        the Article 8 claim by the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  Each of these failures clearly amounts to a material error of law.

22.  For the above reasons we set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as set forth in the 2013 determination.

Re-Making of the Decision

23.  Parties were agreed that this Tribunal should re-make the decision  and
    it should do so  on  the  basis  of  submissions  and  without  hearing
    evidence.



Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

24.  Counsel commenced  her  submissions  by  asserting  that  in  terms  of
    Immigration Rule 297(i)(e) the only  issue  was:  sole  responsibility.
    Counsel submitted Mrs Baing had sole responsibility for  the  appellant
    and she founded on the following:

    (1)  Since 2010 the appellant had stayed with  friends  of  Mrs  Baing.
        This step had been taken at the instance of Mrs Baing in  order  to
        ensure the  appellant's  well-being,  given  that  the  appellant's
        father took no interest in him.


     2) Mrs Baing had, during the above period, financially  supported  the
        appellant.


     3) In addition, during this period, Mrs Baing  had  arranged  for  the
        appellant's schooling and paid for this.

25.  Counsel's position was that when looked at in the  round  the  evidence
    showed  that  Mrs  Baing  was,  during  the  relevant  period,   solely
    responsible for making the key decisions in the life of the  appellant.



26.   Counsel  directed  our  attention  to  TD   (Para   297)(i)(e)   "sole
    responsibility" Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 in which  the  test  for  sole
    responsibility was stated to be this:

        "... whether the parent has continuing control and  direction  over
        the  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all   the   important
        decisions in the child's life."

27.  Counsel submitted that applying the above test to the circumstances  of
    the instant case it was clear that the test was satisfied.

28.  Counsel, in addition, made submissions in  terms  of  Immigration  Rule
    297(i)(f) and Article 8, however, we do not require to detail these.

Reply on Behalf of the Respondent

29.  Ms Holmes' submission was a short one: she conceded that it  was  plain
    that the terms of Immigration Rule 297(i)(e) were met.

Discussion

30.  We are satisfied that Ms Holmes was entirely correct to make the  above
    concession.  We are persuaded that on the basis of the submissions made
    on behalf of the appellant that the terms of Immigration Rule 297(i)(e)
    are satisfied.

Decision

31.  For the reasons given we have set aside the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal set forth in the 2013  determination.   We  have  re-made  its
    decision.  Our decision is that  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent is allowed on the basis that  the  terms  of
    Immigration Rule 297(i)(e) are satisfied.

32.  For the purposes of  this  appeal  we  have  not  had  to  decide  this
    question: if the appellant had  failed  to  satisfy  this  Tribunal  as
    regards Immigration Rule 297(i)(e) and had  also  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  Immigration  Rule  297(i)(f)  could  he   have   been
    successful in terms of his Article 8 claim?  However, we would  observe
    that Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) makes  clear  that  an  Article  8
    assessment should  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules.  Looking to  the
    terms of Immigration Rule 297(i)(f) we find it difficult to conceive of
    compelling circumstances which would fall outwith the Rule which  would
    justify proceeding to an Article 8 assessment.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Bannatyne, Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

