
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/24987/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR BOSSMAN MANTE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Kouma (Afro-Asian Advisory Service)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Miller)  by  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 27th November 2013, he dismissed his appeal against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse him leave to enter the  UK
    as the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.

 2. The background facts to this appeal are that the Appellant,  a  citizen
    of Ghana, came to the UK as a student  in  September  2003  with  leave
    until 2007. The Sponsor, who was a citizen of the Ivory Coast  came  to
    the UK in May 2005 and  claimed  asylum.  Her  asylum  application  was
    refused but she remained in the UK.

 3. In July 2006 the Appellant the Sponsor met and in September 2007  their
    daughter was born in the UK. They lived together from October 2007. The
    Appellant  was  then  granted  further  leave  to  remain   under   the
    International graduate scheme  but  an  extension  of  that  leave  was
    refused in May 2009. The Appellant thereafter returned to Ghana (August
    2009). The couple's son was born in January 2010 in the UK. In December
    2010 the Sponsor was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the
    legacy policy. In November 2011 the children were registered as British
    citizens and in September 2012 the Sponsor became a British citizen.

 4. Since 2009 when the Appellant returned to Ghana he has returned once to
    the UK as a visitor during which time the couple married.  The  Sponsor
    and the children have visited Ghana once.

 5. The Appellant sought entry to the UK as a spouse. That application  was
    refused in November 2012 and it is the  appeal  against  that  decision
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The Sponsor had put forward various documents  claiming  that  she  had
    sufficient income to support the Appellant as well as herself  and  the
    children but that was found to be without substance or  credibility  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. The  application  was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on the basis of finance and the Judge similarly found
    that they could not meet the financial requirements of the Rules.

 7. Before me there was no challenge to that finding.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal considered Article 8 and dismissed  the  appeal
    on that ground also and it was that decision that was challenged before
    me. The sole basis of the challenge was that the Judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate consideration to the best interests of  the  two  British
    children in this case.

 9. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not make a  material  error  of
    law in its consideration. The Judge clearly had in mind the  importance
    of the children's best interests and the fact that  they  were  British
    children. He  said in terms at paragraph 30 that if the family unit  in
    this case consisted simply of the Appellant and his  Sponsor  he  would
    have had no difficulty at all in  concluding  that  this  claim  failed
    under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which warranted it being allowed outside the  Rules.  The
    Judge noted the Appellant's claim to be managing director of a  company
    involved in the publication of marketing magazines and event management
    in Ghana and noted that he appeared to be well settled there. He  noted
    that as far as the Sponsor was concerned she had originally  come  from
    the Ivory Coast and in relation to that country her  asylum  claim  was
    rejected. She was granted ILR and thereafter British citizenship  under
    the legacy provisions and the Judge therefore did not accept  that  she
    would not be able to return to the Ivory Coast or Ghana. The  Sponsor's
    status was precarious  when  she  entered  the  relationship  with  the
    Appellant.

10. However, the Judge recognised at  paragraph  31  that  there  were  two
    children in the case whose interests must be considered. He noted  that
    they were aged respectively six and three years and were  now  British.
    He said that he had no reason to doubt having read the  school  letters
    and reports that they enjoy school and have friends as most children of
    their ages do. However, the Judge noted that what is by  far  and  away
    the most important matter to them is that they  should  be  with  their
    parents. This could be achieved if the Sponsor decided to go  to  Ghana
    and join the  Appellant.  The  judge  also  noted  that  the  Appellant
    returned to Ghana as long ago as 2009 returning only once as a  visitor
    in 2012 when he  married  the  Sponsor.  The  couple  then  spent  time
    together in Ghana in 2012 and the judge noted  that  as  a  result  the
    contact that the children had had with their father had  been  strictly
    limited. The Judge found that should the Sponsor decide not to join the
    Appellant in Ghana then the relationship the children  had  with  their
    father would continue as  it  has  thus  far  and  he  concluded,  even
    recognising  the  fact  that  the  children  are   now   British,   the
    circumstances  were  such  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was   not
    disproportionate.

11. It is quite clear that the Judge gave  significant  importance  to  the
    fact that there are two children in the case and what is more that  the
    children are British. He made a  finding  as  to  the  children's  best
    interests being that they should be with both their  parents  and  that
    this could be achieved by the Sponsor moving to Ghana. If she chose not
    to that then the family life enjoyed with the father would continue  in
    future as it has done thus far. The fact remains in this case that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor are a very long way from meeting the requirements
    of the Rules. This is an entry clearance case. As soon as the Appellant
    can bring himself within the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  he
    can enter the UK to join his family.

12. I can discern no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning.
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 17th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

