
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OC/00001/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 February 2016                      |On 21 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, Counsel, instructed by Ahmed Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and thus the Secretary of State is the Respondent  and  RA  is
    once more the Appellant.


 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morgan (the judge), promulgated on 6 November  2015,  in
    which  he  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's original decision was not otherwise in accordance with the
    law.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  judge
    was not entitled to reach that conclusion.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    30 November 2015.

    The hearing before me

 5. Ms Tobin informed me that she was instructed to oppose the Respondent's
    appeal but had nothing further to add.


 6. Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal.



    Decision on Error of Law

 7. At the hearing I announced to the parties that there were  in  my  view
    clear errors of law in the judge's decision and  that  consequently  it
    must be set aside.


 8. The judge was not entitled to allow the appeal on the basis that he did
    and for the reasons he provided.  Putting it bluntly, it appears to  me
    on a reading of paragraphs 5 to 8 that the underlying grounds  for  the
    allowance of the appeal was that there  was  a  significant  amount  of
    evidence submitted by the Appellant that had not been  previously  seen
    by the Presenting Officer,  and  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    consider  the  issue  of  the   Appellant's   alleged   conversion   to
    Christianity.


 9. In respect of the first  point,  the  existence  of  large  amounts  of
    evidence is no basis on which to allow an appeal on the ground that the
    Respondent's decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law.  If
    anything, the amount of evidence and  the  inability  of  a  Presenting
    Officer to have had regard to such  evidence  might  be  a  ground  for
    adjourning proceedings.  It is unclear to me as to why  the  judge  did
    not take this course of action.


10. On the second point, the judge was in fact demonstrably wrong  to  have
    stated that the Respondent had failed to consider the conversion issue.
     It is unclear whether or not this was before him (it is on  my  file),
    but in a decision letter from the Respondent dated 21 December 2012 the
    matter of conversion is considered in some detail.  The Respondent  was
    there dealing with further submissions submitted by the Appellant,  and
    over the course of a number of pages  the  conversion  issue  is  fully
    covered.  The Respondent had concluded that the representations did not
    amount to a fresh claim.


11. The twin bases relied on by the judge in reaching his  conclusion  that
    the appeal should be allowed on a limited basis were both simply wrong.
     It is also of some concern that the judge  referred  to  a  "pragmatic
    course" as an apparent justification (at least in  part)  for  allowing
    the appeal.  Taking a pragmatic course of action is not the same  as  a
    decision of the Respondent being otherwise not in accordance  with  the
    law, and again I make the point  that  a  more  appropriate  course  of
    action would have been to have adjourned  the  proceedings  to  another
    day.


12. In light of the above the judge's decision is set aside.

    Disposal

13. This appeal clearly needs to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there having been no findings of fact whatsoever by  the  judge.   Both
    parties were agreed on this course of action.


14. I set out relevant directions, below.





    Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



    Directions to the parties

 1) The  Appellant's  representatives  are  to  file  and  serve  a  single
    consolidated bundle, indexed, paginated and containing both  subjective
    evidence and any country information relied upon.  This bundle shall be
    served on the First-tier Tribunal no later than six weeks from the date
    my decision is promulgated;


 2) The Appellant's  representatives  shall  produce  a  skeleton  argument
    setting out all relevant arguments to be put forward and a schedule  of
    essential reading which must relate to the consolidated bundle referred
    to above.  The  skeleton  argument  shall  accompany  the  consolidated
    bundle;


 3) The consolidated bundle shall replace  the  existing  four  bundles  of
    background information currently on file;


 4) The issue of jurisdiction relating to this appeal is to be  dealt  with
    as follows.  This is an out of country appeal relating to a  protection
    claim.  The original asylum claim was certified by the Respondent under
    section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   That
    certificate was not successfully challenged.  The right of  appeal  was
    exercisable only once  the  Appellant  had  left  the  United  Kingdom.
    Although the appeal was lodged out of time, an extension  of  time  has
    been granted by the First-tier Tribunal and this is not a  live  issue.
    When considering the appeal at  the  remitted  hearing  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall have regard to sections 94(9) and 95 of the 2002 Act.



    Administrative Directions

 1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at the Taylor  House
    hearing centre;


 2) The remitted hearing shall be heard on a date not  before  eight  weeks
    from the date my decision is promulgated. The hearing centre shall  fix
    the date;


 3) The appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan;


 4) There shall be a time estimate of two hours for the remitted hearing;


 5) No interpreter is required.




Signed                                  Date: 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


