

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00489/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2019                              |On 5 November 2019            |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

                                   Between

                                HAMMAD HASSAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms S McKeeve, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He gives his date of birth  as
    1 January 1988.  He came to the UK in 2011 as a student,  and  remained
    after his visa expired in October 2013.  He began a  relationship  with
    Yun Hu, a Chinese citizen, in January 2015.  She was in  the  UK  as  a
    student.  They married in September 2018.  (She  remains  here;  I  was
    told that she recently obtained an extension of her visa  for  business
    purposes.)

 2. The appellant sought asylum based on  risk  of  forced  marriage  to  a
    cousin in  Pakistan;  of  "honour  killing"  if  he  resisted;  and  of
    persecution by his family and  the  authorities  for  a  non-recognised
    marriage to a non-religious Chinese citizen.

 3. The respondent refused the claim by a letter dated 3 January 2019,  the
    salient points being:

      [43] accepted "risk of being harshly treated  on  return  to  Pakistan
      with your wife, due to Pakistan laws and general perception of  inter-
      faith marriages in Pakistan";

      [44 - 55] risk through arranged marriage not accepted; and

      [56-68] relocation to China available.

 4. FtT Judge Debra  H  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 3 July 2019.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds set  out
    in his application dated 17 July 2019.  The FtT granted  permission  on
    22 August 2019.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the UT aver error "because:

    (i) the respondent had conceded that if he returned  to  Pakistan,  the
    appellant would be at risk;

    (ii) the appellant had no notice  that  internal  relocation  would  be
    raised;

    (iii) the evidence of the expert about relocation to China is ignored;

    (iv) the decision about article 8 takes no account of  proportionality;
    and in any event

    (v) no findings / proper findings on credibility are made".

 7. The grounds go on to amplify those issues, and the  submissions  of  Ms
    McKeeve were along similar lines.

 8. Grounds (i) and (ii) overlap.

 9. (The contention that to obtain a  visa  the  appellant  would  have  to
    return to Pakistan was supported by evidence and was  accepted  by  the
    FtT at [41].  A visa application would  not  succeed  if  made  to  the
    Chinese authorities from a country where the appellant is not  residing
    lawfully, and there is no apparent alternative to Pakistan.)

10. The contention that the appellant cannot go to Pakistan,  even  on  his
    own, due to a risk of persecution which was conceded by the respondent,
    is not supported by the refusal letter.  The limits of  the  concession
    are clear.  There is nothing in the letter by which the  appellant,  on
    his own, might be at risk of persecution in Pakistan.

11. The appellant would not have to go to his family home unless he  chose.
    There was nothing to suggest that there might be  difficulty  in  going
    anywhere else while he obtained a visa.  Ground (ii) is theoretical  at
    best.

12. On ground (iii), it was contended that the FtT should  have  held  that
    there would be a risk of persecution in China, due to the marriage, and
    a risk of the appellant's refoulment to Pakistan.

13. The alleged risk of refoulment  was  based  on  evidence  of  religious
    persecution in certain areas, and of some Muslim  husbands  of  Chinese
    citizens being refused extensions of their visas.  However, it was mere
    conjecture that if the appellant were once to be to be  granted  lawful
    entry, there might be a later change of heart.

14. In the (highly) unlikely event of the appellant lawfully entering China
    and later being forced  to  return  to  Pakistan,  that  would  not  be
    refoulment of a refugee.  Ms McKeeve  recognised  that,  but  said  the
    principle applied by analogy.

15. The line of argument is ingenious, but far-fetched both  on  the  facts
    and on the law.

16. The FtT noted that there is a degree of religious freedom  in  most  of
    China.  The appellant is not a practising Muslim.  The conclusion  that
    he would not be likely to be exposed to any ill-treatment on  religious
    grounds did not ignore the evidence of the expert.

17. Ms McKeeve submitted that the FtT should have found that the  appellant
    could not obtain a visa for China, based on the expert's statement that
    he would have to submit a marriage certificate with a photocopy stamped
    by the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and that as  the  marriage
    would not be regarded as valid in the law of Pakistan, a  stamped  copy
    could not be obtained.

18. That line is poorly  supported  by  evidence  and  expert  opinion  and
    involves  a  further  chain  of  conjecture.   Professor  Bluth  merely
    footnotes a Chinese Embassy internet  link.   Is  the  Chinese  Embassy
    likely to ask for an original UK marriage certificate (not a  Pakistani
    certificate) to be authenticated by the authorities of Pakistan?   Even
    if so, does Pakistani  law  decline  to  recognise  marriages  lawfully
    contracted  in  the  UK?   Those  are  questions  for  experts  in  the
    immigration and private international law of China, and in the  private
    international law of Pakistan.

19. Fundamentally, as the FtT observed, the onus was on the appellant.  The
    point was capable of being tested in practice, not only in theory;  and
    the appellant had not tested the possibility of obtaining a visa.

20. The FtT gave sensible reasons at [41-42] for finding  that  the  report
    did not make out the appellant's case.  The author was not an expert in
    Chinese immigration law (or  in  private  international  law)  and  his
    observations about religious persecution did not bear on the  facts  of
    the case.  Nothing in the report or in  the  evidence  shows  error  in
    resolving these issues.

21. On ground (iv), it was said that "significant obstacles  to  relocation
    to China" was not the test, or not the only test, for  article  8,  and
    that the FtT should have made an overall proportionality assessment.

22. The appellant did not qualify to have his case considered  directly  in
    terms of section EX of appendix FM for several reasons,  including  his
    lack of status in the UK, and the status of his wife,  who  is  not  "a
    British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee  leave  or
    humanitarian  protection".   Nevertheless,  section  EX  is  a  correct
    starting point.

23. There was nothing which might realistically have been held to amount to
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life between the appellant and his
    wife continuing outside the UK, applying the definition  of  "the  very
    significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their
    partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the applicant or their partner".

24. As Mr Govan pointed out, failure to qualify for consideration in  terms
    of section EX does not lead to a more generous frame of reference.

25. It is readily understandable that the appellant  and  his  wife,  as  a
    young couple of secular views, prefer to see their future  in  the  UK.
    Their case has a sympathetic  aspect.   Nevertheless,  as  two  foreign
    nationals, one with no status and one without settled  status,  a  much
    stronger set of circumstances would have to exist to show  a  right  to
    carry on their family life in the UK,  other  than  through  compliance
    with the immigration rules.

26. The decision  at  [43]  may  be  compressed,  but  any  more  elaborate
    consideration of article 8 would be bound to lead to the  same  result.
    Ground (iv) is no more than formalistic.

27. Ground (v) is both inaccurate and beside the point.  The FtT  did  give
    reasons for doubting credibility, at [36], in which no error  has  been
    suggested; and at [37] found that the case failed even if taken "at the
    highest", on internal relocation.

28. Ms McKeeve has pressed all the grounds as far as  they  could  go,  but
    separately and together they do not disclose that the decision  of  the
    FtT should be set aside for having involved the making of any error  on
    a point of law.  That decision shall stand.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      1 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




