
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00727/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision Promulgated              |
|On 15th October 2018                    | On 18th October 2018              |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     DA
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr H Pratt, instructed by WTB Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shergill promulgated 27.2.18, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    12.12.17, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuel  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    23.3.18. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission on 22.5.18.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I find no material error of law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it
    to be set aside.

 4. The core bases of the claim for international protection, fear of Daesh
    and  inability  to  relocate  to  the  IKR  because  of  his   father's
    connections to  the  former  Ba'ath  Party,  were  rejected  and  these
    findings have not been appealed.

 5. However, the judge accepted that the appellant  was  from  a  contested
    area of Iraq, near Mosul, and could not be expected  to  return  there.
    The remaining issue in the appeal was  that  of  relocation  to  either
    Baghdad or the IKR. At [42] the judge concluded that it would be unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad. At [45] the judge
    concluded that the appellant would be able to enter the IKR and  either
    had a genuine CSID or would have the means to obtain a renewal  of  his
    CSID.

 6. The grounds complain that the judge erroneously declined to  apply  the
    extant country guidance case law in relation to Kurdish  returnees  who
    do not originate from the IKR.

 7. In granting permission, Judge Plimmer found it arguable that the  judge
    failed to  apply  or  give  reasons  for  departing  from  the  Country
    Guidance. For the reasons set out below, whilst there was an  error  in
    the judge's understanding or application of the Country Guidance, I  am
    satisfied that it was not material.

 8. I agree and find that the judge was in error in suggesting at [43] that
    the  appellant  could  fly  from  the  UK  via  Turkey  to   Erbil   or
    Sulaymaniyah, both of which are within the IKR.  The  country  guidance
    revised by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944,
    and the subsequent decision of the Upper Tribunal in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), is to the  effect
    that a Kurd who is not from the IKR cannot be  pre-cleared  for  direct
    entry with a laissez-passer but has to  travel  via  Baghdad.  However,
    with a CSID such a person will have no difficulty making his way to the
    IKR. At the time of the country guidance decisions there were no direct
    international flights to the IKR.

 9. AA had been promulgated before Judge Shergill's decision, but  AAH  had
    not. The judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  not  following  a  country
    guidance decision that  was  not  in  existence  at  the  time  of  his
    decision. However, on a reading of  the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that  the  judge  had  given  appropriate  attention  to  the
    appellant's personal characteristics and likely  circumstances  in  the
    IKR, so that the decision is not incompatible with AAH.

10. As the judge noted at [43] direct flights  to  the  IKR  have  resumed,
    which they did in March 2018. Despite  that,  it  remains  the  Country
    Guidance that a Kurd who does not originate from  the  IKR  cannot  fly
    directly there from outside Iraq but will have to travel  via  Baghdad.
    However, the appellant can be issued with a ticket to fly from  the  UK
    to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah, via a  third  country  such  as  Turkey,  and
    transiting at Baghdad Airport. With  the  same  identity  documentation
    (CSID) enabling him to reach Baghdad the appellant  will  not  need  to
    leave the airport and will have no difficulty in  taking  a  connecting
    flight to one of the two destinations in the IKR. He will not  have  to
    travel overland to reach the IKR and thus there are no risks to him  in
    travelling between Baghdad and the IKR.

11. It follows that there is no material error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal as the outcome would be exactly the same, a dismissal  of
    the appeal.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
