
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: PA/00843/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 11th January 2019                |On: 13th February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     IAA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr C. Holmes, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  in  1992.  He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge RS Drake)  to
    dismiss his appeal on protection (humanitarian protection) grounds.

 2. The case for the Appellant was as follows. He has lived in this country
    since  2008  when  he  arrived  here  and  sought  protection   as   an
    unaccompanied minor. He is a Kurd from Kirkuk. Although he was  refused
    asylum in September 2014 he made a 'fresh claim' for protection on  the
    grounds that the security situation in Kirkuk had deteriorated  to  the
    extent that as a civilian he would face a real risk of harm  simply  by
    virtue of his presence. His application was  considerably  strengthened
    by the publication, on the 30th October 2015,  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544.   In  that
    decision the Tribunal held that as a 'contested area'  Kirkuk  was  not
    safe for civilians.  The Respondent did not make  a  decision  on  that
    claim until the 15th December 2017 when it was refused, inter  alia  on
    the grounds that the Secretary of State  considered  the  situation  in
    Kirkuk to have improved since  AA  (Iraq)  was  promulgated,  and  that
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive no  longer  applied.  This
    was the central matter in issue  before  the  Tribunal.  The  Appellant
    provided evidence and  submissions  in  rebuttal  of  the  Respondent's
    conclusions and invited  the  Tribunal  to  apply  the  extant  country
    guidance.

 3. The second issue in the appeal,  if  the  first  was  resolved  in  the
    Appellant's favour, was  whether  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to avail himself  of  an  'internal  flight  alternative'  and
    relocate in order to avoid the fighting in and around Kirkuk.   It  was
    the Respondent's  position  that  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to do so, to either Baghdad or the IKR.

    Error of Law

 4. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has manifestly  failed  to  address
    the central issue in this appeal, namely  whether  the  Respondent  has
    adduced cogent evidence to demonstrate that the country guidance in  AA
    (Iraq), insofar as it relates to Kirkuk, should no longer  be  applied.
    Under the heading 'findings  of  fact'  the  determination  contains  a
    series of barely comprehensible statements, none of which  go  to  that
    issue. The Tribunal appears to be focused on the  Appellant's  original
    reasons (or claimed reasons) for why he left Iraq in 2008. Very little,
    if  any,  of  that  was  relevant  to  whether  he  faced  a  risk   of
    indiscriminate violence as a civilian today.    No reasoned finding  is
    reached on that issue.

 5. I should add that the grounds correctly identify a number  of  discrete
    errors in the determination. These include:

      i) A failure to apply the appropriate standard of proof. At [20.2] and
         again at [20.5] the formulation "not such as to be more likely than
         not to have happened" is used, where the correct standard  was  "it
         has not been shown to be reasonably likely". At 20.6  the  Tribunal
         finds that the Appellant has  failed  to  show  that  it  would  be
         "impossible" for him to obtain a CSID: again the Appellant was only
         required to demonstrate that it was  "reasonably  likely"  that  he
         would not be able to  acquire  documentation.   This  went  to  the
         second issue in the appeal.

     ii) Failure to  consider  material  evidence.  At  paragraph  20.5  the
         Tribunal states that "no evidence" was  submitted  to  support  the
         Appellant's case. In fact a whole bundle of evidence was supplied.

    iii) Errors of fact. At paragraph 13 the Tribunal indicates that  Kirkuk
         is part of the IKR (or that this was the  Appellant's  case).  That
         was not the Appellant's case, and Kirkuk is not part of the IKR.

 6. For those reasons, the parties before me were  in  agreement  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

    Disposal

 7. I am not satisfied that the Appellant has had an effective  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. The two issues in his appeal (identified at my
    paragraphs 2 and 3 above) are  completely  ignored  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination. In those circumstances, and  having  regard  to
    the extent of judicial fact finding required, I consider it appropriate
    to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal  (a  judge  other  than
    Judge RS Drake) for the decision to be re-made de novo.

    Anonymity Order

 8. The Appellant seeks international protection. Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I consider it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Decisions

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it is set aside in its entirety.

10. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

11. There is an order for anonymity.




    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           11th January 2019
