
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00445/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2016                             |On 24 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and  claimed  asylum
    on 10 April 2015.  That application was refused on 11 June 2015, and  a
    decision to remove him from the UK was made in consequence.

 2. The Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  those  immigration
    decisions was heard on 31 March 2016, and  it  was  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds by decision of Judge Malik, promulgated on 14 April 2016.

 3. Unusually,  both  parties  applied  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal. Both applications were  granted  by  decision  of
    Judge Davidge of 6 May 2016.

 4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 16 May 2016 in relation  to
    the grant of permission to the Appellant, but the Appellant did not.

 5. Thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant's case before the First Tier Tribunal

 6. The Appellant's case was that his mother was an Ethiopian citizen, born
    in Ethiopia to Ethiopian parents. He claimed however that she  was  not
    recognised as such in 1999, when  she  tried  to  enter  Ethiopia  from
    Eritrea, so that she was refused entry, when she was unable to  produce
    any documentation to establish who she was.

 7. The Appellant said that he left Eritrea in 1999 for Sudan with an aunt,
    his mother having died and his father  having  disappeared.  He  denies
    having held any status in Sudan, but says he  lived  there  until  July
    2013 when he made his way to the UK upon the arrest  of  his  aunt  for
    political activities.

 8. The Appellant therefore denied possession of  any  identity  documents,
    but he did not deny knowledge of who the members of his family are, and
    were.

 9. The Appellant was legally represented throughout  the  appeal  process.
    Although Iris Law did not lodge his appeal on his behalf, they did  act
    for him from 12 November 2015 and did  represent  him  at  the  hearing
    before the Tribunal.

10. As both representatives now accept  before  me,  it  follows  that  the
    Appellant's case before the Tribunal was  that  he  was  a  citizen  of
    Ethiopia by descent under Ethiopian law, and that the core issue to the
    appeal was whether he had been  refused  recognition  as  such  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities. With the  benefit  of  hindsight  it  now  seems
    pretty clear that those who represented the parties before the Tribunal
    probably failed to identify that they were agreed  that  this  was  the
    case from the outset, and failed to make it clear  to  the  Judge  that
    this was their joint position. If the Appellant had  not  been  refused
    recognition as an Ethiopian citizen then on his own case  he  could  be
    removed from the UK to Ethiopia in safety, and  issues  over  what  his
    position would be in the event of a removal to Eritrea fell away.

11. As both representatives now accept before me the principles set out  in
    the country guidance decision of ST (Ethnic Eritrean  -  nationality  -
    return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT  252  were  therefore  central  to  the
    appeal. The evidence produced by the Appellant for the hearing did  not
    however follow the guidance contained  in  ST.  Instead  the  Appellant
    produced a photograph of himself standing outside the Ethiopian Embassy
    in London, and a business card for the Head of Consular  Services,  and
    made the otherwise bald assertion that he had attended the Embassy  and
    had been told that without identity documents he was not recognised  as
    an Ethiopian citizen. Belatedly produced for the hearing was  an  email
    that had been sent on the Appellant's behalf by his solicitors  to  the
    Embassy less than 48 hours before the hearing. It was said  that  there
    had been no response to this email, although  no  evidence  to  support
    that claim appears to have been  filed  from  a  member  of  the  firm.
    Despite the timing, the Appellant's representative then sought to  rely
    upon the absence of response to that  email  as  material  evidence  to
    support the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  not  recognised  as  an
    Ethiopian citizen by the Ethiopian authorities. Such an argument sought
    to elevate the absence of evidence into cogent evidence,  when  it  was
    clearly not.

The decision

12. The Judge concluded in the light of the guidance to be found in ST that
    the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof that  rested  upon
    him to establish that he had made proper  enquiries  of  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy in  London,  and,  had  disclosed  to  them  in  so  doing  the
    information that he held concerning his family that would allow them to
    make sensible enquiries into his identity.  Thus  the  Judge  concluded
    that the Appellant had not done all he could reasonably be expected  to
    have done to facilitate his removal from the UK to Ethiopia [41 xi]. In
    turn the Judge concluded that it followed that the  Appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof to show that  he  was  not  entitled  to
    Ethiopian nationality and/or unable to return to Ethiopia [43].  (I  am
    satisfied that "return" must be read here as "be removed"  since  there
    was no finding that the Appellant had ever been to Ethiopia, and it was
    not his case that he had.)

13. The Judge went on to conclude that the Appellant  had  a  well  founded
    fear of persecution if removed  to  Eritrea,  and  allowed  the  asylum
    appeal on that basis.

Error of Law?

14. The Respondent's challenge to the decision is a simple one, and one  to
    which Ms Brakaj accepted she had no answer if paragraphs 41(xi) and  43
    of the decision are to be read as set out above, as I am satisfied that
    they should be. On the strength of the Judge's own findings the  asylum
    appeal should have been dismissed On the Appellant's own case he was an
    Ethiopian national by descent, and the Judge had concluded that he  had
    failed to demonstrate that  he  was  not  recognised  as  such  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities. He did not claim to have a fear  of  persecution
    in Ethiopia if he were recognised as such by the Ethiopian authorities,
    and able to enter Ethiopia recognised as a citizen of that country.

15. The basis of the Appellant's challenge to the decision is framed  as  a
    complaint that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for his decision  that
    the Appellant had failed to establish that he was not recognised  as  a
    citizen of Ethiopia.

16. The fundamental problem with the  Appellant's  grounds,  is  that  they
    amount to a mere disagreement with the Judge's analysis of  the  weight
    to be given to the Appellant's evidence concerning his efforts to  gain
    recognition of his status as a national from the Ethiopian authorities.
    Contrary to the assertion made in the grounds, the Judge did not impose
    a requirement for  corroboration,  and  did  not  fail  to  follow  the
    guidance to be found in ST. Instead the Judge did apply the guidance to
    be found in ST and in doing so quite properly noted the absence of  any
    corroborative evidence to which he could attach  material  weight,  for
    the Appellant's claim to have approached the London  Embassy,  and,  to
    have been refused recognition as an Ethiopian national.

17. In my judgement the Judge was entirely correct  to  take  the  approach
    that he did. There was very little evidence as to whether the Appellant
    had made any personal approach to the Embassy for recognition, and  the
    Judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities that he was not satisfied that he had done so.  Moreover,
    it was well open to the Judge to conclude that  if  the  Appellant  had
    made a  genuine  and  realistic  attempt  to  gain  recognition  as  an
    Ethiopian national through an approach to the  Embassy  rather  than  a
    self-serving dishonest approach designed to produce a  rejection,  then
    he would have been able to supply full details of the information  that
    he had supplied to the  Embassy,  and  of  the  response  that  he  had
    obtained. The Appellant provided no such details.

18. Turning then to the email  sent  to  the  Embassy  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors immediately prior to the hearing. This was an approach  that
    was made  extremely  late  in  the  day,  and  no  application  for  an
    adjournment was made in order to elicit the benefit of  a  reply.  Even
    the content of this email fell a very long way  short  of  establishing
    that the Appellant had made a genuine approach disclosing  all  of  the
    information available to him. Thus the Judge  was  perfectly  entitled,
    for the reasons that he gave (which were entirely adequate), to  reject
    the Appellant's  claim  to  have  made  a  genuine  attempt  to  obtain
    recognition of his Ethiopian citizenship.

Conclusions

19. In consequence I am satisfied that I should set aside the decision upon
    the asylum appeal, and remake that decision so as to dismiss the asylum
    appeal.

20. The Judge's decision records the failure  to  advance  before  him  any
    Article 8 appeal. Neither party suggests that he was  incorrect  to  do
    so, and  neither  Ms  Brakaj,  nor  the  grounds  for  the  Appellant's
    application for permission offer any reason as to why the dismissal  of
    any Article 8 appeal should not follow. It follows that the appeal must
    be dismissed on all grounds.





DECISION


The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  14  April
2016 contains an error of law in  the  decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's
appeal on asylum grounds which require that decision to  be  set  aside  and
remade so that the appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.








Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 23 August 2016

