
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00419/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 Richard [B]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik of Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  promulgated  on  14  May  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims (in the context of deportation) dated  21  December
    2017 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on 15 September 1975,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on 24 June 2002, with leave  to  enter
    as a visitor for six months and subsequently with leave to remain as  a
    student to 31 January 2004.  The  Appellant  was  subsequently  granted
    leave to remain as a spouse and granted indefinite leave to  remain  on
    the same basis on 1 April 2006.

 3. On 27 October 2007, the Appellant was convicted of possession of  drugs
    with intent to supply for which he  was  subsequently  sentenced  to  5
    years imprisonment.  He was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation and  served  with  a  Deportation  Order  and  reasons  for
    deportation letter on 21 July 2010.   The  Appellant's  appeal  against
    deportation was allowed on 2 February 2012  on  human  rights  grounds,
    further to which the Respondent allowed him to  retain  his  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 4. On 21 July 2016, the Appellant was convicted of possession with  intent
    to supply a controlled class B drug, for which he was  sentenced  to  3
    years and six months' imprisonment.  On 5 August 2016, he was convicted
    of  a  further   offence   of   concealing,   disguising,   converting,
    transferring or removing criminal property and sentence  to  4  months'
    imprisonment.

 5.  The  Respondent  issued  a  further  notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order on 6 August 2016, further to which the Appellant made
    representations and claimed asylum.  A decision to deport the Appellant
    was subsequently made on 20  December  2017.   The  Appellant's  asylum
    claim was certified by way of a certificate issued under section 72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis  that  he
    had been convicted of a particularly serious  crime  and  continues  to
    constitute a danger to the community.  His asylum claim  was  therefore
    refused on that basis but in any event,  it  was  considered  that  the
    Appellant was not covered by the Refugee Convention and that there  was
    a sufficiency of protection and internal relocation option available to
    him in Jamaica.  In particular, the Appellant relied on  threats  which
    had been made as long ago as  2002,  since  when  he  had  returned  to
    Jamaica for a visit in 2005 and there had been no threats at all  since
    2007.

 6. In relation to paragraph 398 and following of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the exceptions to deportation, the Respondent considered  that  as  the
    Appellant had been sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of  over  four
    years, he would have to show very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the specific exceptions to outweigh the public  interest  in  his
    deportation.  The Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant  had  a
    parental relationship with his  two  children  as  he  was  playing  no
    meaningful role in their lives and in any event it would not be  unduly
    harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom without him.  They could
    remain here with their mother who is their primary carer.   Further  it
    was not accepted that the Appellant was in a genuine relationship  with
    his partner given that there was no evidence of cohabitation and in any
    event, it would not be unduly harsh for her to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  The  private  life  exception  was  not  met  and
    overall there were no very compelling circumstances.

 7. Judge Cohen dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  14  May
    2019 on all grounds; including that the Appellant had not rebutted  the
    presumption under section 72 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 so as  to  exclude  him  from  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and that he was also excluded from a grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.  In any event,  his  asylum  claim  was  considered  to  be
    incredible given that it related to events  of  15  years  ago  and  no
    earlier claim of asylum had been  made.   It  was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was not at risk on return to Jamaica and therefore his  claim
    was also dismissed under Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

 8. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    Judge Cohen found that it was in the best interests of the  Appellant's
    children to remain in the United Kingdom with their  mother  given  his
    limited  involvement  with  them  during  and  after  his   period   of
    imprisonment.  In any event, it was not considered to be  unduly  harsh
    for either the Appellant's children or his partner  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  without  him.   Judge  Cohen  made  reference  to  the
    requirements of paragraph 398 and following of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and found that there were no very exceptional circumstances to outweigh
    the public interest  in  deportation,  such  that  there  would  be  no
    disproportionate interference  with  his  and  his  family's  right  to
    respect for family life.  It was found that the  Appellant  has  family
    remaining in Jamaica, that he retains familiarity with the country,  is
    in reasonable health would be able to find employment  on  return.   In
    relation to private life, it was found that the Appellant would be able
    to re-establish and reintegrate himself on return to Jamaica.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on what are essentially two grounds.  First, that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply a structured  consideration  of
    the appeal by reference to the Immigration Rules  for  deportation  and
    the  exceptions  thereto.   In  particular,  there   was   no   express
    consideration of paragraph 399 of the Immigration  Rules,  whether  the
    Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on  his  family  members,
    nor of the recent caselaw of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.  The Appellant identified a  number  of
    factual inaccuracies in the decision and also claimed that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in failing to assess his claim in  accordance  with
    the principles in Devaseelan by reference to  his  previous  successful
    appeal.  Overall it was claimed  that  there  had  been  no  cumulative
    assessment of the Appellant's circumstances  and  as  to  whether  they
    would amount together to very compelling circumstances to outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.  Secondly, that there  was  a  material
    error of fact in relation to the assessment of the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim, in that it was stated  that  he  returned  to  Jamaica  in  2007
    whereas  in  fact  his  last  return  was  in  2005.   It  was  however
    acknowledged in the written grounds of appeal  that  this  may  not  be
    material in light of the unchallenged findings  about  the  section  72
    certificate, but is an issue that goes to the  Appellant's  credibility
    overall.

10. At the oral hearing, Mr Malik relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and emphasise that this was a confusing decision  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which looks very much like a decision in two halves and  which
    contains factual errors.  For example, in paragraph 25 of the  decision
    it was recorded that the Appellant was a persistent  offender  this  is
    not the basis upon which the Respondent sought to  deport  him  and  in
    paragraph 41 it was recorded that the Appellant's children didn't visit
    him in prison, where is the evidence was that they did so frequently at
    the beginning of his sentence but then stopped.

11. Mr Malik made an  application  under  rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedural (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce  further  evidence  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  It was accepted that this  evidence  was  not
    relevant to the question of whether there was an error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and no good reason could be offered
    as to why the evidence was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    refused the application  to  rely  on  this  further  material  as  the
    requirements  of  the  procedural  rule  were  not  satisfied  and  the
    application did not meet the test in Ladd v Marshall [1953] 1 WLR 1489.

12. I asked Mr Malik whether any  error  of  law,  if  accepted,  would  be
    material to the outcome of the Appellants appeal.   He  submitted  that
    there was a lack of engagement by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    position of the Appellant's children, dealing with this only  a  single
    paragraph without reference to the requirement to consider  their  best
    interests in section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009, without reference to the Supreme Court decision in  KO  (Nigeria)
    and without clear findings of whether the Appellant's deportation would
    be unduly harsh upon them.  The evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal in relation  to  the  impact  of  deportation  on  Appellant's
    children was essentially  only  that  contained  in  paragraph  33  his
    written statement, which raise a concern about their  ability  to  cope
    without the  Appellant  and  how  his  deportation  would  affect  them
    mentally.  This was supported by the Appellant's wife's statement  that
    the children would be emotionally damaged if they had to  live  a  life
    without their father, who they could only maintain a relationship  with
    in the United Kingdom.

13. The Appellant also relies specifically on  his  relationship  with  his
    wife, who has only ever lived in the same area of  the  United  Kingdom
    with close family relationships with her own parents she provides  care
    for, daughter and grandchildren.  This is supported  by  evidence  from
    the Appellant's wife as to her situation in the United Kingdom  and  as
    to their relationship.

14. It was submitted by Mr Malik that taken cumulatively, the nature of the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife and  children  would  amount  to
    exceptional circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation, such that if considered properly the errors of  law  would
    be material to the outcome of his appeal.

15. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that  the  Appellant's
    case could  only  be  considered  and  the  test  of  very  exceptional
    circumstances to deportation and that he would not be able  to  benefit
    from one of the  express  exceptions  to  deportation  because  of  his
    previous sentence of imprisonment of over  four  years,  in  accordance
    with the Upper Tribunal decision in  Johnson  (deportation  -  4  years
    imprisonment) [2016] UKUT 00282 (IAC).  The conviction and sentence was
    expressly relied upon by the Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.

16. In relation to the Appellant's previous successful appeal in  2012,  it
    was submitted that there had been material changes in both the law  and
    the Appellant circumstances, including amendments  to  the  Immigration
    Rules  and  the  introduction  of  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  The allowance of the previous  appeal  was
    generous but in any event the Appellant had gone on to  commit  further
    serious offences, in particular drugs offences  which  are  significant
    impact on the public and the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest.  For these reasons the First-tier Tribunal was correct not to
    attach any greater weight to the earlier decision in 2012.

17. Although Mr Jarvis accepted that the structure  and  reasoning  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision was poor, it was possible to  understand
    the reasoning given and in any event taking the  Appellant's  claim  at
    its highest, in relation to his family and private life, it  could  not
    legitimately establish very compelling circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    significant  public  interest  in  his  deportation.   It  was  further
    submitted that the Appellant could not even succeed on establishing one
    of the exceptions to deportation that this would  be  unduly  harsh  on
    either his children and/or partner.

Findings and reasons

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not well structured or  easy
    to follow in relation to the Article 8 aspects and generally, and  does
    give the distinct impression that it was written in  two  halves  given
    that the layout and paragraph numbering changes halfway through at  the
    beginning of the section containing the findings.  However, despite the
    lack of structured approach  and  assessment  of  the  facts  following
    paragraphs 398 to 399A of the Immigration Rules and/or section 117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  I  find  that  the
    correct provisions have been referred to and adequate findings made  on
    the key issues, albeit they could have been expressed much more clearly
    and by reference to the language used  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    statute.

 2. In relation to the Appellant's  relationship  with  his  children,  the
    findings made in paragraph 41  are  that  the  Appellant  has  not  had
    significant contact with his children or input into their  daily  lives
    during or after his most recent imprisonment and that it was  in  their
    best interests to remain in the United Kingdom with their  mother,  who
    is their primary carer and who has looked after them for all  of  their
    lives.  It  was  found  that  contact  could  be  maintained  with  the
    Appellant after deportation through modern means of  communication  and
    visits if desired, but that the children would be adequately cared  for
    in his absence from the United Kingdom.  There is no express  reference
    to whether it would be unduly harsh on the children to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant, or whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for them to relocate to Jamaica with  him.   However,  given  the
    nature of the findings made, it can readily be inferred that the First-
    tier Tribunal did not consider it to be unduly harsh on the children to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. As to the Appellant's relationship with his wife, it was accepted  that
    his wife had a close family in United Kingdom including with  her  ill,
    elderly parents, her daughter and  grandchildren  but  that  she  could
    choose to  relocate  to  Jamaica  to  continue  family  life  with  the
    Appellant if she so wished.  There was an express finding that it would
    not be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife  to  relocate  to  Jamaica
    with him and in the alternative, she could remain in the United Kingdom
    and maintain contact with the Appellant in  Jamaica.   Again,  although
    there is no express finding as to  whether  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's wife to remain in the United Kingdom without  him,  reading
    the paragraph as a whole, this can also be readily inferred and in  any
    event it is sufficient that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  her  to
    relocate for the exception against deportation not to apply.

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  makes  express  findings  about   the
    Appellant's relationship with wider family members, including with  his
    stepdaughter in paragraph 44; his  grandchildren  through  marriage  in
    paragraph 45 and  with  his  parents-in-law  in  paragraph  46.   Those
    relationships were not accepted  to  constitute  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 and in relation to the grandchildren, it  was  in
    their best interests  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their
    immediate family members.   The  Appellant's  relationship  with  these
    extended family members is relevant to his overall  circumstances,  but
    could  not,  on  the  basis  of  the  extended  nature  of  the  family
    relationships, fall within the specific exceptions to deportation.

 5. In paragraph 50 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  paragraph
    398 of the Immigration Rules is quoted and it is  identified  that  the
    relevant test for the present case is that the Appellant would need  to
    show very  compelling  circumstances  (expressed  in  paragraph  51  as
    exceptional  circumstances,  with  no  material   difference   in   the
    application of the test as to what is required) to outweigh the  public
    interest in deportation.  In  accordance  with  Johnson,  this  is  the
    correct test to be applied given the Appellant's earlier conviction and
    sentence of over four years' imprisonment.

 6. The findings which follow in paragraphs 52 to 55 consider  cumulatively
    the Appellant's various family relationships, likely circumstances  and
    connections in Jamaica, the Appellant's  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the strong public interest in deportation.

 7. The conclusion follows in paragraph 56 that there is nothing in support
    of the Appellant's appeal which has been raised which gets close to the
    threshold required in order to amount to exceptionality so as  to  find
    that the Appellant's removal would be disproportionate in  all  of  the
    circumstances.  Although this conclusion is poorly expressed as against
    the language used in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Nationality  Act  2002  (which
    are materially identical), I  find  that  the  meaning  and  effect  is
    sufficiently clear that the Appellant  has  not  established  any  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh the significant public interest in
    his deportation.  I do not therefore find any error of law on the first
    ground.

 8. In any event, even if, contrary to the above,  I  had  found  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not consider or  make  findings
    with sufficient clarity in accordance with paragraph 398 and  following
    of the Immigration Rules which amounted to an error  of  law,  such  an
    error could not  on  the  facts  and  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal have been material to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. In his written statement, the Appellant  states  that  his  deportation
    would have a devastating impact on his wife, a British citizen, and her
    family.  He says that  whilst  he  was  in  prison  she  suffered  from
    depression and was struggling to cope but  since  his  release  he  has
    shared  the  burden  of  caring  for  her  parents  and  grandchildren,
    practically  as  well  as  emotionally.   He  also  states   that   his
    deportation would have a devastating impact on their grandchildren,  to
    whom he is more of a father figure as own father only season rarely and
    on a practical level he helps provide childcare and support  for  them.
    The Appellant's wife's entire life and family is in the United Kingdom,
    where she has a home, a job and provides care for her elderly and  sick
    parents as well as for grandchildren.  The Appellant's  wife's  written
    statement is in very similar terms.  There is no supporting medical  or
    other evidence, for example about care  provided  for  her  parents  or
    otherwise.

10. In relation to his children, the Appellant states  that  he  speaks  to
    them regularly, sees them when he can, provides financial  support  and
    takes decisions together with their mother  on  key  matters.   In  the
    future he would like them to come and  stay  for  weekends  and  school
    holidays and meet other family members.  The Appellant  does  not  want
    his daughters growing up without their father because  of  his  actions
    and has seen the impact on other children who  have  grown  up  without
    both parents which he  doesn't  want  for  his  own  children.   He  is
    concerned about the impact mentally on his children if he is  deported,
    where they would not be able to visit him and their relationship  could
    not continue to develop.   There  is  no  evidence  from  the  children
    themselves or their mother and no external assessment of the impact  on
    them arising from the Appellant's deportation.

11. The evidence from  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  these  key  family
    relationships can at best be described as thin, with no real engagement
    in substance of any claimed  adverse  impact  on  either  his  wife  or
    children by relocating to Jamaica with him or  of  their  circumstances
    remaining in the United Kingdom  without  him.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that the impact of  deportation  is  anything  other  than  the
    normal consequences  of  families  relocating  or  being  separated  by
    deportation.  The evidence set out above, even together  with  that  in
    relation to the Appellant's extended family relationships  and  private
    life in the United Kingdom, could not on any legitimate view amount  to
    very compelling circumstances to outweigh what is in this case  a  very
    significant public interest in deportation of the Appellant,  following
    two convictions with lengthy  sentences  of  imprisonment  for  serious
    drugs offences.  On the evidence, it could  not  even  be  legitimately
    found that either of the exceptions to deportation were met in relation
    to the Appellant's partner or children, that it would be  unduly  harsh
    for them to relocate and/or remain in the United Kingdom  without  him.
    For these reasons there is no material error of law in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.

12. As accepted on behalf of the Appellant in the written  application  for
    permission to appeal, the second ground of appeal, even  if  made  out,
    could not be material to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   The  factual
    discrepancy as to whether the Appellant returned to Jamaica  only  once
    in 2005 or twice in 2005 and  2007  has  no  material  bearing  on  the
    dismissal of the appeal on asylum or humanitarian  protection  grounds,
    both of which the Appellant is excluded from because  of  his  criminal
    conduct and the section 72 certificate;  neither  of  which  have  been
    challenged in this appeal.  For these  reasons  there  is  no  material
    error of law identified in the second ground of appeal either.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 3rd October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

