
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00584/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant to rule|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|                              |
|Rules 2008                                   |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Grounds of appeal and Further written submissions
                    and reply provided by Ms K Smith, counsel
For the Respondent:    Written submissions provided by Mr T Lindsay, Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 19 March 2020, and the Presidential Guidance Note no  1
         2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic, as amended  on  19
         November 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Chowdhury (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated
         on 18 December 2020, dismissed her appeal in respect of a  decision
         by the respondent dated 10 January 2020 refusing her protection and
         human rights claim.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal Feeney in a  decision  dated  11  September
         2020 but sent on 14 September 2020.

      4. On 5 November 2020 the Upper  Tribunal  issued  directions  to  the
         parties authored by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  expressing  her
         provisional view that, in light of the pandemic, it was appropriate
         to  determine  the  questions  (i)  whether  the  judge's  decision
         involved the making of an error of law and, if so, (ii) whether the
         decision should be set aside, without a  hearing.  On  19  November
         2020 the Upper  Tribunal  received  further  submissions  from  the
         appellant in respect of the two questions. The  appellant  made  no
         submissions in respect  of  whether  the  two  questions  could  be
         determined  without  a  hearing.  on  25  November   2020   written
         submissions were received from the respondent. No submissions  were
         made in respect of whether the two questions  could  be  determined
         without a hearing. On 3 December  2020  the  appellant  provided  a
         written reply to the respondents written submissions.

      5. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision (which  focuses  on  whether  the
         judge made a mistake of fact amounting to an error  of  law  in  in
         respect of which she attached undue weight, the judge's  assessment
         of medical evidence and the judge's evaluation of the  availability
         of the internal relocation alternative), and having regard  to  the
         relatively narrow focus of the  legal  challenge  and  the  written
         submissions  from  the  appellant's  representatives,  and   having
         satisfied  itself  that  both  parties  have  been  given  a   fair
         opportunity of fully advancing their cases, and  having  regard  to
         the judgment in JCWI v President of the Upper Tribunal [2020]  EWHC
         3103 (Admin), the Upper Tribunal considers it appropriate, in light
         of the Covid-19 pandemic,  to  determine  questions  (i)  and  (ii)
         without a hearing pursuant to rule 34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Background

      6. The appellant is a female national of Iraq. She was born in Baghdad
         and is an Arab Shi'ite. Her husband is a Sunni Kurd and is said  to
         have been born in Jalawla. The appellant and her husband married in
         2007. They have three children, two born in Iraq,  the  third  born
         after the appellant and her husband arrived in the UK  in  December
         2016.


      7. I summarise the basis of  the  appellant's  protection  claim.  She
         fears persecution in Iraq from her cousins, who disapproved of  her
         marriage, which was  conducted  in  secret  with  the  aid  of  the
         appellant's mother. After their  marriage  the  appellant  and  her
         husband left Baghdad and went to live in Jalawla, which is  in  the
         Diyala Governorate. Following an  offence  by  ISIS  the  appellant
         returned to Baghdad with  her  children.  She  pretended  that  her
         husband had been killed. He however visited her  in  secret.  Their
         third child was conceived. The appellant was fearful  of  informing
         her cousins that her husband was still alive and that she had  been
         impregnated by him, and, in the absence of any explanation for  the
         pregnancy, the appellant's cousins  believed  that  she  had  acted
         contrary to Sharia law and had brought  dishonour  on  the  family.
         Fearing that she would be  killed  by  her  cousins  the  appellant
         informed her husband who arranged for an agent to  take  the  whole
         family out of Iraq and, eventually, to the UK.

      8. The appellant's claim was disbelieved by the respondent and,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 18 October 2017, Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal M Davies dismissed her  appeal.  Judge  Davies  found  the
         appellant's account to be incredible based on  discrepant  evidence
         given by her and her husband.

      9. The appellant  made  further  representations  relying  on  medical
         evidence indicating  that  she  was  being  treated  for  PTSD  and
         associated depressive symptoms, documents purportedly issued by the
         police in Iraq relating to an assault on the appellant's mother  by
         her cousins and a hospital letter, and an  expert  country  report.
         The respondent treated the further submissions as  amounting  to  a
         fresh protection and human rights claim but refused the claim.  The
         appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     10. The respondent was  not  represented  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from
         KE, a neighbour who had witnessed an alleged threatening  telephone
         call taken by the appellant's husband from one of  the  appellant's
         cousins. In her decision the judge summarised the appellant's claim
         and the respondent's decision. The judge reminded  herself  of  the
         principles enunciated in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002]  UKIAT  00702  to
         treat the first determination as  her  starting  point.  The  judge
         properly  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  the  appropriate
         standard and burden of proof and indicated  that  she  treated  the
         appellant as a vulnerable witness  in  accordance  with  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.


     11. In the part of her decision containing her findings the  judge  set
         out what she described  as  a  "number  of  conflicts  between  the
         evidence of the Appellant and her husband" that were identified  in
         the decision of Judge Davies. The judge  referred  to  inconsistent
         evidence relating to where their marriage occurred  [40],  and  the
         duration of the husband's visits to see  the  appellant  after  she
         moved to Baghdad [41].

     12. At [43] and [44] the judge considered  the  expert  country  report
         prepared by Alison Pargeter dated 9 August 2019 and found that this
         report did not assist the appellant. At [45] the judge stated:

             "At 3.1 of the experts report the expert noted  that  if  [the
             appellant's] cousins were still angry that she had defied them
             by marrying against their instructions then she could well  be
             at risk from them were she to return  although  if  they  were
             still upset about the fact that she  had  married  the  expert
             would have expected them to  have  taken  action  against  her
             immediately when she returned  to  live  with  her  mother  in
             October 2015. They did  not.  I  find  this  point  materially
             damages the Appellant's credibility."

     13. Then at [46] the judge stated:

             "There is also  no  reasonable  explanation  for  the  delayed
             attack on her mother. The  purported  medical  report  of  her
             mother's injuries allegedly sustained because of an attack are
             dated in December 2018. Why the Appellant's cousins would seek
             to harm the mother after such a delay, (nearly 2  years  after
             the Appellant left the country) is not explained. I find  that
             having regard to Tanveer Ahmed that I cannot safely rely  upon
             the documents purportedly evidencing her mother's injuries."

     14. At [48] the judge stated:

             "The Appellant claims  to  suffer  from  PTSD  and  associated
             depressive symptoms relating to past trauma and physical abuse
             (see page 32 of the Appellant's bundle). I have considered the
             corroborative weight of these i.e.  the  Appellant's  disorder
             being caused by  the  abuse  she  alleges  however  given  the
             fundamental conflicts and  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence,
             even allowing for her trauma, I  do  not  find  that  she  has
             demonstrated on the lower  standard  of  proof  that  she  has
             suffered from  the  abuse  she  claims.  I  do  not  find  the
             Appellant has been truthful or credible. I find that rather it
             is  the  distress  and  anxiety  caused   by   her   uncertain
             immigration status as is highlighted in the Greater Manchester
             Mental Health letter of 2 March 2020."

     15. At [49] the judge referred to the expert report in the  context  of
         the availability of internal relocation within Baghdad. The  expert
         had observed that it was  difficult  to  see  how  the  appellant's
         cousins would be able to track her down or go after her outside  of
         her own local area as militias tended to be localised.  The  expert
         also found it surprising if the cousins  tried  to  mobilise  their
         militia as the issues that allegedly gave rise to the asylum  claim
         were considered shameful and taboo and the cousins were more likely
         to try and conceal "the affair" then risk publicising it.


     16. The judge concluded, at [50], that the  appellant  did  not  suffer
         from a well-founded fear of persecution on  account  of  her  mixed
         marriage or 3rd child from her cousins or society.

     17. The judge then dealt with the medical evidence  under  the  heading
         "Articles 3, 8  and  Mental  Health".  The  judge  noted  that  the
         appellant had been under the care of  the  South  Mersey  Community
         Mental Health team since March 2018 with a diagnosis  of  PTSD  and
         associative depressive symptoms, but indicated, for the reasons the
         judge had already numerated, that she did not find the  appellant's
         claims to be credible or truthful. At [54] the judge noted that the
         information  provided  to  all  the   medical   practitioners   was
         "predominantly subjective" being what the appellant had told  them.
         The judge indicated that  she  had  "considered  and  weighed  very
         carefully" the medical practitioners' findings  on  examination  of
         the appellant. The judge noted at [55] that it was unfortunate that
         none of the medical letters or reports refer to  having  considered
         the previous decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  that  no
         practitioner had considered any alternative  explanations  for  the
         psychological symptoms presented by the appellant.


     18. At [59] the judge stated:

             "I also cannot safely rely upon the psychiatric report because
             it  is  premised  on  an  account  I  have  rejected.  In  the
             circumstances I  cannot  find  that  any  suicide  risk  would
             increase to such an extent  that  it  would  breach  the  high
             threshold in Article 3, or Article 8 in removing her to Iraq."

     19.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     20. The 1st ground contends that the  judge  made  a  mistake  of  fact
         and/or failed to have proper regard to  material  evidence  as  she
         drew an adverse inference at [46] that the appellant's  mother  had
         only been attacked once, in December 2018. The evidence however  in
         the  appellant's  witness  statement  was  that  her  cousins   had
         assaulted her mother twice; firstly in December 2017 and  again  in
         December 2018. To the extent that the judge relied on  a  delay  of
         some 2 years in the attack as a factor undermining the  appellant's
         credibility, she took into account an a relevant consideration.  Mr
         Lindsay submits that even if the judge had made a mistake the error
         was not material. One had to read [45] in  conjunction  with  [46].
         The expert would have expected the cousins  to  have  taken  action
         immediately on the appellant's return to live in Baghdad in October
         2015. Based upon the expert evidence the respondent submits that it
         was the absence of any claimed  attack  immediately  after  October
         2015 that was  considered  to  materially  damage  the  appellant's
         credibility.


     21. The 2nd ground of appeal challenges the  judge's  approach  to  the
         medical evidence. The appellant had been diagnosed  with  PTSD  and
         had received antidepressant and antipsychotic  treatment  including
         EMDR (for PTSD) and CBT Therapy (for PTSD) over a sustained  period
         of time. At [48] and [59] the judge is said to  have  rejected  the
         medical evidence on the  basis  that  she  had  already  found  the
         appellant to be incredible, an approach  that  was  legally  flawed
         (Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367). Nor had the judge  adequately
         engaged with the evidence of the clinical diagnosis  and  treatment
         which was corroborative  of  the  appellant's  account  of  events.
         Although  the  judge  was  entitled  to  note  that   the   medical
         practitioners  were  reliant  on  information   provided   by   the
         appellant, their  diagnosis  was  also  based  on  the  appellant's
         presentation over a prolonged period. To the extent that the  judge
         rejected the clinical diagnosis and  opinion  of  various  treating
         medical practitioners that the  appellant  suffered  PTSD,  instead
         finding that her poor mental health was due to distress and anxiety
         caused by her uncertain immigration status, the judge erred in law;
         she had exceeded her remit in displacing the clinical diagnosis  of
         medical professionals with her own and failed to have  any  or  any
         proper regard to the medical evidence.


     22. In his written submissions Mr Lindsay submits that,  at  [48],  the
         judge demonstrably considered "the  corroborative  weight"  of  the
         medical evidence but  that  "even  allowing  for  her  trauma"  the
         evidence did not demonstrate on the lower standard  of  proof  that
         the appellant had suffered the abuse she claimed. The decision read
         as a whole, in particular the judge's directions at [36]  indicated
         that she had considered all of the documentary evidence before her.
         The judge was, in any event, entitled to rely on the absence of any
         indication that the medical practitioners had been  made  aware  of
         the 2017 First-tier Tribunal decision which found  the  appellant's
         account to be incredible.

     23. The 3rd ground of appeal challenges the  judge's  approach  to  the
         issue of internal relocation. Although the judge had regard to some
         aspects of the expert report relating to  internal  relocation  (at
         [49]), there were other relevant factors that had  not  been  taken
         into account that were highlighted in the expert report and on  the
         appellant's behalf. These  included  the  fact  that  the  security
         situation  in  Baghdad  remained   precarious,   the   difficulties
         presented by the appellant being an Arab Shia and her husband being
         a Kurdish Sunni, the absence  of  any  immediate  accommodation  or
         source of income for the family of 5, the fact that  the  appellant
         has no work experience and a husband, due to a back injury,  cannot
         now work, and the appellant's poor mental health (which  is  likely
         to further deteriorate and destabilise removed to Iraq).

     24. In his written submissions Mr  Lindsay  submits  that  the  judge's
         conclusions were legally adequate and there was no requirement  for
         her to deal with every aspect of the evidence before her. The judge
         dealt with the expert report in some detail and in particular  that
         part of the report dealing with internal  relocation.  The  reasons
         given by the judge worse sufficient for the parties  to  understand
         the judge's decision.

Discussion

     25. I am satisfied that ground one is made out. A  natural  reading  of
         [46]  suggests  that  there  had  only  been  one  attack  on   the
         appellant's mother, which occurred  in  December  2018.  The  judge
         found there was no explanation as to why there have been a delay of
         nearly 2 years after the appellant left the  country  in  attacking
         the mother and, as a consequence, the judge did not feel she  could
         "safely  rely  upon  the  documents  purportedly  evidencing  [the]
         mother's injuries."  It  is  clear  however  from  the  appellant's
         statement, at paragraph 15, that the appellant claimed  her  mother
         had been attacked twice, in December 2017  and  again  in  December
         2018.


     26. Mr Lindsay submits that any such mistake is  immaterial  given  the
         content of [45]. I have considered [45] in detail. This relates  to
         assaults on the appellant by her cousins, not to  assaults  on  the
         appellant's mother. The expert had expected the appellant's cousins
         to have taken action against her immediately when she  returned  to
         live with her mother in October 2015 if they were still upset about
         her marriage. The expert was not commenting on any assault  on  the
         appellant's mother by the cousins. I note  by  way  of  observation
         that the appellant did claim that her cousins physically  assaulted
         her when she returned and that her mother had to beg  them  not  to
         kill her (see paragraph 9 of the statement).

     27. I am satisfied that the  judge  placed  material  reliance  on  her
         mistake concerning the delay in  the  attacks  on  the  appellant's
         mother.  Whilst  the  judge   was   entitled   to   rely   on   the
         inconsistencies  identified  by  Judge  Davies  in   doubting   the
         appellant's account, and on the aspects of the expert  report  upon
         which she relied at [43], I cannot say with certainty that, had the
         judge not erred  in  law  as  I  have  found,  the  decision  would
         inevitably have been the same.

     28. I am additionally persuaded that ground 2 is made out to a material
         extent. The  appellant  had  been  receiving  professional  medical
         treatment since April 2017 and had been in the care of the  Greater
         Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust since March 2018. She
         is under the care of a Consultant Psychiatrist and was  assigned  a
         Social Worker as her care coordinator in  respect  of  support  she
         received in the community due to her mental illness. She  had  been
         diagnosed with PTSD and  associated  depressive  symptoms  and  was
         receiving both antidepressant and antipsychotic medication. She had
         also received  EMDR  therapy.  Whilst  the  judge  was  undoubtedly
         entitled to take into  account  in  her  approach  to  the  medical
         evidence the fact that the medical professionals had either not  be
         made aware of or had  not  commented  on  the  adverse  credibility
         findings made by  Judge  Davies,  and  to  note  that  the  medical
         assessment was based  on  information  provided  by  the  appellant
         herself, the judge appears to  have  concluded  at  [48]  that  the
         symptoms assessed by the professionals were caused by "distress and
         anxiety" occasioned by the appellant's certain immigration  status.
         I do not consider that the judge was lawfully entitled  to  ascribe
         the  symptoms  exhibited  by  the   appellant,   which   had   been
         professionally diagnosed as being caused by PTSD,  to  anxiety  and
         distress. Whilst the judge was not obliged to  accept  the  medical
         evidence there was no evidential basis entitling her to, in effect,
         substitute her own  assessment  of  the  cause  of  the  particular
         symptoms presented by the appellant.


     29. I am further satisfied that ground 3 is made out. I can  deal  with
         this  point  briefly.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  have
         considered all relevant factors when determining  whether  internal
         relocation was a safe option and whether it was reasonably open  to
         the appellant given her particular circumstances and those  of  her
         dependents. Whilst the judge did take  into  account  a  number  of
         relevant factors,  she  failed  to  consider  those  identified  at
         paragraph 23 above. These were relevant and material considerations
         that had been advanced on the  appellant's  behalf  and  which  the
         judge was obliged to consider, even if only briefly. The failure to
         do so constitutes a material error of law.


     30. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 a case may be remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

      1. I have determined that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  the
         appellant's credibility are unsafe. The appeal will be remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal so that a new fact-finding exercise can  be
         undertaken. It will be for the First-tier Tribunal to determine the
         most appropriate mode of hearing the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chowdhury.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               Date 19 January 2021
