
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00169/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 15th August 2019    On 4th September 2019


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between
                                     TS
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, instructed by AP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant seeks, with permission, to challenge the determination of
    the First Tier Tribunal, promulgated on 20th May 2019, which  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum.  The  appellant's
    appeal was also dismissed on humanitarian protection, article 2, 3  and
    article 8 grounds.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born  in  1972  who  left  Sri
    Lanka (either on his own passport or a fake passport) and travelled  to
    the United Kingdom in 2018 via China whereupon  he  claimed  asylum  on
    21st June 2018.  As a Tamil he claimed he was helping the LTTE in  1987
    or alternatively in 2009.  He asserted that he was detained by the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in 2017 and 2018.  Owing to political imputation  he
    was afraid to return to Sri Lanka, specifically of the authorities.  In
    his asylum interview  the  appellant  stated  that  he  had  a  medical
    condition  and  struggled  to   remember   everything.    He   provided
    photographs of scarring  on  his  body,  but  the  Secretary  of  State
    maintained, in his refusal letter of 9th December 2018, that he had not
    provided any indication of the cause of the scars.

 3. The grounds of challenge to the First-tier Tribunal  determination  set
    out the following:

    The first ground asserted the approach to the appeal  was  procedurally
    unfair

           . the report from the Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Dhumad, stated
             that the appellant could give evidence, but he was  depressed,
             hopeless and his concentration poor. Dr Dhumad concluded  that
             the appellant was suffering from learning difficulties and was
             vulnerable and required special  adjustments  in  court.   The
             skeleton argument relied upon at the First-tier Tribunal  drew
             attention  to  the  psychiatric  report  and  the  applicant's
             vulnerability.  Despite this the Judge did not take the report
             into account when considering the appellant's account.

           . the  Judge  made  no  findings  on  whether  he  accepted  the
             diagnoses of Dr Dhumad for example PTSD or moderate depressive
             episode and only considered whether  the  appellant  had  poor
             concentration and learning difficulties.  In merely  accepting
             the respondent's assessment of Dr Dhumad's  report  the  Judge
             failed to consider paragraph 14.5 of the report.

           . the Judge did not refer to the conclusion of  Dr  Dhumad  that
             the PTSD symptoms were closely related to torture  experience.



           . the Judge made no finding  on  the  conclusion  of  Dr  Dhumad
             rejecting that the appellant was feigning symptoms.

           . Dr Dhumad had  expressly  stated  that  he  had  not  recorded
             everything said to him by the appellant but only those matters
             that he considered relevant to his assessment.

           . torture victims were frequently unable to provide a consistent
             account of their history and there may well be an  explanation
             for the inability to be consistent  other  than  the  lack  of
             credibility.

           . the impression given was that the Judge was better  placed  to
             assess the appellant's concentration and memory.

    The second ground took issue with the assessment of the  report  of  Dr
    Martin as follows:

           . at [150] of the determination the Judge noted that  Dr  Martin
             concluded at 6.1 that the scars were  typical  of  the  events
             described by the appellant of being intentionally burnt yet he
             had not claimed so.  The body of his report (5.5 - 5.7)  found
             the scars were typical of injuries cause by being deliberately
             beaten by long narrow blunt instruments as claimed.  The Judge
             made no reference to this and failed to read the report  as  a
             whole.

    The third ground  asserted  the  Judge  had  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings:

           . the Judge failed to make findings of  the  appellant's  wife's
             witness statement which corroborated the appellant's claims

           . there were no findings on the photographs of  the  appellant's
             attendance at demonstrations in Sri Lanka

           . there were no  findings  on  whether  the  appellant's  family
             members were LTTE members

           . the Judge failed to apply paragraph 339K  of  the  Immigration
             Rules such that past persecution was a  strong  indication  of
             future risk absent good reason.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge failed to adequately consider the reports of Dr Dhumad and Dr
    Martin.

 5. Mr Muquit at the hearing before me submitted that the Judge  had  given
    legally inadequate reasons for discounting the medical reports and  had
    not addressed the appellant's PTSD in terms of his  vulnerability.  The
    report was merely side lined.  Dr Martin  had  made  an  error  in  his
    report, but post hearing  had  accepted  this  mistake  and  written  a
    letter.   The  Judge  had  not  applied  KV  v  SSHD  [2019]  UKSC   10
    particularly paragraphs 21  to  22.   Nor  had  the  Judge  applied  AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD.  An assessment of cognitive impairment was not  a
    finding on PTSD. The reports should not have been disregarded.

 6. Mr Melvin apologised for the lack a Rule 24 response.  He submitted the
    grounds had little merit.  The skeleton argument from  Counsel  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal had concentrated on the suicide risk  in  terms  of
    Article 3. The Judge had the vulnerability of  the  appellant  and  the
    medical reports at  the  forefront  of  his  mind  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the account.   In  a  lengthy  decision  the  Judge  had
    assessed all of the evidence.  The challenge was merely an  attempt  to
    reargue the case.  The solicitors must  have  read  the  report  of  Dr
    Martin prior to its submission and the error  was  not  raised  at  all
    during the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Essentially  the
    Judge considered all of the evidence and found it wanting.

    Analysis

 7. The skeleton argument made no reference to a typographical error in  Dr
    Dhumad's report merely that the  psychiatric  report  and  the  medical
    evidence assisted the claim of  the  appellant  that  he  had  suffered
    previous past persecution. The main thrust  of  the  skeleton  argument
    asserted that the GJ and others (war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC) guidelines applied to the appellant and that he was at
    risk of suicide.  J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
    [2009] EWCA 362 were extensively cited.  That is not to  say  that  the
    judge erred in his approach to the medical reports.

 8. Prior to his findings the Judge referred to both  medical  reports  the
    psychiatric report from Dr S Dhumad [79] and noting that the report  of
    Dr A I Martin was a scarring report; he had had regard to both reports.
     In his assessment the  Judge  at  [110]  specifically  refers  to  the
    consideration of the medical reports as  part  of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  He specifically addressed the point  at  14.5  of  Dr  Dhumad's
    report as I have explained below.

 9. The Judge specifically recorded at [81] of his  determination  that  Dr
    Dhumad assessed the appellant as having a moderate  depressive  episode
    and suffering from PTSD symptoms.  He was also  said  to  be  suffering
    from borderline learning difficulties. The Judge noted at [82] that the
    appellant was pronounced by the medical expert as  fit  to  attend  and
    give evidence but that he was described as 'depressed, hopeless and his
    concentration is poor".  It cannot be argued that the Judge was unaware
    of the reports and did not have them at the forefront of his mind  when
    making his assessment of the evidence.

10. As recorded by the Judge at [101]  of  the  determination  his  Counsel
    accepted that there were inconsistencies in the  appellant's  evidence;
    the number of days spent in detention varied

         'from one day to fifteen days and to  four  days  in  his  evidence
         before the Tribunal.  There is also an issue as to whether  he  was
         involved with the  LTTE  in  1987  or  1999.   Nor  was  there  any
         reference to a detention in 2017.  He also accepted that there  was
         no  mention  of  any  detention  during  2018  in   his   screening
         interview'.

11. The question was whether the inconsistencies were so  fundamental  that
    it undermined the credibility. The Judge noted that Counsel referred to
    his diagnoses of PTSD and depression which undermined  his  ability  to
    remember dates correctly.

12. The Judge was fully cognisant of the mental health  conditions  in  the
    report but nonetheless  stated  'when  all  allowances  are  made,  the
    appellant has to come across as someone  who  is  telling  the  truth'.
    That discloses no legal error. The Judge appreciated the wider  context
    and Dr Dhumad had indeed confirmed that the appellant was fit to attend
    and given evidence at court.  It was open to the  Judge  to  take  into
    account the appellant's screening  interview  at  which  the  appellant
    stated that apart from an occasional headache he  had  no  disabilities
    and no medical conditions.  The Judge also noted that the appellant was
    able to give coherent answers to the questions  asked  of  him  in  the
    screening interview on 21st June 2018.   From [115] onwards  the  Judge
    carefully analysed the information  given  in  the  substantive  asylum
    interview.  The Judge noted that the appellant, had been reassured that
    he would be given an opportunity to clarify responses, and that nothing
    would be disclosed to the Sri Lankan government or other authorities in
    that country. The appellant, at the  substantive  interview,  confirmed
    that he understood everything  and  had  an  interpreter.    The  Judge
    nevertheless at [119] specifically stated that  he  took  into  account
    that  during  the  interview  the  appellant  responded  that  he   had
    depression and bad memory problems.   Crucially, the  Judge  identified
    that one month prior to his asylum interview the appellant had  made  a
    signed asylum statement on 14th October 2018 and set out his  claim  in
    some detail but there was 'no contention  in  that  statement  that  he
    suffered any memory loss'.   This was the  appellant's  own  unprompted
    evidence.

13. Thus, the  Judge  had  factored  into  his  assessment  the  issues  of
    depression and PTSD but considered the reliability of  the  account  on
    the appellant's own evidence in a written statement.   The Judge  noted
    at [122] that the account was 'not complicated', and  fairly  concluded
    that

         'he has given materially contradictory accounts with regard to  key
         events and aspects of his claim.  This was particularly so when  he
         as asked about when he first became involved with the LTTE - a core
         aspect of his claim. His replies have ranged between 1987 and  1997
         and he also referred to 2008'.

14. Specifically, the Judge found at [122]

         'these cannot simply be explained as a failure to  recollect  minor
         factual   details,   which   might   be   understandable   in   the
         circumstances.  He has  given  materially  discrepant  accounts  in
         respect of very significant events which he claims occurred  during
         his life in Sri Lanka'.

15. It is evident thus that the  Judge  did  weigh  consider  the  relevant
    evidence given by the appellant and his credibility in the light of the
    psychiatric report.  It is  a  matter  for  the  Judge  to  assess  the
    evidence, which he did in the round and it is not inevitable  that  the
    Judge must accept the explanation that the appellant's inconsistent and
    contradictory account fell to  the  psychiatric  condition.  The  Judge
    carefully highlighted the inconsistencies between the answers given  in
    his witness statement and his  asylum  interview  -  during  which  the
    appellant was given a break and confirmed that he  felt  fit  and  well
    [AIR Q62].

16. As the Judge pointed out from [129] in relation to  the  detentions  in
    his screening interview, he stated he was detained  in  1989  and  that
    then 'the problem seems to have died down a bit but he  does  not  know
    what will happen in the future', in his  asylum statement (14th October
    2018) he was arrested in June 1989 but in his substantive interview not
    only did he vary the length of time during  which  he  claimed  he  was
    detained from four to fifteen days but also the appellant then  claimed
    he had been detained in 2017  and  2018.   During  his  oral  evidence,
    having been pronounced fit to give evidence by Dr  Dhumad,  he  resiled
    from the claim that  he  was  detained  in  2017.    In  his  screening
    interview he did not refer at all to  his  2018  detention  and  indeed
    stated that he had never been detained.   Nor did the  appellant  claim
    that he encountered repercussions from the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in
    2017 [137].

17. Mere disagreement about the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  evidence,
    which is a matter for the judge, should  not  be  characterised  as  an
    error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

18. The Judge also took into account the context  in  which  the  appellant
    made his asylum application. That could not be ignored  when  assessing
    credibility. The appellant had, immediately prior to his asylum  claim,
    made  significant  efforts  to  come  to  the  UK  in  March  2018  for
    employment.  He applied for a  six-month  visa  as  a  seaman/seafarer.
    Following checks conducted by the respondent it was revealed  that  the
    letter produced by him was bogus  and  the  application  refused  under
    paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules. The appellant claimed,  as  the
    Judge recorded that the appellant wished to obtain employment in the UK
    and that he had used an agent but  was  not  aware  that  a  fraudulent
    document had been produced. It was only three months after that initial
    refusal he made his asylum claim.

19. Again at [143] the Judge specifically refers to Dr Dhumad's report  and
    the Judge accepted the respondent's submission that not much detail was
    recorded by Dr Dhumad to form the basis of a thorough  assessment.   He
    had interviewed the appellant for a matter of two hours.  Specifically,
    the assessment of cognitive impairment by Dr Dhumad was not accepted at
    14.5 of the medical report.  It is a matter for the Judge  as  to  what
    evidence he accepts. As the Judge stated at [145], Dr  Dhumad  had  not
    stated upon what basis his view of cognitive impairment was formed

         'Nor has he set out the basis for his assertion that the  appellant
         has poor concentration and learning  difficulties.   There  was  no
         reference to any language difficulties during his assessment'.

    It was entirely open to the Judge to find  a  lack  of  detail  in  the
    report; there were no underlying  psychometric  testing  for  cognitive
    impairment and 'no evidence of thought disorder'.  The Judge implicitly
    factored in the mental health problems, including PTSD and  depression,
    but did not accept, following a careful analysis of the  evidence  that
    the report substantiated that the appellant's comprehension  was  poor,
    reasoning that the appellant gave

         'a  considerable  amount  of  detail  in  respect  of  his  family,
         including his brother's and sister's  responsibilities  within  the
         LTTE.  He was also able to explain what happened  to  him  in  2008
         when he started working for the LTTE' [147].

    The Judge assessed that during the hearing  the  appellant  showed  'no
    signs of poor concentration' and 'was able to understand the  questions
    and gave appropriate and relevant answers'.   Thus,  the  Judge  having
    factored in the PTSD and mental health condition,  rightly  turned  his
    attention to the question of the thought impairment.  The Judge gave  a
    sound analysis of the medical report  and  adequate  reasoning  of  his
    rejection of the suggestion that the appellant had poor  comprehension.
    The Judge balanced the various factors but did not find  the  cognitive
    impairment was adequately assessed or reasoned  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Dhumad so as to explain the glaring inconsistencies  in  the  evidence.
    That deduction was made having already acknowledged the  mental  health
    condition, even if it  were  not  apparent  in  the  appellant  at  the
    screening interview stage.  The  appellant  had  been  assessed  by  Dr
    Dhumad as fit to give evidence despite his PTSD.  Having  recorded  the
    diagnosis at [81], the findings of PTSD and  depression  by  Dr  Dhumad
    were implicit in the findings of the Judge, who proceeded  directly  to
    the analysis of the credibility of the evidence.  It  is  not  for  the
    Judge to countermand such a diagnosis  because  he  is  not  a  medical
    professional, and he did not attempt to do so, but it was his  task  to
    assess the import of the whole report against the evidence as  a  whole
    and that is what the Judge did.  It was open to the Judge, on the basis
    of the report's detail, however, to challenge, the finding of cognitive
    impairment.  Further, that someone has PTSD does not automatically mean
    that their evidence is unreliable. It was not a  question  of  feigning
    symptoms because the Judge did not overtly  reject  the  mental  health
    difficulty.  He just did not accept that the  condition  accounted  for
    all the discrepancies disclosed. That Dr Dhumad did  not  refer  to  or
    omitted information from his report which was relayed  to  him  by  the
    appellant cannot form the basis of criticism of  the  approach  to  the
    medical evidence.

20. At the  outset  of  his  assessment  the  Judge  stated  that  he  made
    allowances for the appellant's vulnerability by stating he acknowledged
    the doctors' reports and noting  'in  assessing  his  evidence  I  make
    allowances for nerves,  the  problem  of  giving  evidence  through  an
    interpreter and the difficulty  of  remembering  precisely  details  of
    matters that happened some time ago'.  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    Judge ignored the appellant's vulnerability; instead at  the  start  of
    his assessment reminded himself of the difficulties faced  by  such  an
    appellant.  It is, however, for the Judge to make the assessment of the
    evidence and that is what he did.  Nothing in  AM  Afghanistan  [states
    that the evidence  should  not  be  considered  holistically,  and  the
    authority accepts  that  the weight  to  be  placed  upon  factors  of
    vulnerability may differ depending on the matter under appeal.   There
    was  no  criticism  recorded  either  at  the  hearing  by  Counsel  in
    attendance or subsequently by that Counsel of the procedures adopted by
    the Judge at the hearing.

21. As the Judge pointed out in relation to  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin's  report
    neither party made submissions thereon.  The Judge  was  criticised  in
    the grounds for failing to refer to the  body  of  the  report,  rather
    concentrating on the conclusion and approaching the report contrary  to
    the guidance in KV at paragraphs 21 and 22.  As held in KV:

         "21.     In para 33 of his judgment, set  out  in  para  19  above,
         Sales LJ suggested that the references in para 187 of the  Istanbul
         Protocol to the "trauma described" relate only to the mechanism  by
         which the injury is said to have been caused. That is too narrow  a
         construction of the word "trauma". It is clear that in the protocol
         the word also covers the wider circumstances in which the injury is
         said to have been sustained. Paragraph 188 of the protocol, set out
         in para 16 above, which Sales LJ had himself quoted in para  31  of
         his judgment, guides the expert  towards  the  type  of  evaluation
         which is important in assessing "the torture story". Paragraph  105
         of  the  protocol  recommends  that,  in  formulating  a   clinical
         impression for  the  purpose  of  reporting  evidence  of  torture,
         experts should ask  themselves  six  questions,  including  whether
         their findings are consistent with the alleged  report  of  torture
         and whether the clinical picture suggests  a  false  allegation  of
         torture. Paragraph 122 says:


             "The purpose of the written or oral testimony of the physician
             is to provide expert opinion on the degree  to  which  medical
             findings correlate with the  patient's  allegations  of  abuse
             ..."


         22.      In another case of alleged torture, namely SA (Somalia)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302;
         [2007] Imm AR 1 236, the Court of Appeal, by the  judgment  of  Sir
         Mark Potter, President of the Family Division, held in paras 27 and
         28 that the task for which  an  asylum-seeker  tendered  a  medical
         report was to provide "a clear statement as to the  consistency  of
         old scars found  with  the  history  given  ...,  directed  to  the
         particular injuries said to  have  occurred  as  a  result  of  the
         torture  or  other  ill  treatment  relied  on   as   evidence   of
         persecution". In paras 29 and 30 Sir Mark quoted paras 186 and  187
         of  the  Istanbul  Protocol  and  commended  them  as  particularly
         instructive for  those  requested  to  supply  medical  reports  in
         relation to alleged torture. In RT (medical reports - causation  of
         scarring) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009 the Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal in para 37 described the SA (Somalia) case as  a  landmark
         authority in the identification of the purpose of a medical  report
         in relation to alleged  torture  and  in  the  indorsement  of  the
         Istanbul Protocol."


22. Dr Marin's report did refer to the Istanbul  Protocol,  but  it  was  a
    brief report. That the body of the report considered  scarring  on  the
    back merely in one sentence at 4.3 that is 'several faint mildly hyper-
    pigmented linear scars - attributed to  being  beaten'.   Much  of  the
    report was generic in nature.  As the expert stated at 4.5  'where  the
    lesions are consistent with their attributed cause, the lesion[s] (sic)
    is nonspecific and there will be many other  alternative  causes.   For
    such lesions I have not listed every conceivable alternative cause  but
    have outline the most relevant one'.

23. The doctor proceeded to record that the appellant stated that  all  the
    scars on arms, back, legs and trunk, were inflicted in the same way and
    then that they were 'typical of injuries cause by being unwillingly and
    deliberately beaten' with long narrow blunt implements as described  by
    the claimant.  There are two points.  Bearing in mind  the  scars  were
    all considered together it is difficult to see how Dr Martin could rule
    out accidental injuries on all the scars from  other  causes,  such  as
    professional or training (the report did not reflect that the appellant
    had applied for a post as professional seaman and referred  to  fishing
    in his asylum interview), but  moreover in his conclusion  at  6.2,  Dr
    Martin  definitively stated with reference to the scars on the  back  -
    for the first time not massing all injuries together - that 'the  scars
    on the back, are typical of the events described  by  the  claimant  of
    being intentionally burnt'.

24. Rightly, and without error of law the Judge noted 'However, as noted by
    Dr Martin at 3.6, the appellant never claimed to have been  burnt.   It
    is thus not clear why he described  intentional  burning'.   The  Judge
    clearly read the report and  at  [153]  found  that  having  failed  to
    mention his detention of 2018, the appellant  had  supplied  Dr  Martin
    with a fictitious account that the scars emanated from his detention in
    2018.

25. The Judge's assessment did not depart from the guidance in KV.  It  was
    open to the Judge to find that the medical findings did  not  correlate
    with the account of the appellant. On the  evidence  before  the  Judge
    there was a contradiction  in  the  report.   Dr  Martin's  report  was
    submitted by the appellant and must have been read prior  to  provision
    in evidence.  There was a lack of consistency and detail in the report.
      I note subsequently there was a further letter submitted by Dr Martin
    attempting to correct his report, but the Judge  cannot  be  criticised
    for evidence not before him.  The criticism that the Judge should  have
    looked at the content of the report is  not  borne  out  by  a  careful
    reading of the report as I have outlined above. It was the summary  and
    conclusion that gave the interpretation as to the scars on the back.

26. Nothing in the third ground takes the matter forward.  The  Judge  does
    not have to refer to every piece of evidence  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341:  judges  needed  to  resolve  the  key
    conflicts in evidence and  explain  in  clear  and  brief  terms  their
    reasons  for  preferring  one  case  to  the  other  so  parties  could
    understand why they  had  lost.   That  is  what  the  judge  did.   He
    addressed the evidence of the live witness as being vague.   The  Judge
    carefully assessed the claim of the appellant himself in the context of
    the evidence overall  as  set  out  at  [156]  'having  considered  the
    evidence as a whole' he rejected the appellant's claim that he left Sri
    Lanka to seek safe haven in the UK, finding instead that he 'came  here
    for employment'.  With reference to the photographic evidence the Judge
    found that the appellant was not perceived as a threat, not  registered
    as a member of the TGTE, not on any computerised stop  list  and  there
    were no outstanding court orders against him.  In terms of his activity
    in the UK, as recorded,  Counsel  accepted  that  these  would  not  be
    sufficient on their own to found an asylum claim.

27. As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)

         "(1)     Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation
         of the conclusions on the central  issue  on  which  an  appeal  is
         determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision  as
         a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by  the
         judge.

         (2)      Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the
         requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
         Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
         finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  Country
         Guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
         judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
         or her."

28. The grounds do not disclose a material legal error.  The reasoning  was
    sound.  On the evidence, the conclusions were open to  the  Judge.   He
    addressed the two medical reports and found the appellant had  in  fact
    submitted a deceitful application to achieve his purpose;  overall  the
    claim lack credibility. As confirmed at [19] in UT (Sri  Lanka)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1095, mere disagreement with a decision  is  insufficient  and
    that

         "Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department at [30]:


             "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirections
             simply because they might have reached a different conclusion
             on the facts or expressed themselves differently.""


29. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and the   determination will stand.  The appeal  of  AS  remains
    dismissed.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed                                         Date 23rd August 2019


         Helen Rimington

    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

