
                 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00690/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                             |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms A. Nizami of counsel, instructed by J D
Spicer Zeb                      Solicitors
For the Respondent:                   Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1998, is a national of  Afghanistan.
    It is his case that his brother was in the Afghan police force and that
    the Taliban sent him two letters warning him to leave the police force.
    It is also his case that when his brother did not do so, the  Appellant
    was abducted by the Taliban and ill-treated on two occasions  but  that
    he was able to escape from them on the second occasion after they  were
    attacked by American or Afghan special forces. His father then arranged
    for him to flee from Afghanistan.

2.   The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 May 2013  and  applied
    for asylum. It was accepted that at this time he was only fifteen years
    old.  His application was refused  on  25  February  2015  but  he  was
    granted leave to remain, as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  child,
    until 1 September 2015. At that time the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 did not provide him with a right of appeal against  the
    decision to refuse him asylum. He was not entitled  to  appeal  against
    this decision. He made a second asylum application on  18  August  2015
    but his application was refused on 13 January 2016. This  time  he  was
    entitled to a right of appeal, which he exercised. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer dismissed his  appeal  in  a  decision,  promulgated  on  4
    January 2018.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted him permission to appeal on 24 January
    2018.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision  below.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer accepted that the grounds of appeal taken  in  their
    totality indicated that First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer  had  erred  in
    law.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   It is my view that the decision reached by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Freer is fundamentally undermined by a number of characteristics of his
    general approach to the Appellant's appeal.

6.   Firstly, he failed to consider the evidence given by the  Appellant  in
    the context of any objective evidence about the  present  situation  in
    Afghanistan. This included, but was not limited to, the fact  that  the
    Taliban did target and threaten members of the security  forces  in  an
    effort to persuade them to resign, as confirmed  at  page  328  of  the
    Appellant's Objective Bundle of Documents which referred to category  K
    of the UNHCR's potential risk profiles.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer  also  failed  to  give  any,  or  any
    adequate, reasons for a number of his findings. One of these related to
    the question of the Appellant's nationality. At  paragraph  24  of  his
    decision he stated  that  "while  [he]  had  a  lingering  doubt  about
    nationality, [the] Appellant knew enough  to  persuade  the  respondent
    that he was Afghan and not a citizen of Pakistan". He then went  on  to
    assert that "it is easy to pass for either as he is a Pashtun  who  was
    living in the border area". In addition, he found at  paragraph  40  of
    his decision that "it is likely that [the Appellant and his family] can
    be reunited and all travel safely to Pakistan together and so there  is
    no basis for a protection claim".

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer did not provide any substantive  reason
    for concluding  that  the  Appellant  was  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  or
    challenge the very detailed findings as  to  nationality  made  by  the
    Respondent. The Appellant had given full  and  cogent  answers  to  all
    questions posed about Afghanistan during his asylum interview  when  he
    was only fifteen years old and First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer did  not
    provide any reasons to go behind  these  answers  and  this  knowledge.
    Neither did he explain the basis upon which he and his family would  be
    entitled to protection in Pakistan.

9.   In paragraph  6  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freer
    purports to remind himself of the approach recommended in Karanakaran v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] Imm AR 282 but in the
    substance of his decision, he fails to adopt the  approach  adopted  by
    the Court of Appeal in that case. In particular,  in  paragraph  21  he
    found that there was  no  cogent  proof  of  trouble  beyond  what  the
    Appellant told the doctor, which means it is  reported  hearsay.  Given
    the  evidential  difficulties  which  the  UN  Committee  on   Refugees
    recognise  that  asylum  seekers  face  and  the  express   advice   in
    Karanakaran it was necessary for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  give
    at least some weight  to  the  medical  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant unless he gave cogent reasons for not doing so.

10.  In paragraph 27 of his decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Freer  also
    stated that "if the trafficking theory is correct, it is not supportive
    of an asylum claim without more". The only reference to trafficking was
    contained in paragraph 82 of Dr. Arnold's report, where  he  said  that
    "it would be speculative to say, without more information, whether  the
    agents were people smugglers or traffickers in human beings,  but  [the
    Appellant's] behaviour is, in my opinion, likely to have  been  similar
    to that of trafficked persons in respect of that control". This  was  a
    remark which was obiter to his overall  medical  opinion  and  went  no
    further than suggesting that whether the Appellant had been  trafficked
    or smuggled the "agents" would have "controlled"  him.   There  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant had actually been smuggled  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer gave no reasons for believing that  the  Appellant
    had been "trafficked" to  the  United  Kingdom,  as  opposed  to  being
    "smuggled" here.  In addition, neither the Appellant nor the Respondent
    had suggested that he had been trafficked or provided any evidence that
    he had been. In addition,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freer  gave  no
    reasons for stating in  paragraph  20  that  "the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant being a victim of trafficking is more than hinted at".

11.  The lack of reasoning also infects the Judge's  reasoning  in  relation
    to the on-going contact that the Appellant  may  still  have  with  his
    parents and other family members in Afghanistan. There was no  evidence
    to suggest that the Appellant was still in touch with them.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer asserted that an independent local official or NGO
    could have been used to trace his family but had pointed to no evidence
    to indicate that this  was  the  case  and  no  detail  of  which  such
    organisations were being referred to. In contrast, there  was  evidence
    from the Red  Cross,  the  international  agency  charged  with  family
    tracing, that due to the security situation in Afghanistan such tracing
    was not presently possible.

12.  The Judge also failed to provide any  cogent  reasoning  for  asserting
    that if parents paid for their child to be taken to Europe  they  would
    be able to keep in contact with them.  There  were  also  a  number  of
    findings which were unsupported by any evidence, such as the assumption
    that the Appellant's PTSD would diminish over time or that the  Taliban
    would not have tortured him  in  the  manner  described.  In  addition,
    drawing an adverse inference from the fact that the Appellant initially
    fled  to  Pakistan  was  not  consistent  with  the  location  of   the
    Appellant's home province.

13.  There is also no indication that, having accepted  that  the  Appellant
    was a vulnerable witness, the Judge took any steps to ensure  that  his
    vulnerability did not prevent him from having a fair hearing.

14.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer  did  err
    in law in his decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judges Freer, Carroll, Clarke, and Coll  for  a  de
    novo hearing.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


