
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00833/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th October 2017                    |On 9th October 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S R]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms F ALLEN (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the Secretary of  State"  who  is  the
    appellant in this matter and to "the Claimant".  This is  an  error  of
    law hearing.  I consider whether or not there is a  material  error  of
    law in the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cameron)  ("FTT")
    promulgated on 30th December 2016.

2.   The Claimant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  claimed  asylum  on  the
    grounds that he was a Christian  (which  was  accepted)  who  had  been
    accused of possessing anti-Islamic material which the FTT found  to  be
    lacking in credibility.  The FTT further took into account the  4  year
    delay in making a claim for asylum.  In the  concluding  paragraph  the
    FTT "allowed the appeal" although it was clear from  the  decision  and
    reasons that the FTT intended to dismiss the appeal.

3.   At the hearing before me it was agreed  by  both  representatives  that
    the FTT had made a typographical error by stating that the  appeal  was
    allowed when in fact it should have been  dismissed.   I  am  satisfied
    that this can be construed as a perverse decision and thus an error  of
    law. The Secretary of State's grounds are made out. The main issue  was
    how the matter should be resolved.  Ms Allen produced a helpful Rule 24
    Notice in which she set out  the  various  options  and  quite  rightly
    pointed out that were I to set aside  and  remake  the  decision,  that
    would in effect deprive the Claimant of  his right  of  appeal  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In the grounds of application for permission  the
    Secretary of State cited (Katsonga "slip rule"; FTT's  general  powers)
    [2015] UKUT 228 that Rule 31 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules
    could not be used to reverse the effect  of  the  decision.   This  was
    reiterated by FTJ McGinty who granted permission to appeal.

4.   Whilst utilising the appellate process is  highly  inefficient  way  of
    rectifying what is obviously a typing error, it seems that  I  am  left
    with no option but to return the decision to be  re-determined  by  the
    FTT and to preserve the findings of fact made. I decline to direct that
    the matter be referred back to FTJ Cameron in light of the comments  in
    Katsonga.

Decision

5.   There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.  The decision is sent back to the First -tier Tribunal at Taylor
    House for redetermination.




                               Signed   Date 6.10.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 6.10.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
