

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00859/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th July 2018                        |On 19th July 2018                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     RH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S. Khan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  22nd
    March 2018, dismissed his claim for protection.

 2.   The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is   set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs 1-2, and in the papers before the Tribunal.
    The Appellant is an Iraqi national who  originates  from  the  IKR.  He
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on the 17th February 2017  and
    travelled to Hungary where he  was  fingerprinted.  He  travelled  from
    there to other European countries and claimed asylum on the  19th  July
    2017. The screening interview was undertaken  on  the  19th  July  (see
    Annex A) and corrections to that interview were noted and reproduced as
    Annex B. A substantive interview took place on 12 October 2017 and  set
    out at Annex C in the Respondent's bundle. There is no dispute that  he
    was a minor when he entered the United Kingdom.

 3. The factual basis of the Appellant's claim is briefly summarised in the
    determination at paragraph  13.  The  Appellant's  family  lived  in  a
    village within the Sulaymaniyah Governorate in the IKR. He claims  that
    his brother was killed in a family blood feud and that his  father  and
    mother as a consequence had to leave Iraq for their safety to  go  live
    in Iran. The Appellant stated that he was left to live with an uncle in
    Iraq. His uncle arranging him to leave Iraq with the assistance  of  an
    agent.

 4. The Respondent refused his claim for protection in  a  decision  letter
    dated 5th January 2018. There was no dispute that the Appellant was  an
    Iraqi national and that he was of Kurdish ethnicity and  had  moved  to
    the IKR after the age of five. However  the  decision  letter  did  not
    accept as credible that had been involved in a  blood  feud  given  his
    lack of knowledge nor did the respondent accept that the Appellant  had
    given a reasonable account as to why his family would leave him  behind
    when they were fleeing for their safety. Furthermore it was  considered
    unreasonable that he would leave his home to seek safety without either
    his Iraqi nationality certificate or his Iraqi civil status ID  (CSID).
    The rest of the decision letter made reference to  the  feasibility  of
    return to Iraq applying the country guidance and the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD] 2017] EWCA Civ 944. At  paragraphs
    139 - 147 his claim was considered under Article 8.

 5. He appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 19th February 2018
    and in a decision promulgated on the 22nd March  2018  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 6. The judge set out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs 23  -  38.
    They can be summarised as follows. The judge found that there were  two
    significant areas that led him not to accept the  Appellant's  account.
    Firstly, the Appellant was 15 years old when the claimed blood feud had
    started and that if his account was accurate and his  family  had  been
    caused significant inconvenience and danger as a  result  of  the  feud
    including the death of his brother and given the Appellant's  age,  the
    judge stated that he would have expected the  Appellant  to  have  some
    idea with regard to what his family thought the blood feud  was  about.
    He found that the Appellant's lack  of  knowledge  about  the  violence
    which had led to the death of his brother was implausible  (see  [27]).
    Secondly, the judge rejected his account as being "even less plausible"
    that his mother and father would leave that Iran and  not  taking  with
    them. The judge found that by leaving him with his  uncle  who  was  at
    this point the "centre of the blood feud" was implausible. He found  it
    even more so relying on the fact that the  Appellant  stated  that  his
    father and mother would not explain to him why they  were  leaving  him
    with his uncle while they left for a place of safety  (see  [28]).  The
    judge found the Appellant to be "vaguely inconsistent" in  his  account
    as to how many times have been targeted in  the  blood  feud.  He  made
    reference to his witness statement that the tribe had come to his house
    five or six times (paragraph 10) but found that that  was  inconsistent
    as that detail had not been mentioned in the asylum interview. He found
    further inconsistency from paragraph 11 in the  witness  statement  and
    found that also to be inconsistent with the previous  paragraph  namely
    either the tribe attended at the house five or six times or they simply
    passed by. The judge at (30) did accept as a general  proposition  that
    the background information was consistent with family  blood  feuds  in
    the IKR. He also made reference to parts of the account  given  by  the
    Appellant which he  found  not  to  be  inconsistent  contrary  to  the
    decision letter.  However  at  [31]  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's account as to the family being involved in a blood feud was
    credible. At [32] the judge stated that he had given "due weight in the
    Appellant's favour when assessing his credibility to the fact that  the
    Appellant would have been a child of approximately 15 or 16  years  old
    at the time of some of these incidents." At  [33]  he  found  that  the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum adversely affected his  credibility
    but this was only one feature in the case.

 7. At paragraphs 36 - 38 the judge considered feasibility of  return.  The
    judge purported to apply the relevant country guidance and the Court of
    Appeal  decision  (as  cited)  and  at   [38]   applied   the   factual
    circumstances. He found that the Appellant had lived  in  the  IKR  and
    that he had not accepted his account as to why he  had  left  Iraq.  He
    also did not accept that his parents had left Iraq nor that he did  not
    know where his uncle had lived. He also found that the Appellant had  a
    CSID document until taken off him in Hungary and this was a case  where
    the Appellant would be able to reacquire the necessary  CSID  documents
    to allow him to live in the IKR.

 8. At paragraph 39 - 42 of the decision the judge considered Article 8 but
    reached the conclusion that he could not succeed on these  grounds  and
    that return to Iraq was proportionate. Thus  the  judge  dismissed  his
    appeal.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge E M Simpson  on  the  24th
    April 2018.

10. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.  Miss  Khan  appeared
    before the Upper Tribunal and relied upon the grounds as drafted. I was
    also able to  hear  submissions  from  Mr  Diwycnz,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.  I  also  had  sight  of  some
    additional medical evidence that post-dated the hearing.

11. After having had the opportunity of hearing the  oral  submissions  and
    being directed to the medical evidence before the Tribunal, I indicated
    to the parties that I was satisfied that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal demonstrated the making of a material error of  law  and  that
    the decision should be set aside.

12. I shall  therefore  set  out  the  reasons  why  I  have  reached  that
    conclusion from the material that is before me.

13. The first ground of appeal relates to a procedural irregularity, namely
    the judge's failure to adjourn the hearing. It is  submitted  that  the
    judge erred in law by refusing the adjournment given that neither party
    had objected to that course of action. Furthermore,  it  was  submitted
    that the judge misapplied the current procedure rules when dealing with
    the application to adjourn and did not consider dealing with the  case"
    fairly and justly" as set out in the current rules.

14. The judge considered the issue of whether  the  proceedings  should  be
    adjourned at paragraphs 14 - 16 of the decision. The judge records that
    an application was made to adjourn the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was displaying signs of mental illness and it  was  submitted
    that a psychiatric report might assist the proceedings.  At  paragraphs
    15 - 16 the judge set out his reasoning to refuse the adjournment.  The
    judge stated that the information provided to the  legal  advisers  was
    information that had been provided by the staff at the care home  where
    the Appellant was currently living and that "little further information
    was forthcoming" from  his  Counsel  other  than  the  matters  already
    raised. The judge made reference to the  submissions  made  by  counsel
    that the Appellant had been "difficult to  engage  with"  but  had  not
    submitted that she could not take instructions. The judge observed that
    those concerns already been drawn to the attention of the GP is set out
    in a letter and that the GP's view is that the behaviour is  consistent
    with a diagnosis of depression  for  which  he  prescribed  appropriate
    medication. Therefore at [16] in the light of the diagnosis of  the  GP
    the judge found that there was "no  evidential  basis  to  adjourn  the
    case". He found that the GP had considered the symptoms and that he was
    in the best position to give an opinion as to  the  likely  cause.  The
    judge found that the details given all appeared to him to be consistent
    with those of an  18-year-old  facing  the  stress  of  ongoing  asylum
    hearings. He went on to state that  he  had  considered  the  direction
    given in the Tribunal procedure rules as to adjournments and that  "the
    overriding principle are the interests of justice."



15. I have therefore considered the relevant Procedure Rules.  The 2014
    Procedure Rules Rule 4(3) (h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn a
    hearing. The Tribunal has wide case management powers as set out below.
    Case management powers
    4.-(1) Subject to the provisions of the 2007 Act and any other
    enactment, the Tribunal may
    regulate its own procedure.
    (2) The Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct or
    disposal of proceedings at any
    time, including a direction amending, suspending or setting aside an
    earlier direction.
    (a) 1971 c.80
    6
    (3) In particular, and without restricting the general powers in
    paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal
    may-
    (a) extend or shorten the time for complying with any rule, practice
    direction or direction;
    (b) consolidate or hear together two or more sets of proceedings or
    parts of proceedings
    raising common issues;
    (c) permit or require a party to amend a document;
    (d) permit or require a party or another person to provide documents,
    information, evidence
    or submissions to the Tribunal or a party;
    (e) provide for a particular matter to be dealt with as a preliminary
    issue;
    (f) hold a hearing to consider any matter, including a case management
    issue;
    (g) decide the form of any hearing;
    (h) adjourn or postpone a hearing;
    (i) require a party to produce a bundle for a hearing;
    (j) stay (or, in Scotland, sist) proceedings;
    (k) transfer proceedings to another court or Tribunal if that other
    court or Tribunal has
    jurisdiction in relation to the proceedings and-
    (i) because of a change of circumstances since the proceedings were
    started, the
    Tribunal no longer has jurisdiction in relation to the proceedings; or
    (ii) the Tribunal considers that the other court or Tribunal is a more
    appropriate forum for
    the determination of the case; or
    (l) suspend the effect of its own decision pending the determination by
    the Tribunal or the
    Upper Tribunal of an application for permission to appeal against, and
    any appeal or
    review of, that decision.


16.  Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives under the Rules which the
    Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any power under
    the Rules.


    2.-(1) The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly
    and justly.
    (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
    (a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to the
    importance of the case, the
    complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of
    the parties and of the
    Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the
    proceedings;
    (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able to
    participate fully in the
    proceedings;
    (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and
    (e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of
    the issues.
    (3) The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the overriding objective
    when it-
    (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or
    (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.
    (4) Parties must-
    (a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and
    (b) co-operate with the Tribunal generally.



17.  It follows that they are the issues to be considered on an adjournment
    application as well. The overriding objective is deal with cases fairly
    and justly. This is defined as including "(a) dealing with the case in
    ways which are proportionate to the importance of the case, the
    complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of
    the parties and of the Tribunal; (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and
    seeking flexibility in the proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is
    practicable, that the parties are able to participate fully in the
    proceedings; (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal
    effectively; (e) avoiding delay so far as compatible with proper
    consideration of the issues".


18.  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was held
    that If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several respects:
    these include a failure to take into account all material
    considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to intrude;
    denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply the
    correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in most cases the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the
    test to be applied is that of fairness: was there any deprivation of
    the affected party's right to a fair hearing?


19. I also have in mind, of course, what was said by the Court of Appeal in
    the judgment of Moses LJ in the well-known case of SH (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 :
    "The principle applicable to the request for an adjournment to adduce
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant was not in dispute. It is
    fundamental that the parties should be allowed to answer adverse
    material by evidence as well as argument (see, e.g., In Re. D [1996] AC
    593 at 603) and all the more so where the subject matter, such as a
    claim for asylum, demands the highest standards of fairness."(See
    paragraph 8).


20. When applied to the particular facts in this case, I have considered
    the documentation that was before the Tribunal. It is plain that on 9
    February 2018 (received by the Tribunal on 12 February) the solicitor
    concerned raised issues concerning his client's mental health and that
    they required the medical evidence in support. Attached to that letter
    was a letter from the place where the Appellant was currently residing
    as a young person in care. It was a letter that set out a number of
    significant matters including the "dramatic decline" in his behaviour
    which was then set out within the letter. There was also reference to
    the Appellant having seen his GP and having made disclosures there and
    that a diagnosis of depression was given but that he was to be reviewed
    in a couple of weeks. The GP stated that it did not rule out psychosis.
    The application for an adjournment was refused on the basis that the
    medical evidence did not state that he was unfit to attend. It does not
    appear that any consideration was given to the effect or otherwise of
    the matters set out in the attached correspondence which may give rise
    to issues of vulnerability and the effect upon any evidence being
    given.


21. It is plain also from the determination that Counsel who was instructed
    on behalf the Appellant raised issues as to the Appellant's well-being
    and his ability to engage with the proceedings. Thus the basis of the
    application to adjourn the hearing was for the provision of a
    psychiatric report to assist the parties and the Tribunal to reach a
    conclusion regarding his current mental health and the concerns that
    had been expressly raised by those who were in charge of caring or
    looking after him.


22. I have set out earlier the decision to refuse the adjournment. It
    appears that the judge placed weight in reliance upon the diagnosis of
    the GP however there was no report from the GP and the information had
    come "second-hand" in the letter from those who had the care of the
    Appellant. That letter made it plain that the diagnosis had not been
    formally made and that a review was to be undertaken. Furthermore, it
    was incumbent upon the judge to consider the annexed letter from the
    home manager setting out the description of the Appellant's behaviour
    and the "dramatic decline" that they had viewed in relation to the
    Appellant's mental health. Whilst the judge considered that the
    behavioural issues outlined in that letter were consistent with an 18-
    year-old facing the stress of an asylum hearing that ignored in my
    judgement the history and factual background set out by the home
    manager in the letter. The information raised real concerns as to the
    Appellant's mental state and there was a lack of information before the
    First-tier Tribunal as to his current functioning but importantly, the
    impact of that mental state on his ability to give evidence in his
    appeal and the effect this would have on any evidence that could be
    given.


23. In my judgement the procedural irregularity led to the position that
    the Appellant had not been given the opportunity to provide expert
    medical evidence and that this was relevant in making an assessment of
    the credibility or otherwise of his evidence. Where, as in this case,
    the Appellant was the main source of the evidence, given the potential
    vulnerability of the Appellant, his relatively young age and recent
    deteriorating mental health, the adverse credibility findings were
    arguably unsafe. As Miss Khan submits the judge when making reference
    to his vulnerability at [17] only identified his vulnerability in the
    light of his age and not in the light of his mental health.


24. I am therefore satisfied that the decision discloses a material error
    of law and must be set aside. As to the remaking the decision in the
    majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal when setting aside the decision
    will be able to re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, the
    Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper
    Tribunal at para 7.2 recognises that it may not be possible for the
    Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied
    that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

25. Given the nature of the error of law identified in the preceding
    paragraphs and that as a result of the procedural irregularity this has
    led to the findings of fact being unsafe, it is appropriate to remit
    the case the First-tier Tribunal for a full fact-finding determination
    to be carried out. It is not be necessary to consider further the
    findings of the judge which related to feasibility of return as that
    issue was also dependent upon the findings of fact made by the judge
    which have now been set aside. That issue will also be considered in
    the light of the most recent country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 002129IAC).



Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the appeal is allowed; the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall be set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed [pic]
                                Date: 17th July 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds






