
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00614/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2019                       |On 5 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel, instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M R Oliver ("the judge"), promulgated on 21 March  2019,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 21 December 2018, refusing his protection and human  rights
    claims.  These claims arose as a result of further representations  put
    in in September  2018  following  a  previous  unsuccessful  claim  and
    subsequent appeal.

 2. The essence of the Appellant's protection claim was that he was related
    to a prominent member of Jamaat-e-Islami in Bangladesh  and  that  this
    individual, Mr S (his paternal grandfather), had  been  imprisoned  and
    sentenced to  death  in  relation  to  allegations  of  war  crimes  in
    Bangladesh's past.  The Respondent, and indeed the previous judge,  had
    rejected the relationship.  In light  of  this,  and  in  refusing  the
    latest  protection  claims,  the  Respondent  had  also  rejected   the
    Appellant's claims to have been genuinely involved in politics, both in
    Bangladesh and, significantly, in the United Kingdom.

 3. On the basis of what the judge clearly considered to be  a  significant
    volume of evidence, he found that the Appellant was in fact related  to
    Mr S (para. 34). Notwithstanding this favourable finding the judge went
    on to conclude that the Appellant's claim was not made out.   This  was
    on the basis of a number of factors. It was  said  that  an  unreliable
    arrest warrant had been produced; there was no evidence to suggest that
    the Bangladeshi authorities would be aware  of  or  interested  in  any
    United  Kingdom-based  activities;  and  that  there  was  no  reliable
    evidence  to  associate  the  Appellant  with  the  activities  of  his
    grandfather.  It was also said that the late timing of the  Appellant's
    protection claim counted against his overall credibility.  It  is  also
    of some note that the judge expressly declined to make a finding as  to
    whether the Appellant's United Kingdom activities were genuine or not.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The succinct grounds  of  appeal  place  significant  emphasis  on  the
    assertion that once the judge had found that the Appellant was  related
    to Mr S as claimed, he then failed to factor this in to the claim as  a
    whole, having regard to political activities in Bangladesh and in  this
    country, which in turn had to be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    country information.

 5. Permission to appeal was duly  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew on 12 April 2019.



The hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Jorro relied on his skeleton  argument  and
    the  grounds  of  appeal.   In  essence  he  submitted  that  once  the
    favourable finding on the claimed relationship had been made, the judge
    was then bound  to  take  full  account  of  this  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim to have been politically involved,
    the extent of those activities, and the nature of any risk presented to
    him as a result.  Mr Jorro submitted that the judge had  simply  failed
    to undertake this important step and that none of the specific  adverse
    findings made could go to save the initial fundamental error.

 7. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had considered all of the evidence in
    the round and the findings made  had  been  open  to  him.   There  was
    enough, he submitted, for this decision to be sustainable.



Decision on error of law

 8. I conclude that the judge did materially err in law in the way  clearly
    set out by Mr Jorro in his grounds and skeleton argument.

 9. It is clear to me that the issue of the Appellant's relationship to  Mr
    S was of crucial importance to his claim  as  a  whole.   I  accept  Mr
    Jorro's submission that once a favourable finding on  the  relationship
    had been made, it was therefore inherently more likely (although not of
    course decisive) that the Appellant would have been genuinely  involved
    in political activities both in Bangladesh and this country.  Issues of
    risk as a result of his profile would have had to have been assessed in
    light of this.  In my view, the judge has simply failed  to  factor  in
    his finding on the relationship  to  the  other  core  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's claim as it was put to him.

10. As I read the decision, there is no  assessment  by  the  judge  as  to
    whether the fact of the relationship and the nature of Mr  S's  profile
    would have been relevant to any political involvement by the  Appellant
    himself.  There was no consideration of whether the relationship,  when
    seen  in  its  proper  context,  would  have  caused  the   Bangladeshi
    authorities to have an adverse interest in the Appellant.

11. It is clear that the judge failed to take the relationship into account
    when assessing whether the Appellant's undisputed  activities  in  this
    country were genuine or not because of course  the  judge  declined  to
    make any finding on motivation (para. 36).  I regard that  as  being  a
    significant omission in and of itself.  In my  view,  the  question  of
    whether the Appellant had  been  genuinely  involved  in  politics  was
    relevant to the way in which the Bangladeshi authorities might perceive
    him, particularly in light of the country information that  was  before
    the judge.

12. I recognise that the judge did address the issue of the relationship in
    para. 37, but having read the relevant passage it is clear to  me  that
    he did not assess this important factor on an appropriate basis. Rather
    it appears as though he had been looking for  some  connection  between
    the crimes allegedly committed by the grandfather  of  himself  in  the
    past and the Appellant himself.  This of course  was  artificial  given
    that the grandfather's alleged actions would have occurred decades ago.



13. The judge was in my view entitled to have regard to the experiences  of
    other family members, but that does not go to save the  decision  as  a
    whole from the effects of the errors I have set out.

14. The same applies to the judge's consideration  of  the  timing  of  the
    protection claim at para. 38,  and  indeed  his  consideration  of  the
    arrest warrant at para. 35. In respect of the latter  point,  this  was
    and is a problematic issue for the  Appellant,  but  it  simply  cannot
    render the judge's errors immaterial in the context of the  Appellant's
    case as a whole.

15. A further point on materiality arises from the country information that
    I am  satisfied  was  cited  to  the  judge.   Having  looked  at  this
    information for myself it is clear  that  the  Bangladeshi  authorities
    have and continue to have a significant adverse interest  in  political
    opponents.  In particular, there is  country  information  to  indicate
    that relatives of those involved  in  Jamaat-e-Islami  have  themselves
    been specifically targeted (see,  for  example,  page  325-326  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).

16. In summary if, as he should have done, the judge had properly  factored
    in the finding on the relationship into the other core elements of  the
    Appellant's claim, there is a real possibility that the  outcome  would
    have been different.

17. In light of this, I set the judge's  decision  aside,  subject  to  any
    preserved findings of fact (see below).



Disposal

18. Having heard from both representatives, I have decided  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Although  the  default  position  is
    that cases will be dealt with in the Upper  Tribunal,  in  this  appeal
    there is a significant amount of fact-finding to be undertaken.

19. It is clear that the  judge's  findings  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    political  involvement,  together  with   the   conclusions   resulting
    therefrom, are unsound.

20. However, the judge's clear  finding  that  the  Appellant  is  in  fact
    related to Mr S was reached after  consideration  of  a  good  deal  of
    evidence.  The  errors  I  have  identified  do  not  impinge  on  this
    particular finding and it shall stand.

21. I appreciate the  potential  difficulties  facing  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judges when confronted with preserved findings on  a  remitted  appeal.
    Here though, the preserved finding is limited  and  should  present  no
    material difficulties for a  careful  consideration  of  the  remaining
    "live" issues in the case.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside, subject to the preserved finding set  out  in  para.  20  of
this Decision.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

Signed        [pic]             Date: 31 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted for a  rehearing,  subject  to  the  single
         preserved finding of fact set out in para. 20 of this Decision;

      2. The remitted hearing shall not be reheard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge M R Oliver
