
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00552/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th January 2019                           |On 29th January 2019          |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     PB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is  an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  with
    permission granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal  on  21st  November
    2018.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was by a Sri Lankan Appellant
    who had sought asylum on the basis that he was of  continuing  interest
    to the authorities in Sri Lanka because of his family's  links  to  the
    LTTE and  in  particular  his  brother's  continuing  interest  to  the
    authorities.  That brother has been given refugee status in the UK.

 3. Judge Devittie dismissed the  appeal  and,  in  a  brief  Decision  and
    Reasons, gave no adequate consideration to the brother's situation  and
    the fact that he is of continuing interest. That is clearly relevant to
    this Appellant's situation.  He also failed to deal adequately with the
    medical evidence concerning the Appellant's scars.

 4. The Judge refers to the medical report at paragraph 7 of  the  Decision
    and Reasons where he says "it is clear from the medical report that the
    doctor was not able to give a date as to when the injuries  could  have
    occurred nor was he able to  rule  out  in  each  instance  that  these
    injuries could have been sustained accidentally.  In other  words  they
    were equally consistent with having been caused by  accidental  means".
    In fact that does not accurately reflect what the  expert  said.   That
    report is contained in the Appellant's bundle and at  page  38  of  the
    bundle  in  the  "Summary  and  Conclusions"  section  the  expert,  Dr
    Izquierdo-Martin, says that the scars are "consistent/highly consistent
    with injuries intentionally and unwillingly caused by  a  third  party.
    This means that  they  are  not  fully  specific  and  other  alternate
    explanations are  also  possible,  such  as  accidental  mechanisms  of
    injury; however in my opinion this possibility is less likely  in  view
    of  the  appearance  of  the  scars,  which  they  did  not  show   any
    inconsistencies with the description of events".

 5. For those reasons I find that the First-tier Decision  and  Reasons  is
    fatally flawed and must be set aside in its entirety.

 6. Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State accepted  that  was  the
    case and both representatives agreed that the appropriate  way  forward
    was for this case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
    rehearing on all issues by any judge other than  Judge  Devittie.   The
    appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.

Decision

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    Decision and Reasons is set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a full rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 18th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
