
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/00275/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2019                     |On 19 March 2019                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                  NAM TRAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet promulgated on  13  December  2018  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's protection appeal.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.


3.   It is common ground before me that the decision in the appeal  requires
    to be set aside and the decision in the appeal remade before the First-
    tier Tribunal by any Judge other than Judge Sweet. In the circumstances
    it is unnecessary to rehearse the Appellant's immigration  history,  or
    to set out in any great detail the basis of his claim for protection.


4.   It is enough to note for present purposes that in support of his  claim
    for protection the Appellant referred to activities both in Vietnam and
    political activities in the United Kingdom.


5.   The latter activities - the so-called 'sur  place'  activities  -  were
    the consideration of findings adverse to the Appellant's overall  claim
    at paragraph 32 of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    However, it is not possible to identify any findings in respect of  the
    Appellant's account of the events that he claimed had befallen  him  in
    Vietnam, and had prompted his flight from that country.


6.   The Judge, under the heading 'Findings and Decision'  appears  for  the
    main part to have set out a  rehearsal  of  the  Appellant's  narrative
    account.  In so doing the Judge commented twice in respect of section 8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004:
    he notes that there are doubts in respect of credibility because of the
    delay in claiming asylum (paragraph 32); he also notes there are doubts
    as to credibility because of the Appellant's failure to  claim  asylum,
    or otherwise  seek  protection,  en  route  to  the  United  Kingdom  -
    including when  passing  through  European  countries  (paragraph  35).
    Although the Judge expresses doubts as to credibility, he nowhere takes
    this forward into any clear findings - or  indeed  any  findings  -  in
    respect of the narrative account.


7.   In the grounds for permission to appeal Mr Khan  has  suggested  it  is
    implicit that the Judge accepted the  Appellant's  account.  I  do  not
    consider that the Decision can bear that interpretation.  It  seems  to
    me, unfortunately, that the Judge has  quite  simply  omitted  to  make
    findings in respect of key elements of the account.


8.   In those circumstances, the parties are  agreed  on  the  outcome.  The
    Appellant's account has not  been  adequately  considered,  and  it  is
    appropriate that the appeal be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal for
    the decision to be remade. I decide accordingly.


Notice of Decision

9.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


10.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet,  with
    all issues at large.


11.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

