


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/00057/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons promulgated |
|On 26 June 2017                            |On 7 July 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms G Capel instructed by Tamil Welfare Association
(Romford Road)
For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Hussain ('the Judge') promulgated on 30 March  2017  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 18 December  1989.
        The basis of the appellant's claim is set out at [2  -  6]  of  the
        decision under challenge. The core of the claim is that following a
        bomb blast on 26 May 2008 near his home in  Colombo  the  appellant
        was rounded up by the police and detained  for  seven  days  during
        which he was interrogated and  tortured.  His  mother  secured  his
        release on payment of a bribe and thereafter arranged for an  agent
        for him to leave for the United Kingdom in September of that  year.
        The appellant remained in the UK although in August  2014  returned
        to Sri Lanka having got his mother to check with a lawyer  that  it
        was safe for him to do so. The appellant  claimed  he  was  in  Sri
        Lanka when, on 6 September 2014, he  was  arrested  by  the  police
        whilst he was travelling in a car, detained  for  three  days,  but
        again with the assistance of  a  lawyer  arranged  by  his  mother,
        managed to secure his release on bail. On 10  September  2014,  the
        appellant flew to the United Kingdom but did not apply  for  asylum
        until one day before his leave to remain in the UK,  which  he  was
        granted as a student, was due to expire.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact at [34 - 48]  of  the  decision
        which may be summarised in the following terms:


   i. The Judge was required to  have  regard  to  the  background  evidence
      relating to country conditions which has been looked at, leading to  a
      finding there was nothing in that evidence that is  inconsistent  with
      the appellant's claims [34].
  ii.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  his
      association  with  the  LTTE.  The  respondent  relied  upon   adverse
      credibility challenges as well as the  appellant's  delay  in  seeking
      asylum which was said to damage his credibility pursuant to section  8
      of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatments  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
      2004.
 iii. At [37] the Judge writes:


                  37.   My  starting  point  in  the   assessment   of   the
                      appellant's credibility is Section 8 of the 2004 Act.
                      I find that the appellant has delayed his  claim  and
                      the explanation which he offers for the delay is  not
                      reasonable. The appellant's explanation is that  when
                      he returned in September 2014 and thereafter, he  had
                      leave to remain as a Tier 4 student which meant  that
                      he could continue to remain here  in  that  capacity.
                      The need to make the asylum claim arose from the fact
                      that the  Home  Office  was  unlikely  to  grant  any
                      further extensions as a Tier 4 student. That  excuse,
                      in my view, does not avail the appellant  because  by
                      his own account  after  his  departure  in  September
                      2014, the authorities visited his mother on  no  less
                      than three occasions, namely  November  2014,  August
                      2015 and May 2016 (see Question 130 of his interview)
                      I find therefore that the appellant's credibility  is
                      damaged. However, I am aware that a finding of deemed
                      damaged credibility under Section 8 of the  2004  Act
                      is not determinative of the issue. The  Tribunal,  as
                      any  other  decision-maker,  has  to   consider   the
                      totality of the evidence in order to  reach  a  final
                      position on the appellant's account.


  iv. There was  no  need  to  make  a  finding  regarding  the  appellant's
      involvement with the LTTE in 2006 because his claim  is  that  he  was
      arrested in May 2008 as a suspect in a bomb blast on the 26th of  that
      month [38].
   v. The fact there was a bomb blast  is  evidenced  in  the  various  news
      articles to be found in the  appellant's  bundle.  However,  there  is
      "absolutely no  evidence  directly  to  support  the  claim  that  the
      appellant was the subject of an arrest and detention over a  seven-day
      period". The Judge agrees with the Home Office's reasons for  doubting
      that part of his account and noted that the account of detention  over
      a seven-day period is at odds  with  his  mother's  written  statement
      which suggested that he had only been detained for two days [38].
  vi. The Judge did not  accept  the  alleged  arrest  and  detention  on  6
      December 2014 [39].
 vii. The Judge noted that neither in his interview nor  written  statements
      that the appellant make is there any mention of his return  visits  to
      Sri Lanka in 2009 and 2012 which only came to light  in  his  mother's
      statement [40].
viii. The appellant's explanation for not mentioning he had returned to  Sri
      Lanka was not accepted especially as the appellant was represented and
      those representatives would have gone through his immigration  history
      and realised the significance of these facts. The  appellant  admitted
      his solicitor was aware of these facts [40].
  ix. The significance of the  appellant's  ability  to  travel  safely  and
      return to the United Kingdom  during  the  two  periods  mentioned  is
      firstly that if he was the subject of adverse  interest  in  2008  the
      authorities would have kept a record of that and it was  found  highly
      unlikely that the appellant would not have been apprehended on return,
      particularly as 2009 and 2012 would have been much closer to the Civil
      War than 2014 [41].
   x.  The  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  detained  for  three   days,
      interrogated, yet released  on  bail,  but  makes  no  mention  of  an
      appearance at court. He produced no paperwork to show this was  police
      bail, if that was  the  applicable  medium,  and  it  was  also  found
      remarkable the appellant would have simply been asked to  produce  his
      national identity card despite having a passport with a  Visa  in  it.
      The  Judge  concluded  the  authorities  were  more  likely  to   have
      confiscated the  passport.  The  appellant's  evidence  was  that  the
      authorities would have been aware he was out of the country until  his
      return in August 2014 [42].
  xi. The appellant sought to prove ongoing interest by the authorities  per
      se by providing a letter purportedly from the Human Rights  Commission
      of Sri Lanka dated 29 May 2016. The appellant's representatives  wrote
      to the Tribunal to say enquiries with the organisation  have  revealed
      the letter was not issued by them. The Judge noted, however,  that  in
      his supplementary statement the appellant continued  to  rely  on  the
      letter as being genuinely issued by the Commission [43].
 xii. The letter allegedly from the Commission is dated 29 May 2016 which is
      said by the Judge to be at odds  with  the  appellant's  own  evidence
      which was that his mother made the report of the police  visit  on  28
      May when she procured the letter. The letter refers to a police  visit
      on 28 May whereas in the appellant's interview he claimed it  was  the
      26th.   The letter also simply states the appellant's mother  went  to
      their offices and told them there had been visits by  the  police  who
      were looking for the appellant yet the  report  did  not  include  the
      alleged visits in November 2014 and August 2015 [45].
xiii. On 2 February 2017, the appellant's current representatives  wrote  to
      the tribunal in a letter received  15th  February  2017  attaching  an
      email dated 3 February 2017 from the Human Rights  Commission  of  Sri
      Lanka to the effect that the letter dated 29 May 2016 was  not  issued
      by them [46].
 xiv. At [47] the Judge concludes:


                  47.  Having looked at the totality of the evidence and for
                      the  reasons  given  above,  I  have  come   to   the
                      conclusion that the appellant  has  not  demonstrated
                      that there is a real degree of  likelihood  of  being
                      treated in a manner that may  amount  to  persecution
                      for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee   Convention   or
                      otherwise incompatible  with  his  rights  under  the
                      Human Rights Convention. In any event, I  agree  with
                      the Home Office position that the appellant is not  a
                      person of sufficient profile to fit the categories of
                      those at risk as set out in GJ and Other  (post-civil
                      war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  000319
                      [IAC].


  xv. In relation to the appellant's human rights claim, it was  found  that
      for the reasons given by the Home Office the appellant  is  unable  to
      satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the   circumstances   are   not
      sufficiently exceptional as to merit a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      Rules [48].


     4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds,  Ground
        1 asserting an incorrect approach to the assessment of  credibility
        by using Section 8 of the 2004 Act as a starting  point,  Ground  2
        asserting an incorrect approach to the assessment of credibility by
        an unfair and improper reliance on the  absence  of  documentation,
        and Ground 3 and improper assessment of credibility by  failure  to
        consider background country evidence.
     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal. The operative part of the grant reads "the fact  that  at
        paragraph 37  the  Judge  said  that  his  starting  point  in  the
        assessment of the Appellant's credibility was Section  8  may  well
        have infected the whole of the Judges credibility findings in  this
        matter. Thus, I find there is an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
        decision."
     6. There is no Rule 24 reply.



Error of law


     7. A short preliminary discussion arose in relation to the grounds  on
        which the appellant had been granted permission to appeal which was
        accepted by both advocates and the Tribunal would be all  three  of
        the pleaded grounds.
     8. Ground 1 refers to section 8 of the 2004  Act  and  criticises  the
        Judge for deciding at the outset that the appellants delay  in  the
        asylum  claim  was  fatal   to   his   credibility.   This   is   a
        misrepresentation of the actual findings made by  the  Judge  which
        are set out at [3 (iii)] above where [37] of the  decision  is  set
        out in full. The Judge found that the appellant had delayed in  his
        claim  for  asylum  and  that  the  explanation  provided  was  not
        reasonable. The Judge found the appellant's credibility was damaged
        as a result of this fact. What the Judge does not do is state  that
        such damage is fatal to the appeal without doing more.  It  can  be
        seen at the end of [37] that the Judge finds "However, I  am  aware
        that a finding of deemed damaged credibility under Section 8 of the
        2004 Act is not determinative of the issue. The  tribunal,  as  any
        other decision-maker, has to consider the totality of the  evidence
        in order to reach a final position on the appellant's account".
     9. Not only does the Judge not find the appellant's delay in  relation
        to Section 8 fatal or determinative, the Judge goes on to  consider
        the merits of the appeal by reference to other matters.  The  Judge
        clearly sets out the correct self-direction that it is important to
        consider the totality of the evidence in order  to  reach  a  final
        position.
    10. The appellant, in his grounds, relied upon SM (2005) UKIAT 00116 in
        which the Tribunal said section 8 should not be the starting  point
        for the assessment of credibility.   The  behaviour  identified  in
        that section is a factor to be taken into account  in  the  overall
        assessment of credibility and its importance will vary from case to
        case.  Although section 8 required the deciding authority to  treat
        certain aspects of the evidence in a  particular  way  it  was  not
        intended to and did not otherwise affect  the  general  process  of
        deriving facts from evidence.
    11. In the more recent case of JT (Cameroon) v SSHD 2008 EWCA  Civ  878
        the Court of Appeal said that section 8  factors  should  be  taken
        into account in assessing credibility and were capable of  damaging
        it but the section did not dictate  that  the  relevant  damage  to
        section 8 inevitably results.  It was possible to read  the  adverb
        "potentially" into section 8(1) before  the  word  "damaging".   In
        this case the Court concluded that  there  was  a  real  risk  that
        section 8 matters were given a statement and compartment  of  their
        own and were not taken into account as part of a global  assessment
        of credibility.  Accordingly, the appeal was remitted.
    12. Ms Capel referred to this decision in support of her argument  that
        even though the Judge made a  finding  at  the  end  of  [37]  that
        "however,  I  am  aware  that  a  finding  of  deemed  damaged  the
        credibility under Section 8 of the 2004 act is not determinative of
        the issue, the  Tribunal,  as  any  other  decision-maker,  has  to
        consider the totality of the  evidence  in  order  to  reach  final
        position on the appellant's account" the Judge erred. At [16] of JT
        the court found:


         16.  In fairness to the Tribunal, I  note  that,  when  considering
             section 8, the Tribunal stated, at paragraph 27, that  it  was
             not "a determinative factor on credibility, but as one of  the
             matters that I should take  into  account  when  weighing  the
             evidence that is placed  before  me".  There  was  substantial
             conduct  within  the  categories  specified  in   section   8,
             including the use of a false  travel  document  to  enter  the
             United Kingdom, a long delay in applying for  asylum  and  the
             use of two identities in the  United  Kingdom.  Moreover,  the
             Tribunal conducted  a  very  detailed  assessment  of  matters
             relevant to credibility, other than section 8 matters, and the
             Tribunal did state, at paragraph 52, that it was  "looking  at
             the evidence in the round". I do not regard the positioning of
             the section 8 reference in the  determination  as  necessarily
             fatal. I do, however, agree with the parties that there  is  a
             real risk that section 8 matters were given  a  status  and  a
             compartment of their own rather than taken  into  account,  as
             they shall have been,  as  part  of  a  global  assessment  of
             credibility.


    13. In terms of the purpose of Section 8 the Court of Appeal stated  at
        [21 - 22]:


        21.  Section 8 can thus  be  construed  as  not  offending  against
             constitutional principles. It is no more than  a  reminder  to
             fact-finding  tribunals  that  conduct   coming   within   the
             categories stated in section 8 shall be taken into account  in
             assessing credibility. If there was a tendency  for  tribunals
             simply to ignore these  matters  when  assessing  credibility,
             they were in error. It is necessary to take account  of  them.
             However, at one end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be
             cases in which conduct of the kind identified in section 8  is
             held to carry no weight at all in the  overall  assessment  of
             credibility on the particular facts. I  do  not  consider  the
             section prevents that finding in an appropriate case.  Subject
             to  that,  I  respectfully  agree  with  Baroness   Scotland's
             assessment, when  introducing  the  Bill,  of  the  effect  of
             section 8. Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled  to
             some weight, the weight to be given  to  them  is  entirely  a
             matter for the fact-finder.




        22.  Issues may arise as to precisely what conduct  is  capable  of
             coming within section 8, and  as  to  the  relevance  of  that
             conduct to assessment of credibility in a particular case, but
             it is not, in my view, necessary to go into further detail  to
             determine this appeal. Safeguards are incorporated within  the
             wording of the sub-sections.


    14. In JT (Cameroon) the section of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal which gave rise to concern was  in  paragraph  52  of  the
        impugned decision where it is written:


             "In all the circumstances, and looking at the evidence in  the
             round, I must apply the appropriate low standard of  proof  to
             the Appellant's account. Set out above, I  am  satisfied  that
             very serious damage has been  sustained  to  [the  appellants)
             credibility by virtue of the operation of Section 8."


    15. Ms Capel submitted that the  Judge  erred  in  the  decision  under
        challenge in this appeal in that the section 8 matters were given a
        statement and compartment of their own  and  were  not  taken  into
        account as part of a global assessment of credibility.
    16. I do not agree. It is important that the  decision  is  read  as  a
        whole and the correct self-direction by the Judge  in  relation  to
        the need to  assess  all  the  evidence  before  reaching  a  final
        position shows the Judge retained an open  mind  to  the  potential
        outcome, notwithstanding the finding clearly open to the Judge that
        the appellant's conduct warranted the finding that his  credibility
        had been damaged pursuant to section 8. The weight the  Judge  gave
        to this element was clearly  one  of  a  number  of  issues  to  be
        considered and to be weighed in the balance before arriving at  the
        final position.
    17. Within each pleaded heading for the three grounds are a  number  of
        subparagraphs. In relation to Ground 1, which appears on  the  face
        of it to relate solely to Section 8 in its heading, it  is  further
        asserted that the Judge erred in failing to determine a real  issue
        relating to the appellant's previous involvement with  and  support
        for the LTTE. It is stated the Sri Lankan authorities suspected the
        appellant of having connections with the LTTE and that his previous
        links to the organisation was central to the appeal and relevant to
        the proper  understanding  of  the  circumstances  leading  to  the
        authorities' interest in the appellant.
    18. The Judge  was  aware  of  the  appellants  claim  in  relation  to
        membership of the LTTE and specifically refers to this at  [3]  and
        [4] of the decision under challenge. The Judge also notes  at  [38]
        it was unnecessary to make a finding as to  whether  the  appellant
        was involved with the LTTE in 2006 as his claim  was  that  he  was
        arrested in May 2008 as a suspect in a bomb blast on  the  26th  of
        that month.  The  nature  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  to  have
        supported the LTTE and to have attended border training camps, none
        of which it has been established would have placed him at  risk  on
        return to Sri Lanka in  2014  in  light  of  the  relevant  country
        guidance caselaw. It was also not the appellants claim  before  the
        Judge that he faced a real risk as a result of such support of  the
        LTTE although had the assertion  been  that  the  appellant  had  a
        higher profile, one that would place him at risk,  it  is  arguable
        that the Judge would have been required to deal with this aspect of
        the matter.
    19. Ms Capel asserted that the information is relevant as it  is  known
        the Sri Lankan authorities have an intelligence led system and that
        had the appellant been involved with the LTTE as  he  claims,  this
        may have indicated the detention in 2014 May have had some relation
        to his previous activities.
    20. It is necessary to consider the decision as a whole  which  reveals
        that the Judge did undertake a cumulative assessment of  risk  and,
        in light  of  the  evidence  available,  cannot  be  said  to  have
        materially erred  in  law  in  treating  the  aspect  of  low-level
        involvement in 2006 (if credible) in the manner set out in [38]  of
        the decision.
    21. Ground 2 asserts an unfair and improper reliance on the absence  of
        documents by reference to [38] of the decision under challenge.  It
        is asserted the Judge found  there  was  no  evidence  directly  to
        support the claim the appellant was the subject of  an  arrest  and
        detention over a seven-day period which is claimed to  be  entirely
        inconsistent with what was said by the Judge in [34], in  which  it
        is recorded that the Judge had looked  at  the  background  country
        evidence  and  found  nothing  that  was  inconsistent   with   the
        appellants claims.
    22. The Judge is not seeking corroboration in [38] but making a factual
        statement that there was no  evidence  to  support  the  claim  the
        appellant was the subject of an arrest and detention over a  seven-
        day period, which is factually correct.
    23. The finding in [34] refers to  the  need  to  have  regard  to  the
        background evidence relating to the  country  concerned  which  the
        Judge  found  did  not  disclose  anything  inconsistent  with  the
        appellants claim relating to this aspect.  That  is  a  finding  in
        relation to the country conditions not the specific claim  made  by
        the appellant in relation to his own experiences. For example,  the
        Judge found that the country material supported the fact there  had
        been an explosion on 26 May 2008 which is stated to be evidenced in
        various news articles to be found in the appellant's bundle [38].
    24. The fact  the  Judge  found  the  evidence  of  country  conditions
        consistent with that element of the  appeal  did  not  prevent  the
        Judge from seeking  further  evidence  to  support  the  subjective
        aspects of the appellants claim, namely that he was the subject  of
        an arrest warrant and detained over a seven-day period. It was  not
        "unfair or unreasonable" as alleged for the Judge to find a lack of
        evidence having regard to even the lower  standard  of  proof.  The
        fact there had been an explosion in Colombo was not  proof  of  the
        fact the appellant was person responsible or a person who had  been
        arrested and detained in connection with this  event.  The  country
        material refers to the troubled history in Sri Lanka where a number
        of  explosions  and  similar  activities  occurred  throughout  the
        country by the LTTE and others.
    25. It is not disputed that release from  detention  by  payment  of  a
        bribe was entirely consistent with the country guidance case of  GJ
        and indeed earlier country guidance cases, but the  issue  was  not
        whether the appellant had been released on the payment of  a  bribe
        but whether he had even been detained in the first place, which was
        not accepted. No arguable legal error is made out  in  relation  to
        the Judges treatment of this aspect of the evidence.
    26. Ground 3 refers to an alleged improper  assessment  of  credibility
        and failure to consider the  background  evidence  challenging  the
        conclusion at [41] that it was highly unlikely that  the  appellant
        would not have been apprehended on return to Sri Lanka in  2009  in
        2012. The appellant refers to [392] of GJ where the Upper  Tribunal
        found:


         "We do not consider that the  authorities  failure  to  arrest  the
         appellant between 2010 and 2011 indicates that they did not  arrest
         and detain him in May 2011. It  is  entirely  possible  that  their
         information improved during that period to  the  extent  that  they
         became interested in him, alternatively, that some other matter  of
         interest  had  arisen  in  which  they  considered  he  might  have
         information."


    27. It is submitted the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  an  identical
        submission made on behalf of the appellant  that  it  was  entirely
        possible that the information or intelligence  upon  the  appellant
        improved after his return visits to Sri Lanka  to  the  extent  the
        authorities then became interested in him or that some other matter
        arose in which the Sri Lankan authorities considered the  appellant
        might have information leading to his second  arrest  in  September
        2014.
    28. The Judge was entitled to note the failure of the appellant in both
        his interview and written evidence to make  any  reference  of  the
        return visits that only came  to  light  in  his  mother's  witness
        statements.  The  Judge  was  clearly  suspicious  as  to  why  the
        appellant would choose to omit such information.
    29. The assertion evidence may have subsequently  come  to  light  that
        warranted the appellants detention in 2014 is speculative as  there
        is no evidence to support the same.  There was no evidence to  show
        that anything specific had arisen that would lead to  an  increased
        risk as per GJ or heightened risk on the evidence.
    30. It is also important to consider the situation that existed at  the
        date the appellant  claimed  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  not
        following the defeat of the LTTE and the  issue  of  residual  risk
        which is that contemplated in GJ.
    31. In the earlier country guidance case of LP (LTTE area  -  Tamils  -
        Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka [2007] UKAIT 00076 the Tribunal had  set
        out twelve risk  factors,  which  may  increase  the  risk.   These
        were:(i) Tamil ethnicity; (ii)  Previous record as a  suspected  or
        actual  LTTE  member;  (iii)   Previous  criminal   record   and/or
        outstanding arrest warrant; (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping  from
        custody; (v)  Having signed a confession or similar document;  (vi)
        Having been asked by the security forces  to  become  an  informer;
        (vii)     The presence of scarring;  (viii)Return  from  London  or
        other centre of LTTE fundraising; (ix) Illegal departure  from  Sri
        Lanka; (x)    Lack of an  ID  card  or  other  documentation;  (xi)
        Having made an asylum claim abroad; (xii) Having relatives  in  the
        LTTE.
    32. As the appellant was able to enter  and  leave  Sri  Lanka  on  two
        occasions without experiencing difficulties it is  safe  to  assume
        that no factors were known to the Sri Lankan authorities, including
        those relating to any previous  involvement  with  the  LTTE,  that
        warranted the appellants detention or created a real risk  for  him
        on return, within Sri Lanka, or on departing through the airport to
        return to the United Kingdom.
    33. In TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka [2009] UKAIT  00049,  also  a
        former country guidance case, the Tribunal found that  the  records
        the Sri Lanka authorities keep on  persons  with  some  history  of
        arrest and detention have become increasingly sophisticated;  their
        greater accuracy is likely to reduce substantially the risk that  a
        person of no real interest to the authorities would be arrested  or
        detained.
    34. In AN & SS (Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00063,
        a former country guidance case, the Tribunal held there is no  good
        evidence that the LTTE maintain a computerized  database  of  their
        opponents, such that new arrivals in Colombo can be checked against
        it. Checks are, on the other hand, run on a  computerized  database
        by immigration officers  when  passengers  arrive  at  Bandaranaike
        International Airport, or by members of the  security  forces  when
        people are detained, but there is no good  evidence  to  show  that
        everyone who has in the past been  detained  and  questioned  about
        possible involvement with the LTTE is  on  that  database.  On  the
        contrary, it is likely to contain the names only of those  who  are
        of serious interest to the authorities.
    35. These cases again support the view that the  appellant  was  of  no
        adverse interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka on either  of  the
        occasions he was able to visit and leave that country, which  again
        supports the concern by the Judge in relation  to  the  appellant's
        motives for failing to disclose this information.
    36. At the conclusion of her intended submissions Miss Capel was  asked
        to address an issue which by that point she had avoided, which  was
        the reliance by the appellant upon a forged document in support  of
        his claim for international protection.
    37. Miss Capel accepted that the appellant had  relied  on  the  letter
        from the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka  but  asserted  there
        had been no finding by the Judge that he had relied upon  a  forged
        document. It was claimed the appellant had received the letter from
        his mother and that the fact the letter was  forged  was  only  one
        matter relevant to assessing the credibility of  the  appellant  in
        the round. It was submitted that even if the appellant  had  sought
        to bolster his claim by reliance upon a false document it  did  not
        mean that all his claim was unreliable as this was only  one  piece
        of evidence which should not be treated  as  determinative  of  the
        entire decision.
    38. The assertion the appellant could somehow distance himself from the
        false document was shown to have no arguable merit in the  response
        by Miss Isherwood who referred to the fact the appellant  had  been
        asked about the  letter  in  cross  examination.  At  [24]  of  the
        decision under challenge the Judge records:


         24.   In cross examination, the appellant was asked when he  became
             aware  that  the  letter  from  the  Human  Rights  Commission
             existed. He said that after two or three days of  getting  the
             letter, she told him about it. He confirmed that he  had  been
             interviewed by the Home Office on 9 December 2016. However, he
             asked for the letter in September to be sent to him.  He  does
             not know why it was not sent to the  Home  Office  before  the
             appeal. What he told the interviewing officer was that he will
             submit a letter from Human Rights and that two people  dressed
             as police officers visited his mother. He  does  not  remember
             when he received the letter in the United Kingdom. He  recalls
             receiving it in September. He admitted that the letter was  in
             his possession before the interview. He does not know  why  he
             did not send it to the Home Office. The reason he asked for it
             in September was because he had applied for asylum and thought
             that he will need it.


    39. The appellant therefore sought the letter, received it,  failed  to
        mention it in his interview or disclose the document, and sought to
        rely on it at the hearing.  The  letter  is  clearly  a  false  and
        fraudulent document. Even  though  the  appellant  in  his  witness
        statement claimed that his mother had said the letter was  genuine,
        either his mother or the appellant has lied as clearly  the  letter
        is not genuine. Submitting a  false  document  is  damaging  to  an
        individual's credibility or the credibility of the overall claim.
    40. Whilst it is accepted that some  parts  of  the  case  may  not  be
        believed but this does not mean  that  other  parts  of  the  claim
        cannot be believed, all matters which must  be  considered  in  the
        overall assessment in accordance with  the  self-direction  by  the
        Judge.
    41. In relation to the section 8 point, Miss Isherwood also referred to
        the fact that section 8 only appears in [37] whereas  the  findings
        of fact commence from [34]. It is also  the  case  that  the  Judge
        undertook the holistic assessment of all aspects of the decision.
    42. Miss Capel has failed to establish that the finding  by  the  Judge
        that there is insufficient evidence to support the claim  that  the
        appellant had been arrested and detained over a seven-day period is
        infected by arguable legal error. The Judge gives adequate  reasons
        for why this aspect of the claim could not be believed.
    43. In relation to the appellant visiting Sri Lanka in 2009  and  2012,
        it was not part of the appellant's case that he had paid  an  agent
        to get him into Sri Lanka indicating must have passed  through  the
        airport and the standard immigration and security checks  in  place
        at that time.
    44. I find that the Judge not only considered  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny but  has  also  given  adequate
        reasons to support the findings made.  The core finding is that the
        appellant is not a credible witness, that his claim  to  have  been
        detained over a seven-day period is not true (especially  in  light
        of the fact that it was found to  be  at  odds  with  his  mother's
        written evidence which suggested  a  two-day  period  of  detention
        [38]), that the appellant's profile does not create a real risk  on
        return, and that a key document relied upon by the appellant (which
        is stated to be at odds with the appellant's own evidence [45])  is
        also a false/fraudulent document.
    45. The overall conclusion that the appellant had  not  established  an
        entitlement to a grant of  international  protection  or  leave  to
        remain on human rights grounds has not been shown to be affected by
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal

Decision

    46. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity


    47. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such an order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 July 2017











