
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00580/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                             C--- S--- J--- K---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by MTC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr S Lakshman interpreted the Sinhalese and English languages

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because this is a protection claim and publicity could create a  risk
to the Appellant's safety.

2. This is the resumed hearing of an  appeal  by  the  appellant  against  a
decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
decision of the respondent refusing him asylum.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
has erred in law and the decision has been  set  aside  by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge  Martin.   The  appeal  has  been  transferred  to   me   for   final
determination.

3. There was a time when it was thought that  this  appeal  presented  facts
that would be a convenient addendum  to  possible  country  guidance.   The
policy considerations leading  to  the  designation  of  cases  as  country
guidance and the hearing of appeals that might result in a country guidance
designation are nothing to do with this decision and I am in no position to
review them nor is there any need.  I  simply  make  the  point  that  this
appeal was once expected to be written with  a  view  to  offering  country
guidance but that is no longer the case.  This history explains in part why
there has been some delay between Judge Martin's decision and  the  hearing
before me.  The hearing began with an adjournment  application  renewing  a
similar application that had already been made administratively.

4. The appellant's solicitors wished to obtain  better  evidence  about  the
risks that he might face in the event of return  to  Sri  Lanka.   This  is
particularly pertinent because the appellant's difficulties arose from  his
part in opposing the then president of Sri Lanka, Mr M Rajapaksa,  who  was
president from November 2005 until January 2015 but is now out  of  office.
Nevertheless he remains a significant force in Sri Lankan politics.  For  a
time he was part of a movement seeking to make him the prime  minister  but
that plan was defeated and he remains  leader  of  the  opposition  in  Sri
Lanka.

5. Mr Raza said that his solicitors had identified an expert who was in  Sri
Lanka  and  willing  to  provide  a  report  in  approximately  six  weeks.
Nevertheless I refused the adjournment.  This appeal should have been ready
when it was first heard by the First-tier Tribunal in June of last year.  I
appreciate there has been some changes, particularly the former president's
bid for power.  His importance is extremely uncertain.  He is not presently
in power and that is all that can be said with any confidence.

6. No doubt the appellant's solicitors were genuinely trying to  be  helpful
but I regard the dispute here as quite a short point.

7. It is important to appreciate that this  appellant,  unlike  many  asylum
seekers from Sri Lanka, is not Tamil but Sinhalese.

8. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  evidence  supported  by  the  Medical
Foundation that the appellant has  been  ill-treated  and  the  appellant's
explanation that the ill-treatment followed his assisting a  journalist  in
reporting against the then president although the appellant never  actually
saw the article complained of.  The injuries sustained by the appellant are
significant.  He has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and
there were scars on the body which together  amounted  to  strong  evidence
that the appellant had been beaten as he claims.  He says too that  he  was
raped  during  detention.   He  was  diagnosed  with  "moderate  to  severe
depression" and although his conduct before me was entirely  courteous  and
rational I mean him no disrespect when I say that my observations about his
demeanour did not surprise me when I had regard to the medical evidence.

9. The attack complained of was in January 2011  or  February  of  the  same
year.  The appellant had dealings with the authorities on two occasions.

10. Mr Mills submitted that the appellant was not at risk now.  Eight  years
or so have passed and there have been changes in Sri Lanka  in  that  time.
The government has changed and the attitudes  have  changed.   He  drew  my
attention to the public domain report from the  Secretary  of  State  dated
July 2017 which concluded that, in general, journalists  and  human  rights
activists  are  not  subject  to  treatment  that  had  been   persecutory.
Notwithstanding the  very  significant  injuries  that  the  appellant  has
experienced at the hands of the authorities this is a strong  point  and  I
have to give it full weight.

11. Mr  Raza's  counter  argument,  which  is  also  strong  and  worthy  of
consideration,  is  that  the  appellant  has  always  insisted  that   the
authorities have not lost interest in him.  He did not satisfy the Tribunal
of this on the last occasion but there was no clear  finding  against  him.
The judge was just not persuaded.

12. The appellant  gave  oral  evidence  before  me.   He  supplemented  his
earlier evidence by saying that his family still say they  are  visited  by
the authorities.  It does not seem rational to someone looking at the  case
from a western European perspective that the  authorities  would  still  be
interested in him. Neither does it seem rational from that perspective that
a man would be raped and beaten effectively for saying something  that  was
embarrassing about the president.

13. It is trite law that judges must  not  assume  that  persecuting  states
behave rationally.  Mr Raza drew my attention to a document that was before
the First-tier Tribunal from the International Truth  and  Justice  Project
(ITJP) dealing with torture by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   According  to
this document (134 in the bundle):

  "Family members are subject to intimidation and  harassment  both  before
  and after the abductions and releases.  All but one of  the  families  of
  victims in the ITJP case pool have had members questioned by the security
  forces after  the  victim  fled  abroad.   This  practice  instils  fear.
  Details of these experiences are documented in the ITJP's July  2015  and
  January 2016 reports.  Continuing surveillance and intimidation acts as a
  deterrent  to  speaking  out,  sending  ripples  of  fear  through  exile
  communities who remain in close  touch  with  their  loved  ones  in  Sri
  Lanka."

14. In other words, precisely what the ITJP says  is  likely  to  happen  is
precisely what the appellant  says  happened  and  says  is  continuing  to
happen.  If that is right then clearly the appellant is  at  real  risk  of
further ill-treatment in the event of his return.

15. This history is only of relevance if the authorities  would  know  about
it.  But the Appellant has been arrested.  There must be a record somewhere
and as I read the guidance in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri
Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) there is a distinction between a "stop list"
and a "watchlist".  I do not see how it can be  said  with  any  confidence
that the appellant could return to Sri Lanka and not be noticed  especially
as he may find it  difficult  to  establish  himself  away  from  his  home
community because of his health difficulties.  He is somebody who will need
some support if he is to re-establish himself.

16. There are many  peculiar  features  about  decisions  in  asylum  cases.
Amongst them is that the judge is required to make a finding not about what
has happened but about what will happen, except it is not  a  finding  that
something will happen but that there is a reasonable chance  that  it  will
happen.

17. This appellant is a man who has been seriously ill-treated in the  past.
 I believe his evidence that the authorities are still  interested  in  him
which is what the background material indicates tends to happen  and  I  am
persuaded there is a real risk of his facing persecution in  the  event  of
his return.

18. I make it plain I do not find this risk  enhanced  by  anything  he  may
have said to the ITJP.  It is not clear what he said  and  what  they  have
done with that information.  It is too speculative to  say  that  that  has
created any risk.  We can assume the ITJP will show some sense  in  how  it
uses its material and will not be exposing people to risks.

19. This case is very finely balanced but the standard  of  proof  in  these
cases is deliberately low and the appellant is entitled to  take  advantage
of it.  I find he has done enough to satisfy me there is a real risk and  I
allow the appeal.  This man is a refugee.

Notice if Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside  because  it  is
wrong in law.

I substitute a decision ALLOWING the appellant's appeal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 March 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|ANNEX                                |                                     |


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00580/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th October 2018                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                      A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan (instructed by MTC & Co. Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION


At the Appellant's request, as his name is easily identified even by use of
initials, I have made an anonymity direction and he shall be known as "A".

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission, by the Appellant,
who is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1997.  His asylum claim was refused
by the Secretary of State and his appeal against that Decision came before
Judge Thomas at Birmingham on 13th June 2018.  In a Decision promulgated on
25th July 2018 the appeal was dismissed.

The grounds assert that the Judge erred in relying on a case listed as
country guidance, which has been overturned by a subsequent country
guidance case; for failing to give any, or any adequate reasons not
accepting the Appellant's claims of visits to his family home after his
departure from Sri Lanka and/or making a material error of fact regarding
the appellant's evidence of such visits.

The Secretary of State asserts that there was no such error and indeed
asserts that there was no error in relying on the case of PT (risk-bribery-
release) Sri Lanka [2002] UK IAT 03444. The Secretary of State also asserts
that the Judge adequately dealt with the issue of visits to the Appellant's
family home after he left Sri Lanka.

At paragraph 27 of the Decision and Reasons the Judge says that the case of
PT remains relevant on the issue of release on a bribe. He based his
finding that the Appellant 's name would not be on a stop list at the
airport on the rationale of that case.

In relying on PT I find the Judge did err as the grounds suggest. PT is
erroneously still included on the list of country guidance cases because
the subsequent case of GJ and others (post-Civil War: returnees) Sri Lanka
CG [2013] UK UT00319 (IAC) said in terms at paragraph 356; "this
determination replaces all existing country guidance". The Judge was
therefore wrong to place reliance on an earlier country guidance case.

The judge also erred in his consideration of visits to the Appellant's
family home. He said, also at paragraph 27,"Given the Appellant's family
continued to live in the same area, I do not find the claim that the CIA
visited his family home after he was released and in 2016 proven. However,
if the CID did visit in 2016, the fact that they have not done so since
indicates a lack of ongoing adverse interest in the Appellant." That is in
error because the Appellant's evidence was that they had visited also in
2017.

I would also note that the Judge appears to have failed to consider the
actual nature of the Appellant's claim. The Appellant is not a Tamil and
does not claim on that basis. Rather his claim is based on the fact that he
divulged information to a journalist which led to his detention and
torture. That part of his claim was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.
His claim is that he had, after the end of the war been subjected to
persecution and therefore is known to the authorities and the fact that
there have been continued visits to his family home indicate that he
remains of interest and thus would be at risk today. That aspect of his
claim was not considered by the Judge.

In all the circumstances therefore I find that the Decision and Reasons of
the First-tier Tribunal tainted by material errors of law. The credibility
findings in relation to what took place prior to his leaving Sri Lanka are
preserved but the issue of risk on return remains outstanding. The decision
is therefore set aside to that extent to be re-decided on the outstanding
issues in the upper Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 16th October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
