
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00176/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 August 2017                      |       On 29 August 2017              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I. Palmer, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 19 July 2003 whose
   protection claim was refused. His ensuing appeal to the First-tier
   Tribunal ("FtT") was heard by Judge Hanes. In a decision promulgated on
   27 February 2017 the appeal was dismissed. The appellant is now appealing
   against that decision.


2. It was common ground before me that the decision of the FtT contained a
   material error of law and that the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.
   As the parties are in agreement (for reasons with which I agree) I will
   give only brief reasons.


3. In summary, the appellant's claim is that he was born and lived his
   whole life in Iran before leaving with his mother and three siblings for
   Europe. He claims to have become separated from his family on route to
   the UK and to have arrived in the UK alone in May 2016. He claims that he
   faces a risk of persecution in Afghanistan because of his (deceased)
   father's prior military service. He also claims to not know the
   whereabouts of his family in Afghanistan and that if returned he would be
   alone and unsupported.


4. One of the findings of the FtT was that the appellant would be cared for
   by his family in Afghanistan. At paragraph 22 the judge stated:


    "I am in no doubt that he would be cared for by his family if required
    to return to Afghanistan".


5. The FtT reached this conclusion after finding that the appellant had not
   been truthful about his separation from his family (paragraph 19) and was
   not credible in claiming to not know from where his family originated in
   Afghanistan before moving to Iran (paragraph 21). The FtT also found that
   the appellant's family would have spent substantial money to arrange for
   him to come to the UK with an agent (paragraph 19).


6. Mr Singh, on behalf of the Secretary of State, agreed with Mr Palmer
   that the judge's finding that the appellant has family in Afghanistan who
   would be able to support him lacked any evidential basis. He conceded
   that the decision contained a material error of law as the judge had made
   inferences without explaining them properly. Noting that it was accepted
   by the Secretary of State that the appellant had been raised by his
   mother and with his siblings in Iran, Mr Singh accepted that it could not
   be inferred from the finding that the appellant's family paid for an
   agent and arranged for him to travel to the UK, or that the appellant had
   not been truthful about how he became separated from his family when
   travelling to the UK, that there would be family support available to him
   in Afghanistan.


7. I agree with Mr Singh. For the reasons he gave, as summarised in
   paragraph 6 above, I find that the decision of the FtT contains a
   material error of law such that it will need to be set aside.


8. Both parties submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.
   Given the extent of further fact finding necessary to remake the
   decision, I agree and accordingly the appeal will be remitted to the FtT
   to be heard afresh before a different judge.




Decision

9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
   such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
   afresh.


10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanes.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                       Dated:  25    |
|                                     |August 2017                          |

