
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00607/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 25th August 2016                  |On 5th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 AMANUIL [Y]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G Dewar, Advocate, instructed by Peter G Farrell,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea, born on 1st June 1987.
     He has not sought anonymity.  He appeals to the Upper Tribunal against
    a  determination  by  Judge  Lea,  promulgated  on  18th  March   2016,
    dismissing his appeal against refusal of recognition as a refugee  from
    Eritrea.

 2. Paragraphs 1 to 7 of the appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal criticise the judge's finding that inability to speak Tigrinya
    (or to speak more than a little Tigrinya) was adverse to his account.

 3. The grounds at paragraphs 8  and  9  go  on  to  make  a  challenge  to
    paragraph 26 of the determination, where the judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant said in oral evidence that:

         ".... his father and the pastor were detained and no one knew where
         they were.  He has not adequately explained why his mother would be
         able to so easily get him released but  not  be  able  to  get  his
         father released."

 4. The notes and recollection of the author of the grounds  indicate  that
    the appellant was asked:

         Q.   Why not know where the father is?

         A.   My father used to work in the church with the pastor.

 5. This is said to be "a clear explanation ... why the father's  treatment
    was different from that of the appellant, because the appellant did not
    work for the pastor and was merely a member of the congregation".

 6. Paragraph 10 of the grounds is directed against  paragraph  28  of  the
    determination, where the judge said that the appellant has  "not  given
    any explanation as to why he left his wife (and  presumably  child)  in
    Sudan in 2015."  It is said that the appellant was  not  asked  for  an
    explanation, and that the Tribunal's approach was contrary to HA & TD v
    SSHD (No. 2) [2010] CSIH 28.

 7. On 13th July 2016 UT Judge Blum granted permission, saying at paragraph
    1 of the grant that the judge accurately recorded the evidence and  was
    entitled to find as she did on the appellant's knowledge  of  Tigrinya.
    The points about the appellant leaving his wife and child in Sudan, and
    about his explanation for his release, were thought to be arguable. The
    representative  was  expected  to  provide  his  original   record   of
    proceedings at the error of law hearing.

 8. Mr Dewar submitted firstly on procedural unfairness.  He relied upon HA
    and TD, in particular at paragraphs  6,  7,  8  and  31.   The  judge's
    decision  at  paragraphs  28  and  30  clearly  took  the  absence   of
    explanation as one of the reasons for finding  against  the  appellant.
    Fairness  depended  always  on  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the
    particular case.  As the lack of explanation was an essential component
    of the outcome, it was unfair that the point had not been  put  to  the
    appellant.

 9. Mr Dewar took as his second point the judge's failure to  consider  the
    explanation which  could  be  derived  from  the  record  kept  by  the
    appellant's representative at the hearing, as quoted  in  the  grounds,
    and as confirmed by a written copy.  The handwritten note  showed  that
    this had been the subject of a submission, it having been  put  to  the
    judge that the appellant's father  worked.   This  appeared  to  be  an
    explanation of why one could escape and the other could not.

10. Mr Dewar's third point was derived from paragraph 4  of  the  grant  of
    permission, where the judge said that there was little analysis by  the
    judge in rejecting the appellant's account where the errors recorded at
    interview about his knowledge of Eritrea.  This went to paragraph 27 of
    the  decision,  where  the  judge  said  that  she  did  not  find  the
    appellant's explanation in his statement adequate, given that he "could
    have got a lot  of  his  information  from  the  internet".   Mr  Dewar
    referred to Koca v SSHD [2005] SLT 838 at paragraph 19, where the court
    held that the requirement for a fair hearing was not  confined  to  the
    actual conduct of the hearing itself before a judge but applied also to
    the process whereby the judge reached her decision.  An  appellant  had
    to be informed adequately of  why  his  case  did  not  succeed,  which
    required the giving of intelligible and  adequate  reasons.   Mr  Dewar
    submitted that the analysis by Judge Lea at paragraph 27 was not  of  a
    sufficient standard to meet these criteria.

11. Finally, Mr Dewar said that there was an issue in relation to  language
    in that the judge ignored the evidence in the  form  of  a  linguistics
    report but went instead on a fact-finding exercise of her own, a matter
    beyond her remit.

12. Mr Matthews in response firstly dealt with the language analysis point.
     He submitted that there was nothing in this case along the lines of MN
    and KY, referred to in the grounds.  This was a  matter  of  the  judge
    reaching a view of the languages actually spoken by the  appellant  and
    the languages which he would have been likely to  speak,  according  to
    the history he gave of himself.  The expert report was not  overlooked.
    It was referred to  at  the  end  of  paragraph  25.   The  appellant's
    inability to speak Tigrinya had some significance.  As Tigrinya was the
    language spoken by his parents and would have been his primary or  sole
    language at least until the age of 4, there was  no  factual  or  legal
    error.  The grounds claimed  that  the  appellant's  evidence  in  this
    respect had been overlooked but that was incorrect; it was referred  to
    at various parts of the decision, in particular paragraph 18.

13. Regarding the challenge to  the  adequacy  of  reasoning,  Mr  Matthews
    submitted that judges were  not  obliged  to  give  endless  series  of
    reasons for reasons.   The  appellant  had  been  disbelieved  in  part
    because of the errors in his professed knowledge, for which he  offered
    no adequate explanation.  There was no need to recite what  both  sides
    said on the point, or to analyse any further.   The  judge's  reasoning
    was plain.

14.  Regarding  the  error  based  on  the   representative's   record   of
    proceedings, Mr Matthews said that this sought to make a great deal out
    of very little.  He accepted that the record kept  by  the  appellant's
    representative fitted with the record on the Home  Office  file.   What
    the First-tier Tribunal  had  said  was  that  there  was  no  adequate
    explanation of why the appellant escaped,  but  not  his  father.   The
    judge rejected the appellant's account of his escape for  a  number  of
    reasons, including the absence of an explanation  of  where  the  money
    came from.  The fact that his father worked  for  the  pastor  was  not
    shown by the appellant to have any bearing on whether it would be  more
    difficult for him to escape.  The judge also founded on other  reasons,
    such  as  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  described  at
    paragraph 24, to which the grounds made no challenge.

15. On procedural unfairness, Mr Matthews submitted that the judge had been
    entitled to note the absence of explanation on a matter which obviously
    cried out for one.  This was not  a  matter  of  taking  the  appellant
    unfairly by surprise, but simply part of the evaluation of his account.
     It was also notable that now that the  matter  had  been  raised,  the
    appellant did not  attempt  to  offer  any  explanation.   His  account
    glossed over the time he had spent in Sudan, and  the  absence  of  any
    reason for suddenly deciding to leave  after  spending  a  dozen  years
    there.  There was nothing in the grounds to justify setting  aside  the
    determination.

16. Mr Dewar  requested  and  was  granted  a  short  adjournment  to  take
    instructions before responding.

17. On resumption of the hearing, Mr Dewar said that  the  purpose  of  the
    adjournment had been partly to check over the interview  record.   This
    ran to 174 questions and answers.  A significant  aspect  of  the  Home
    Office submission had been  based  on  the  point  that  there  was  no
    explanation of where the money came from to pay the agent.  Perusal  of
    the record showed that the appellant had not  been  asked  about  that,
    although it was now said to be central (Mr Matthews  interjected,  with
    justification, that such had not been  his  point).   The  record  also
    showed that the appellant had not been asked at interview why  he  left
    his wife and child in Sudan.  The matter had been noted by  the  judge,
    but not put to  the  appellant.   Fairness  demanded  that  a  material
    concern which was the basis of an adverse credibility finding should be
    put  fairly  and  squarely  to  the  appellant.   Absence  of  such  an
    opportunity negated the proceedings.  If there were any requirement  to
    offer an  explanation  to  substantiate  the  ground,  the  appellant's
    position was that he does have an  explanation,  namely  that  security
    agents [presumably of the Eritrean government]  operate  within  Sudan,
    which is why he left when he did.

18. I reserved my decision.

19. The obligation of fairness does not preclude  judges  from  considering
    the evidence, written and oral, which has been placed before  them  and
    from formulating their reasons for accepting or rejecting it.  There is
    no requirement to pose their every thought for further  comment,  which
    would make the process of decision-making endless.   The  essential  is
    that an appellant should not be taken by surprise  on  a  matter  which
    could not reasonably be anticipated and for which, once asked, he might
    have a sensible answer.

20. A finding that an appellant has failed to offer an  explanation  of  an
    obvious point is always open to a judge.  It is not her job to coax the
    appellant into perfecting his evidence.

21. The record of proceedings kept by the appellant's  solicitor  does  not
    disclose anything which differentiates his ability to escape  from  his
    father's, so as to make his account any more likely.

22. The grounds touching on language analysis and on the judge embarking on
    an exercise outside her field  are  confused.   It  was  a  simple  and
    obvious point that the appellant by his own account might reasonably be
    expected to be a fluent Tigrinya speaker, so that his lack  of  ability
    in that language was adverse.

23. The grounds and submissions in my opinion are  upon  scrutiny  no  more
    than reassertion of the appellant's  case  and  disagreement  with  the
    adverse conclusions reached, presented under legal headings. I  am  not
    persuaded  that  this  decision  is  anything  less  than  an  adequate
    explanation to the appellant of why his case did not succeed,  or  that
    it is based on any point on which fairness required that the  appellant
    be given a further opportunity.  In any event, he has  not  shown  that
    now these points are fully in the open, he can make any better a case.

24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




                           [pic]


                           2 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


