
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00796/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2016                         |On 18 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Chandran, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
                    Solicitors (Bromley)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of  7  August
    2015 to make a deportation order.
2.   The appeal proceeded by way of submissions only,  the  judge  accepting
    the evidence in a psychological report that the appellant should not be
    required to give evidence as he was not fit to do so.

3.   The appellant claimed to be at risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  as  a
    consequence of the fear he  had  of  the  Taliban  resulting  from  his
    family's opposition to the Taliban.  He also claimed to be at  risk  on
    account of his homosexuality.  The reason for the  deportation  stemmed
    from his conviction in 12 November 2007 on a charge of  rape.   He  was
    given an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment on 15 August 2008.  The
    respondent did not accept that he was gay,  did  not  accept  that  his
    claimed  persecutors  would  have  retained  an  interest  in  him  and
    contended that there was an internal flight option to him.

4.   As will be seen, there are some doubts which need to  be  clarified  as
    to whether or not the judge accepted that the appellant was  homosexual
    and I shall need to turn to what she had  to  say  about  that  in  due
    course.  She accepted that his father was a  member  of  Hezb-i-Islami,
    that he was killed by the Taliban  and  that  the  appellant  had  been
    detained by the Taliban as regards the claimed risk and considered that
    it might well be that his home area was not a  safe  area  for  him  to
    return to but he could internally relocate.  There was also an  Article
    3 health issue  considering  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  the
    question of whether or not he was at risk of suicide.  Again there  are
    criticisms of the judge's findings in this regard and I shall return to
    those in more detail subsequently.

5.   The upshot was that the judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds,  and
    the appellant sought and was granted  permission  in  relation  to  the
    suicide risk issue and the issue of the appellant's claimed  sexuality.



6.   Ms Chandran argued that the judge had not addressed the 2016 report  of
    Dr van Leeson and Mr Calderwell (the 2016  report)  in  addressing  the
    suicide risk issue.  In that report it  was  made  clear  that  if  the
    appellant were  removed  to  Afghanistan  his  risk  of  suicide  would
    increase to very high.  It was also  argued  that  the  judge  had  not
    followed the correct approach to suicide risk cases as  set  out  in  Y
    (Sri Lanka) and Z (Sri  Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362,  in  particular
    failing to make findings on key issues such as whether the  appellant's
    fear of serious harm or persecution on return was genuine, and  whether
    by reason of that fear there was a real risk of suicide on return.  She
    also argued that the judge had failed  to  follow  the  legal  test  as
    defined in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  In any event it was  argued  that
    the judge had not made clear findings as to the  appellant's  sexuality
    and that was a key component of the HJ (Iran) analysis.

7.   Mr Whitwell, relying on the Rule 24 response, argued  that  little  had
    been accepted, and with regard to the first ground, the expert evidence
    had been taken into account at various points in the judge's  decision,
    for example paragraph 39 and also at paragraph 111,  and  the  evidence
    had to be understood in light of the credibility of the matter and  the
    credibility findings were quite nuanced.  Although the  judge  had  not
    referred to the decision in Y nor the decision in  J  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    629, on which Y built, it could be seen from  paragraphs  118  and  119
    that the reasoning in those two cases  had  been  properly  taken  into
    account.  There was no need to set out all the tests in J and in  Y  as
    that would be to put form over substance.

8.   It was also argued that it was sufficiently clear from  paragraphs  112
    and 113 in particular that the judge did not accept that the  appellant
    was gay and therefore any argument about misapplication of  HJ  was  by
    the way but if the Tribunal was against Mr Whitwell on that point,  the
    findings had to be seen in light of the  discretion  exercised  by  the
    appellant in respect of his homosexuality while in the United  Kingdom.
    It was not enough that he had said in his  witness  statement  that  he
    would act discreetly on return for fear of harm,  bearing  in  mind  in
    particular the submissions recorded at paragraphs 21 and  24  from  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before the judge.

9.    By  way  of  reply  Ms  Chandran  emphasised  the   context   of   the
    vulnerability of the appellant and  the  relevance  of  the  vulnerable
    person guidelines, the critical nature of the error in respect  of  the
    medical report and the failure to take that into account, and the  lack
    of clear findings as to  suicide  risk  and  the  failure  to  consider
    properly the issue of the appellant's sexuality.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  It is certainly the case that the judge referred to  the  2016  report,
    as can be seen for example in her references to it at paragraph  71  in
    the context of the level of risk the appellant posed but  there  is  no
    specific reference to it in the analysis of paragraphs 118  to  120  of
    Article 3 health.  The judge referred there to an earlier  report  from
    2013 which he had also taken into account at paragraphs 110 and 111.

12.  In the 2016  report  at  paragraph  8.6.3  the  author  of  the  report
    expressed the opinion that the appellant's risk of attempting to commit
    suicide would increase to very high were he informed that he was  being
    repatriated to Afghanistan.  This came at the end of the section  which
    addressed specifically the effect of returning him  to  Afghanistan  on
    his mental health including risk of suicide and noting at 8.6.1 that at
    present  he  was  able  to  function   because   there   were   limited
    psychological  or  emotional  stressors  aside  from  the  anxiety  and
    anticipated threat of being returned to Afghanistan  and  that  if  the
    symptoms remained untreated they  would  significantly  interfere  with
    his ability to engage in any psychological treatment that  exposed  him
    to further vulnerability.  Although the author of the report could  not
    comment on what medical care was or was not available  in  Afghanistan,
    if he was unable to access services that would  both  support  him  and
    provide the requisite and  essential  psychological  treatment  it  was
    likely that the deterioration in his mental health would be distressing
    and degrading for him.

13.  That, then, was a very up-to-date  assessment  of  risk  to  which  the
    judge did not refer.  At paragraph  119  she  considered  the  risk  of
    suicide, bearing in mind the reference to previous suicide attempts  in
    the 2013 psychiatric assessment.  That suggested that the suicide  risk
    at that stage was not related necessarily  to  a  fear  of  return  but
    noting that uncertainty regarding the impact of his  asylum  claim  and
    the indeterminate sentence had  affected  his  mental  health  and  the
    trauma that he had suffered on the  way  to  the  United  Kingdom  also
    contributed.  It was said that treatment would not be effective  if  it
    was undertaken in a place where the appellant did not  feel  safe,  but
    the judge considered it to be notable that much of the traumas  leading
    to his PTSD were as a result of his journey to the United  Kingdom  and
    the violent attack to  which  he  had  been  subjected  here,  and  she
    commented that the return to Afghanistan was not return to where  those
    traumatic events took place.

14.  This in my view does not adequately take into account the  evidence  in
    the 2016 report which clearly more specifically than  the  2013  report
    had done linked the suicide risk to  the  concerns  the  appellant  had
    about return to Afghanistan.

15.  I canvassed with Ms Chandran whether paragraph  120  potentially  saved
    the earlier findings in that it was  said  there  that  the  respondent
    would be well aware of any suicide risk at the time that the  appellant
    was removed from the United Kingdom and  would  therefore  ensure  that
    necessary precautions were put in  place.   The  judge  concluded  that
    there was insufficient evidence before her to suggest that  his  mental
    health would deteriorate if he was returned to Afghanistan to  such  an
    extent as to engage Articles 3 and 8.  That  latter  point  is  clearly
    relevant to the issue as I have noted above as to the failure  to  take
    account of the linking of  the  impact  of  return  on  Afghanistan  to
    suicide risk, and also, it was argued, this failed adequately  to  take
    account of the guidance in J and in Y.  In J, Dyson LJ as he then  was,
    set out the various points in J that it was said had to be followed  in
    order properly to asses the  issue  of  suicide  risk.   This  includes
    first, the requirement of an assessment to be made of the  severity  of
    the treatment which it is said the appellant would suffer  if  removed,
    secondly, the need to show a causal link between the act or  threatened
    act of removal or expulsion and the  inhuman  treatment  relied  on  as
    violating the Article 3 rights; thirdly, in the context  of  a  foreign
    case the Article 3 threshold is particularly high; fourthly,  the  fact
    that an Article 3 claim can in principle succeed  in  a  suicide  case;
    fifthly, the question of whether  the  fear  of  ill-treatment  in  the
    receiving state is objectively well-founded;  and  sixthly,  a  further
    question  of  considerable  relevance  whether  the   removing   and/or
    receiving state has effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.



16.  I do not think that it can properly  be  said  that  paragraph  120  or
    anything  in  the  previous  paragraphs   effectively   addresses   the
    structured approach which is encouraged in J and in  Y.   This  can  be
    seen from the above list of factors, such matters  as  the  failure  to
    address what effective mechanisms there  are  to  reduce  the  risk  of
    suicide in the receiving state, nor was there  an  evaluation  in  that
    context of the well-foundedness  or  otherwise  of  the  claim.   As  a
    consequence, I am satisfied that the  judge  materially  erred  in  her
    evaluation of the suicide risk both in terms of the failure to  address
    specific relevant evidence and a failure to apply the proper test.

17.  The other issue is that of the appellant's sexuality. At paragraph  112
    the judge  expressed  concerns  regarding  his  statements  as  to  his
    sexuality given the  conflicting  accounts  that  he  had  given  which
    suggested a capacity to change accounts when he felt it  might  benefit
    him and the fact that he appeared to have had, fluctuated  with  regard
    to his sexuality.  These concerns are understandable ones for the judge
    to have, but the paragraph does not resolve her doubts in that  regard.
    Nor do I consider that the statement at paragraph 113  "moreover,  even
    if the appellant is gay ..." can properly be said to be  a  finding  on
    this point.  In this regard it is of course  important  to  recall  the
    issues which the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) required  to  be  asked  in
    relation to sexuality-based protection claims, the first of these being
    the need to make a finding as to whether the person is gay as  claimed.
    That in my judgement was  not  done  in  this  case.   The  alternative
    finding that paragraph 113 goes on to make does not save the  position,
    in my view.  The judge commented that the  appellant  did  not  suggest
    that he would live an openly gay  life  in  Afghanistan.   That  needed
    however to take into account his evidence that  he  would  be  discreet
    because he feared ill-treatment if he were not  discreet.   I  bear  in
    mind Mr Whitwell's point that that has to be seen in the light  of  the
    credibility findings and the submissions made by the Presenting Officer
    in that regard, but again it was  a  matter  on  which  the  judge  was
    required to make a finding as a consequence of the  evaluation  of  the
    evidence as a whole, and did not do so.  It would have been open to the
    judge for example to say that she accepted his sexuality  but  did  not
    accept in light of the evidence as a whole and even bearing in mind his
    statement  that  the  discretion  with  which  he  would  exercise  his
    sexuality was a matter of choice rather than compulsion, but  that  was
    not done.

Notice of Decision

18.  Accordingly, bringing these matters together, I consider that  material
    errors of law as contended for in the  grounds,  have  been  made  out.
    Both  parties  were  in  agreement  that  the  decision  would  in  the
    circumstances have to go back for a full hearing  before  a  First-tier
    Judge and I direct that that shall  take  place.  The  matter  will  be
    listed for 3 hours, with a Dari  interpreter.   It  will  be  heard  at
    Taylor House.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              18 October 2016
