
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00520/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On January 25, 2017             |On January 26, 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         MRS JUSTINE BIANZA MUTOMBO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo.  On
       August 18, 2015 he claimed asylum. The respondent refused his asylum
       claim on January 5, 2016 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

    2. The appellant appealed the removal decision under section  82(1)  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  January  20,
       2016.

    3. Her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Wedderspoon
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on September 27, 2016 and  in
       a decision promulgated on October 27, 2016 he dismissed  her  appeal
       on all grounds.

    4.  The  appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  October  31,  2016
       submitting the Judge had erred by  not  granting  the  appellant  an
       adjournment in circumstances where  she  was  unrepresented  and  by
       failing to give adequate reasons for rejecting her account.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Grant on November 9, 2016 on the ground it was  arguable  the  Judge
       had erred in his approach to an adjournment. The respondent filed  a
       Rule 24 response dated November 29, 2016 opposing the permission.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  the  parties  were
       represented as set out above.


    7.  The  notes  of  the  original  hearing   were   examined   by   the
       representatives and it was noted that the hearing  lasted  over  two
       hours during  which  there  was  lengthy  cross-examination  by  the
       respondent's representative, Miss  Shaw.  There  had  been  positive
       findings in her favour in which the  Judge  accepted  that  she  was
       married to a person who had been killed trying to kill the President
       and whose husband was a leading UDPS member.


SUBMISSIONS


    8. Mr Nicholson submitted that when the  appellant  turned  up  at  the
       hearing with a letter from the UDPS, London, the Judge  should  have
       firstly offered the respondent an opportunity to check the  veracity
       of the document and secondly, enquired why  the  signatory  or  some
       other representative had not attended the hearing. None of this  had
       been done and the Judge appeared to have dealt with the document  on
       the basis that as no one attended little weight should  be  attached
       to it. Additionally, the respondent's representative questioned  the
       appellant at length about her claim and failed  to  record  much  of
       this in his decision. The Judge appeared to have accepted  that  her
       husband was who he claimed to be but had  failed  to  make  adequate
       findings on whether the appellant was politically active or not.

    9. Mr Harrison relied  on  the  refusal  letter  but  acknowledged  the
       appellant suffered from mental health issues and  was  unrepresented
       at the original hearing. He conceded she had possibly done her  best
       and may not have been aware of the importance of witnesses attending
       in circumstances  where  a  letter  had  been  produced.  The  Judge
       appeared to accept positive aspects of her case  but  may  not  have
       considered all of the evidence when assessing the  political  issues
       facing her.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10. Two issues have been raised in  an  appeal  before  me  and  at  the
       hearing I agreed there was an error in law.

   11. The record of proceedings was very detailed and I found no  evidence
       that anyone sought an adjournment in the case.  In  fact,  the  main
       reference to the newly admitted document was recorded in  the  final
       submissions although clearly new documents  were  submitted  at  the
       hearing. It may  well  be  that  it  was  only  at  that  point  the
       respondent's position on the new document was  known.  There  is  no
       evidence that  the  appellant  actually  enquired  about  calling  a
       witness  and  the  fact  she  is  a  litigant  in  person  does  not
       automatically mean a different set of Rules would apply. On its  own
       this issue would not be sufficient to amount to an error in  law  as
       it is clear from the  record  of  proceedings  that  a  considerable
       amount of time was spent by the Judge on this hearing.


   12. The second issue that has been argued is that the Judge appeared  to
       accept her husband was politically  active  and  that  he  had  been
       killed trying to assassinate the  President.  It  therefore  follows
       that the Judge's finding that the appellant was not politically well-
       known was hard to balance with that finding and of course there  was
       evidence before the Judge she too was a UDPS activist  and  she  had
       been arrested. To suggest that  she  had  no  profile  against  this
       background seems unsustainable. The Judge was entitled to reject the
       evidence but merely saying based on her assertion  he  rejected  the
       claim overlooked the fact he had already accepted her evidence about
       her husband's own activities.


   13. I was satisfied there was an error in law.


   14. I raised with both representatives where this appeal should be heard
       in the event there was an error in law.  Both agreed that  in  light
       of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3 of the Practice Statement  the  matter
       should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   15. I direct that any additional evidence should be served on  both  the
       Tribunal and other party in accordance with the directions I  issued
       in court.


DECISION

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   17. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   18. The matter should not be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Wedderspoon. Ideally, this matter should be  listed  before
       myself in the First-tier but I leave that to the listing  department
       to decide if that is necessary.




Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

