
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00603/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th September 2016                        |On 27th September 2016        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               Ms azeb tefera
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant was born on 1st November 1990.  She appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis,  dated  16th  June  2016,
    dismissing  her  appeal  against  removal   on   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    25th July 2016 on the grounds that the judge arguably did not give  any
    or adequate reasons in support of his finding that  the  Appellant  was
    not Eritrean as she claimed.  The judge at paragraph 27 of his decision
    identified the paramount  issue  raised  by  the  appeal,  namely,  the
    Appellant's  claim  to  be  Eritrean  in  line  with  her  father.   At
    paragraphs 28 to 37 inclusive the judge recited various claims advanced
    by the Appellant.  Save to mention inconsistencies  which  he  did  not
    hold against the Appellant the structure of his assessment  was  really
    to set out the Appellant's claims.  At paragraph 38 of his decision  he
    concluded from the facts above that the Appellant was  not  a  credible
    witness in respect of her claim as to  her  nationality.   However  the
    judge's assessment arguably could not be characterised as expressing  a
    reason or reasons in support of such a finding, but merely amounted  to
    a recitation of claims advanced by her.

3.   Ms Radford relied on the grounds of appeal dated 4th  July  2016.   She
    submitted that this was a reasons challenge on the basis that the judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons for why he found the Appellant  was
    not an Eritrean national. He found that she had failed to show that she
    had been denied Ethiopian nationality.

4.   The Appellant's case was that her father was Eritrean  and  her  mother
    had taken Eritrean nationality.  The Appellant had  no  documents  from
    Ethiopia.  She had been born in Ethiopia but had lived in Eritrea for a
    year in 2001.  The judge recited the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs
    27 to 37 but did not give reasons for rejecting it.  At  paragraph  31,
    the Appellant was unable to give details in relation to Eritrea and the
    reason she gave was that she did not go out much while she  was  there.
    The judge made no findings on whether  he  accepted  or  rejected  this
    explanation.

5.   The Appellant was not old enough to have been educated in Tigrinya  and
    the judge failed to make findings on what  happened  at  the  Ethiopian
    embassy [the Embassy], merely  pointing  out  that  he  had  heard  two
    inconsistent accounts. There was nothing in  paragraphs  27  to  37  to
    explain the conclusion, at paragraph 38, that the Appellant's claim  to
    be an Eritrean national was not credible. Although the  judge  rejected
    the evidence of Ms Kedane at paragraphs 35 and 36, and the evidence  of
    the Appellant's other witness, effectively the judge  was  noting  that
    there was no supporting evidence. He did not give any reasons  for  why
    he rejected the Appellant's account.

6.   Accordingly, the core  of  the  Appellant's  account  was  rejected  at
    paragraph 38, but there were no clear reasons why that was in fact  the
    case.  The reasons given later in the decision in relation to the visit
    to the Embassy were made in light  of  the  earlier  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not a credible witness. Further, the judge also misstated
    the Appellant's case because there was clear  evidence  in  the  asylum
    interview that the  Appellant  had  been  mistreated  in  Ethiopia  and
    exploited by her employer.

7.   In relation to deprivation of Ethiopian nationality, the  judge  stated
    that the Appellant's account was inconsistent with  the  witnesses.  He
    failed to resolve this conflict or to state which of  the  accounts  he
    accepted, or give reasons for which of the accounts he rejected.  There
    were three areas where the reasoning was  not  clear:  the  Appellant's
    credibility at paragraphs 27 to 38;  the  account  at  the  Embassy  at
    paragraph 47; and the misstatement at paragraph 48.

8.   Ms Fijiwala for the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    factual findings at paragraphs 27 to 37. He noted the Appellant's  case
    at paragraph 10 and at paragraphs 20 to 26.  The Appellant did not know
    why her father was detained by the  Ethiopian  authorities  or  how  he
    died. This did not go in her favour. The judge indicated evidence which
    he found did not adversely affect the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    claim. Accordingly, the other findings from 27 to 37 clearly  indicated
    adverse  findings  in  relation  to  credibility.   The   judge   noted
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 31 to 32: she
    did not know the currency in Eritrea; she did not know the names of the
    places where she stayed; and she did not speak Tigrinya. The judge also
    found that she was educated in Ethiopia and made comments at  paragraph
    47 that this in itself was not a determinative factor. The judge  noted
    the inconsistent evidence of Ms Kedane at  paragraph  35  and  did  not
    accept the evidence of Mr Abraha.

9.   The judge took into account  all  relevant  information  in  concluding
    that the Appellant's claim that she was Eritrean was not credible.  The
    judge did not have to state at each point of his evidence what was  not
    credible because the overall conclusion given at paragraph 38 explained
    the situation. This amounted to a  structural  issue,  not  a  lack  of
    reasoning.

10.  The judge dealt  with  the  Appellant's  ability  to  obtain  Ethiopian
    nationality at paragraph 47 onwards. The judge did not have to  make  a
    finding which evidence he preferred.  He found that  the  evidence  was
    inconsistent and therefore it did not assist him. The Appellant had not
    provided a written application to the Ethiopian Embassy and had  failed
    to show that the authorities had refused to grant nationality  or  that
    she would not be able to enter the country. The Appellant, on the facts
    before the judge, had not shown that she was unable to obtain Ethiopian
    nationality. There was no misstatement of fact  because  the  Appellant
    had not faced any problems with the Ethiopian authorities. The  judge's
    findings were open to him and there was no material error of law.

11.  In response, Ms Radford submitted that it was  not  possible  to  infer
    from the judge's findings at  paragraphs  27  onwards  that  they  were
    adverse in relation to credibility.  It was not possible to infer  that
    this was the case because the judge  did  not  state  why  the  factors
    mentioned in those paragraphs damaged the Appellant's credibility.  The
    Appellant did not know her parents' history because of her  age.   This
    was a common feature. The judge failed to explain why  the  Appellant's
    level of knowledge was inconsistent with  her  explanation.  The  judge
    needed  to  explain  why  speaking  Amharic  damaged  the   Appellant's
    credibility.  The  Appellant  had  given  evidence  of   her   father's
    nationality and that he had Eritrean papers. The Appellant may  not  be
    lawfully entitled to Ethiopian nationality. On her own account she  had
    not made a written application because the authorities  would  not  let
    her make it.


Discussion and Conclusions

12.  At paragraphs 27 to 37 the judge set out the Appellant's claim made  in
    her interview and her oral evidence, and the evidence of her witnesses.
    The Appellant was born in Ethiopia. Her father was born in Eritrea  and
    she thinks her mother  became  Eritrean  because  of  her  father.  The
    Appellant did not know why her father was detained in Ethiopia in  2000
    as she was only nine years old at the time.  She did not know  how  her
    father died in 2001 because she was too young.  The Appellant's  mother
    died in 2007 when the Appellant was 16 years of age.  The Appellant did
    not claim that her mother gave her any  details  regarding  her  father
    once she was older and able to understand.

13.  The Appellant had given an inconsistent account regarding the  searches
    of her home for weapons by the authorities, but this was  not  relevant
    to the issue of nationality and therefore the  judge  made  no  adverse
    credibility finding in that respect. The Appellant claimed she went  to
    Assab, Eritrea in 2000 and returned to Ethiopia in 2003.   She  entered
    Eritrea illegally and left it illegally.  However she could not  recall
    where she lived in Assab and she was unable  to  answer  any  questions
    regarding the names of buildings, hospitals or parks  there.   She  was
    unable to give the name of the currency in Eritrea and she stated  that
    she did not attend school.  The Appellant does not speak  Tigrinya  and
    was unable to give any details about her  claimed  two  to  three  year
    period of life in Eritrea during her asylum interview and stated it was
    because she was too young and did not go out. The Appellant had  stated
    that she had never been in possession of Eritrean documents of her own,
    although her mother had held some at one point prior to her death, in a
    camp, of malaria.

14.  The Appellant was educated to grade 6 in Ethiopia and the  judge  found
    this was one factor indicating that the Ethiopian authorities  regarded
    her as Ethiopian on the evidence taken as a whole. The Appellant and Ms
    Kedane gave inconsistent evidence regarding  their  knowledge  of  each
    other. The Appellant claimed Ms Kedane visited  her  once  in  Ethiopia
    when she was very young. Ms Kedane stated in oral  testimony  that  the
    first time she saw the Appellant was in Ethiopia  four  years  ago.  Ms
    Kedane stated that the Appellant's father was the son of her aunt,  but
    she did not state her aunt's nationality or that of her aunt's  husband
    which was crucial to the nationality of  the  Appellant's  father.   Ms
    Kedane did state  that  her  whole  family  was  Eritrean.   The  judge
    concluded that, for these reasons, no evidential weight could be placed
    on Ms Kedane's evidence.

15.  Mr Abraha had only known the Appellant since she arrived in the UK  and
    met her on the day he accompanied her to the Embassy. He only knew  the
    Appellant through Ms Kedane and the judge concluded that Mr Abraha  did
    not give any evidence  relevant  to  the  Appellant's  father  and  his
    nationality.

16.  The judge concluded, at paragraph 38, that her  claim  to  be  Eritrean
    was not a credible  one  because  on  the  information  given  by  her,
    applying the lower standard of proof, she had failed to  show  she  was
    Eritrean rather than Ethiopian.  I find that the judge is  entitled  to
    come to this conclusion on the basis of what he set out  at  paragraphs
    27 to 37. He could have expressed himself better, but it was clear from
    the tenor of those paragraphs that he found  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of Eritrea, and of her father, to indicate that she  was  not
    Eritrean. The fact that she had been  educated  in  Ethiopia  indicated
    that she was Ethiopian and her failure to produce supporting  documents
    was not credible given that she said her mother possessed some, but had
    not given them to her. The evidence from her witnesses did not  support
    her account and was inconsistent.  I find that  the  judge's  reasoning
    was adequate and there was no material error of law.

17.  It is certainly clear from the judge's conclusions at paragraph  47  to
    54 that the judge found that the Appellant had failed to show that  she
    is Eritrean and not Ethiopian.  The judge found that the Appellant  was
    educated in Ethiopia which was an indicator  that  she  was  Ethiopian,
    although it was not a determinative factor. However, there  were  other
    factors which were relevant and indicated that there was  a  reasonable
    likelihood that she was in fact Ethiopian. She was fluent  in  Amharic,
    which was an Ethiopian language, and the Appellant  and  her  witnesses
    had given inconsistent evidence about their trip to the Embassy.

18.  The Appellant stated that her first visit to the Embassy  was  with  Mr
    Abraha and they had travelled to London together from Rotherham by  bus
    from Meadow Hall. Mr Abraha stated in oral testimony that he had  never
    been to Rotherham and did not travel to London with the Appellant.   He
    met her at Ms Kedane's home in London and they caught the  bus  to  the
    Embassy. The Appellant stated that she saw a man  who  was  brought  to
    reception at the Embassy to speak to her and she told him that she  was
    Ethiopian and that her father was Eritrean and her mother was Ethiopian
    at birth, but that he refused to help her as her father  was  Eritrean.
    Mr Abraha stated that the Appellant asked for a form of  identification
    at the Embassy and told them that she was Eritrean and that as soon  as
    she said she was Eritrean they refused to assist her.

19.  The judge stated that,  on  her  own  account,  the  Appellant  had  no
    Ethiopian documents and provided none to the Embassy.  She had accepted
    that she did not set out her history, parentage and lineage in  writing
    and submit it in  the  absence  of  such  identification.   No  written
    application was ever made to the Ethiopian Embassy.  Mr  Abraha  stated
    that the Ethiopian Embassy informed the Appellant that if she can bring
    documentation as proof they would help, but  without  proof  they  were
    unable to assist her.

20.  On this evidence the judge concluded that the Appellant had  failed  to
    show, to the lower standard, that the Ethiopian authorities had refused
    to grant her nationality or arbitrarily refused her permission to enter
    the country. This was a finding that was open  to  the  judge  on  that
    evidence. The Appellant's account was inconsistent  and  therefore  she
    had failed to establish the necessary facts to show that she was unable
    to obtain Ethiopian nationality.

21.  Accordingly, the judge's conclusion that the Appellant  had  failed  to
    show, to the lower standard, that she was not Ethiopian was  one  which
    was open to him on the evidence. I am not  persuaded  by  Ms  Radford's
    submission that the decision is so lacking in reasons that  it  is  not
    possible to determine any conclusions the judge has in fact made.

22.  On reading the decision as  a  whole,  the  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for why he does not accept the Appellant's claim. The judge has
    summarised the evidence and reached a conclusion which was open to  him
    on the basis of that evidence. I find that there was no material  error
    of law and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 22nd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 22nd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
