
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/00712/2015
                                                               PA/00976/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 21 September 2016                 |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    N I F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Paxton, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. In this appeal I refer to the Appellant as the  Secretary  of  State  and
   the Respondent as the Claimant for ease of reference. The Claimant  is  a
   national of Somalia. He entered the United  Kingdom  on  8  October  2013
   using a UK travel document and was refused leave to enter as  Immigration
   Officers at Stansted airport did not believe he was the rightful  holder.
   Removal directions were set for 8 October 2013 but he claimed asylum.  On
   25 August 2015 the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
   Claimant as he was a foreign criminal who had been sentenced to a  period
   of imprisonment of at least 12 months.


2. The Claimant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  allowed
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke in a decision promulgated on
   16 May 2016. She found  that  he  was  a  refugee  and  consequently  the
   exception to automatic deportation in s33 (2) of the UK Borders Act  2007
   applied.  The  Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  that
   decision. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on  3
   June 2016. The Judge found that there were arguable errors of law as  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not have regard to the latest country guidance on
   Somalia, MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442,
   and there were arguable errors in the finding that the  Claimant's  crime
   did not amount to a serious crime leading to exclusion from  humanitarian
   protection.

   The Grounds

3. Ground 1 asserts that the Judge erred in her approach to  the  return  to
   Mogadishu of a Bajuni. The Judge found that the  Claimant  was  a  Somali
   ethnic Bajuni from Chula and his claim to have escaped from  his  captors
   was credible. The Judge then  allowed  the  appeal  by  reference  to  KS
   (Somalia) CG 2004 UKIAT 00271 on the basis that he would be  at  risk  on
   return as a Bajuni clan member. The Secretary of  State  argues  that  in
   failing to apply the most recent country guidance,  MOJ,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had materially erred. The relevant paragraphs of MOJ are set out
   in the application. The Secretary of State also contends that the case of
   AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015]  UKUT  673  (IAC)  is  also
   materially  relevant  and  that  the  Bajuni  have  a  clan  presence  in
   Mogadishu.

4. Ground 2 asserts that the Judge's finding that the  Claimant  should  not
   be excluded from humanitarian  protection  is  completely  without  legal
   justification. A twelve month  sentence  is  serious  enough  to  justify
   automatic deportation and for the public interest to remain even where  a
   person shows an exception under s33 of the 2007 Act.

   The Hearing


5. Mr Richards submitted that the  Judge  only  dealt  with  exclusion  from
   humanitarian protection and did not  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
   protection grounds. She allowed it on asylum grounds. In  his  submission
   the principal error was glaringly obvious as the Judge made no  reference
   to the most recent country guidance case law and the  relevant  part  was
   quoted in the grounds.  Perhaps  the  key  paragraphs  were  set  out  at
   paragraphs 407 (a) and (g) where the court found that the significance of
   clan membership had changed and there  was  no  clan  based  violence  in
   Mogadishu. Even if he was not from Mogadishu this had  to  be  considered
   and it was not appropriate for the Judge to direct herself  to  case  law
   from 2004 when there had been a sea change in circumstances.  It  was  as
   clear a case of material error as there could be and it ought to  be  set
   aside. He submitted that it should be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.
   Nationality and clan membership were not challenged.


6. Mr Paxton submitted that the grounds were misconceived  because  MOJ  was
   Article 15 (c) case. The case of KS was still good law. If  MOJ  was  the
   leading case on Bajuni's it should have been referred to by the Secretary
   of State. It was a persecution claim  and  the  Claimant  was  an  ethnic
   Bajuni. The  Secretary  of  State  conceded  in  the  refusal  letter  at
   paragraph 11 that Bajuni were at risk and there was no need  to  consider
   MOJ as it was off point. Article 15 (c) was not presented as an  argument
   and the Secretary of State did not refer to MOJ in  the  refusal  letter.
   The reason KS was the key case was that it dealt with Bajunis and had not
   been removed from the website. It was not good enough for  the  Secretary
   of State to say it was out of  date.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
   present any evidence to show that Bajuni would not be granted asylum  and
   they were regularly granted asylum.  Ground 2 was not material.

7. In reply Mr Richards said that KS was authority for not  simply  risk  on
   return but how to identify Bajuni and there were matters that were  still
   relevant. MOJ was clearly not limited to Article 15 (c) and the  decision
   letter was drafted strongly on the basis that the Claimant was not Somali
   and that he was from Tanzania. His nationality did not necessarily settle
   matters against the Claimant because there were other matters to be taken
   into account. This was a case where MOJ should have been at the forefront
   of  Judge's  mind  so  that  consideration  should  be   given   to   the
   circumstances of this Claimant.

   Discussion and Findings

8. In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA Civ 982 the Court of  Appeal  endorsed
   Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure to follow a  clear,
   apparently applicable country guidance case or to show why  it  does  not
   apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded as  a  ground  for
   review or appeal on a point of law.  The Court of  Appeal  said  that  it
   represented a failure to take a material matter into account.


9. The issue the Upper Tribunal determined in MOJ is set out at paragraph  1
   of the decision:

         "Whether the current situation in Mogadishu is such as  to  entitle
         nationals of Somalia whose home area is Mogadishu or whose proposed
         area of relocation is Mogadishu to  succeed  in  their  claims  for
         refugee status, humanitarian protection status under Article  15(c)
         or protection against refoulment under Articles 3 or 2 of the  ECHR
         solely on the basis  that  they  are  civilians  and  do  not  have
         powerful actors in a position to afford them adequate protection."

10. It is clear that  the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  neither
   confined to Article  15  (c)  nor  to  individuals  who  originated  from
   Mogadishu. The First-tier Tribunal found in this case that  the  Claimant
   was Bajuni, as claimed, and that his account  was  true.  She  stated  at
   paragraph 38 that it followed from these findings that  he  would  be  at
   real risk of persecution and treatment contrary to Article 3  on  return.
   It was the Claimant's claim that he was from Chula and that he  had  been
   captured by the Marehen and told that they wanted him to fight for  them.
   The First-tier Tribunal, having found the Claimant to be Bajuni,  treated
   this as determinative of the question of risk of persecution. In so doing
   she relied on the case of KS. That case remains country guidance  because
   it is on the Tribunal's website. The Upper Tribunal in that case did  not
   conclude that every member of  the  Bajuni  clan  would  be  at  risk  of
   persecution and made the following observations:

         "38.     In the second category clan membership  will  normally  be
             determinative but may not be in individual cases  where  there
             are features in the claimant's  background  and  circumstances
             which indicate that the claimant is not in fact  at  the  same
             risk as that faced generally by other clan members. By way  of
             example where a female member of such a clan  marries  into  a
             majority clan, she may  have  protection  from  her  husband's
             clan.  Therefore, subject to the qualifications  we  have  set
             out, the Tribunal agree with  the  approach  set  out  in  the
             Secretary of State's letter of 25 July 2003.


         39 The present appeal falls within the second category.  The  issue
             is whether the appellant is genuinely a Bajuni. Mr  Sheikh  in
             his  submissions  has  accepted  has  accepted  that  if   the
             appellant is Bajuni and if his account of events in Somalia is
             correct, then he is entitled to asylum. When assessing a claim
             to be a member of the Bajuni clan, the issue of language is of
             considerable importance. The Adjudicator clearly regarded  the
             language spoken by the appellant as a  critical  indicator  of
             his credibility.


         40.      It is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that if
             the appellant is Bajuni  and  if  his  account  of  events  in
             Somalia is correct, then he is entitled to asylum."

11. The Upper Tribunal then endorsed previous guidance on how  to  determine
   whether a claimant  is  Bajuni.  There  has  been  a  sea-change  in  the
   situation in Somalia since  the  decision  in  KS  in  2004.  Whilst  the
   guidance may remain relevant to the determination of whether  a  Claimant
   is Bajuni it must be read together with the more recent country  guidance
   case law. The Secretary of State's refusal letter did not concede that if
   the Claimant were Bajuni he would be  entitled  refugee  status.  It  was
   accepted in paragraph 14 that the minority clans  in  Somalia,  including
   the Bajuni had been historically persecuted. The Secretary of State  then
   concluded he was not a Bajuni from Somalia  and  therefore  rejected  his
   claim.


12. The Upper Tribunal in MOJ  concluded  as  summarised  at  (xii)  of  the
   headnote that:

         "The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."

13. The Claimant in this case did not originate from Mogadishu  and  on  the
   undisputed findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  from  a
   minority clan. The First-tier Tribunal was obliged in the  light  of  the
   country guidance to consider whether he could relocate to  Mogadishu.  It
   may well be that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong-footed by the  absence
   of reference to MOJ in the refusal letter and the fact that the Secretary
   of State was unrepresented at the hearing. It may be also that she  would
   have come to the same conclusion notwithstanding the error but it  cannot
   be said that but for the misdirection she would have done so and  so  the
   error is clearly material. Since  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
   appeal on asylum grounds and I found there was an error of  law  in  that
   decision Ground 2 is not material.


14. In the light of the fact finding required and in  accordance  with  Part
   7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber
   of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper-Tier  Tribunal,  the  extent  of
   judicial fact finding is such that this matter should be re-heard in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  The findings that he is a  Bajuni  from  Chula  and
   that his account of what happened to him is true are preserved.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the decision to be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

