
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00327/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Given extempore on 7 August 2019     |On 28 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                                  Preet [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G L C Brown of Counsel, instructed by Legal
Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  2  March  1984  and
    who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  20  October  2015.   She   made
    application for asylum to the respondent, but the  respondent  declined
    to recognise her claim and so she appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker on 3 April
    2019 in Manchester.  He dismissed the appellant's appeal but  in  doing
    so has materially erred in law.

2.   Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parker should be set aside and the  matter  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, in  order  that  the  appeal  can  be  reheard
    afresh.  The judge failed to properly assess the issue  of  whether  or
    not the appellant had access to family  or  friends  in  Jalalabad,  or
    elsewhere and the findings he made at  paragraphs  28  and  29  of  the
    determination are unsafe.  The judge  failed  properly  to  assess  the
    Article 15(c) risk to this appellant and to properly assess the  impact
    of security assessment  of  the  appellant's  private  life  claim,  in
    respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395, as amended ("immigration rules").

3.   The appellant has been denied a fair hearing and appeal is remitted  to
    the First Tier Tribunal where it will be heard by a  judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker.  A Punjabi Afghan interpreter will be
    required.  Two hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
21 August 2019
