
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00528/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms E Foubister, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan,     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    it is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iraq, born in 1984, whereas the
    respondent contends that he is in fact a Lebanese citizen born in 1985.

 3. On 4 January  2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant's human rights claim within the context of a decision to make
    a deportation order against him in the light of his criminal offending.
     The respondent also certified under section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") that the appellant had
    been convicted of a particularly serious crime and constituted a danger
    to the community of the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant's offending goes back to 2004 when he  was  convicted  in
    the Magistrates' Court of  obtaining  property  by  deception.  Further
    offences of  obtaining  property  by  deception  in  2005  resulted  in
    detention in a young offenders' institution for nine months.  In  March
    2006 he was convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  which
    resulted in a  further  term  of  six  months'  detention  in  a  young
    offenders' institute.  In February 2007 he  was  convicted  of  driving
    whilst disqualified and related motoring offences as well as failing to
    surrender to custody, for which he received four months'  imprisonment.
    Again in February 2007, he  was  convicted  of  obtaining  services  by
    deception which resulted in a term of imprisonment of 28 days.

 5. The particular offence which led to the decision to make a  deportation
    order was one of possession with intent to supply  Class  C  drugs  for
    which he received a sentence of 32 months' imprisonment on 26  November
    2007 in the  Crown  Court  at  Blackfriars.  There  was  a  consecutive
    sentence of four months' imprisonment for driving whilst  disqualified.



 6. After the conviction for  possession  with  intent  to  supply  he  was
    convicted in November 2011 of driving whilst disqualified  and  driving
    whilst uninsured, receiving a community order for  the  driving  whilst
    disqualified offence.  On 23 May 2013 he was convicted of possession or
    control of articles for use in fraud and making  false  representations
    for gain or loss, resulting in nine months' imprisonment suspended  for
    24 months.  Lastly, on 16 November 2015 he was convicted of breach of a
    non-molestation order for which he received a fine  and  a  restraining
    order.

 7. The appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  of  4
    January 2017 came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A  M  Black  ("the
    FtJ") at a hearing on 27 November 2018 following which she allowed  the
    appeal on asylum  and  article  3  grounds.   She  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not a Lebanese citizen but is  an  Iraqi  citizen  as  he
    claimed.

    The grounds and submissions

 8. The respondent's grounds of appeal in relation to  the  FtJ's  decision
    can be summarised as follows.  It is argued that the FtJ erred  in  law
    in concluding that the appellant was an Iraqi national  rather  than  a
    Lebanese national.  Evidence before the FtJ included a travel  document
    that  had  been  agreed  by  the  Lebanese  authorities.  Part  of  the
    application  for  the  travel   document   required   the   applicant's
    thumbprints.  A 'Sprakab' (language) report suggested that the  dialect
    spoken by the appellant is common in some Arabic varieties, for example
    in Lebanon, Northern Syria and Southern Turkey.  There was also a  visa
    application "in the details accepted by the respondent  confirming  the
    appellant's  nationality   as   Lebanese"   to   quote   the   grounds.
    Furthermore, there was evidence that when the appellant was removed  to
    Iraq in 2010 he was returned to the UK having been deemed by the  Iraqi
    authorities not to be an Iraqi national. Whilst in Iraq he had  claimed
    to be Palestinian.

 9. The grounds take issue with the FtJ's assessment of  two  letters  from
    the respondent to the Lebanese Embassy in London in  terms  of  certain
    differences in those letters.  Whilst the FtJ had noted that  the  name
    and date of birth on the letters  were  different  from  those  on  the
    travel document application, the grounds state that "these details  are
    auto populated by the computer system and are those that were  believed
    to  be  the  appellant's  true  identity".   On  the  other  hand,  the
    application form reflected the details provided by the  appellant  that
    are recorded as one of his several aliases on the Home Office  computer
    system.  In addition, it  was  a  matter  of  fact  that  the  Lebanese
    authorities in 2014/2015 were prepared to issue a  travel  document  in
    the details provided by the appellant, including his thumbprints.

10. The grounds rely on the appellant's convictions for various offences of
    dishonesty and that his apparent use of 17 aliases and  five  different
    dates of birth, as indicated on the police  national  computer  ("PNC")
    printout.   Even  if  some  of  those  names  were  as  a   result   of
    misinterpretation and variations of the  same  name,  they  demonstrate
    that the appellant is prepared to use deception.  Similarly, on the PNC
    printout it is recorded that the appellant was born in Beirut.

11. Further, the grounds contend that the FtJ was wrong to say  that  there
    was an anomaly in relation  to  a  purported  visa  application  of  12
    February 2002 because the visa itself was said to have  been  delivered
    "in person" (according to the respondent's screenprint) but  there  was
    no evidence that the appellant was in Lebanon in 2002.  The point  made
    in the grounds is that the fact that the visa was delivered  in  person
    only confirmed that the visa was collected  from  the  visa  processing
    centre.

12. Lastly, it is argued that weight could and should have been attached to
    screenprints from the Home Office computer system which  suggests  that
    the Lebanese Embassy agreed to provide  an  emergency  travel  document
    ("ETD") for the appellant.

13. In his submissions Mr Whitwell relied on  the  grounds.   He  submitted
    that the  strongest  point  for  the  respondent  was  that  the  Iraqi
    authorities did not accept the  appellant  as  an  Iraqi  when  he  was
    removed there in September 2010.  The  FtJ's  analysis  of  this  issue
    betrayed inadequate reasons.  Although Mr Whitwell  accepted  that  the
    Sprakab report was not determinative, he alighted on one aspect  of  it
    which refers to the appellant's pronunciation in a  particular  respect
    as being common in some Arabic varieties spoken  in  Lebanon,  Northern
    Syria and Southern Turkey.

14. Ms Foubister in her submissions relied on the 'rule 24' response.   She
    submitted that  the  FtJ  had  considered  all  the  evidence  and  her
    conclusions were open to her.

15. As regards the decision by  the  Iraqi  judiciary  not  to  accept  the
    appellant as an Iraqi national, that was because there  was  no  family
    member to vouch for or identify him.  The FtJ had properly  dealt  with
    this in her decision.  She made a finding in  relation  to  his  having
    stated to the Iraqi authorities that he was Palestinian.

16.  Further,  the  Sprakab  report  was  inconclusive  and  in  any  event
    consistent with the appellant's history of arrival in the UK.

17.  In  relation  to  the  ETD,  there  was  no  actual  evidence  of  the
    thumbprints.  Furthermore, as regards the Lebanese  passport  that  the
    respondent relies on to show that he is Lebanese, that passport was the
    very one that was the basis of the appellant's conviction for having  a
    false document.  The respondent's reliance on his having that  passport
    is inconsistent with the conviction.

18. As to the Lebanese visa application, the appellant  claimed  asylum  in
    March 2002 so there was evidence that in fact the appellant was in  the
    UK at the time (not in Lebanon).

19. In his reply Mr Whitwell submitted that to suggest that  there  was  no
    evidence of the ETD (as had been on behalf of the appellant)  puts  the
    matter  too  highly,  although  it  was  accepted  that  there  was  no
    documentary confirmation of the ETD as such.  In relation to the  entry
    clearance application made in February 2002, as can be  seen  from  the
    FtJ's summary of the appellant's immigration history,  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum in the UK on 15 March 2002 is  not  inconsistent  with
    the entry clearance application having been made and  granted  February
    2002. This point does not appear to have been appreciated by the FtJ.

20. At the end of submissions we reserved our decision, which we now  give.



    Assessment and Conclusions

21. As  regards  the  s.  72  certificate  (presumption  of  conviction  of
    particularly serious crime and danger to the community) the  FtJ  found
    that the appellant had not rebutted the presumption that  he  had  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime in relation to the offence of
    possession of Class drugs with  intent  to  supply,  but  that  he  had
    rebutted the presumption that he constituted a danger to the  community
    of the United  Kingdom.   There  is  no  challenge  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent  to  the  FtJ's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  does  not
    represent a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

22. In the following paragraphs  we  summarise  the  FtJ's  conclusions  in
    relation to the appellant's nationality. That summary  illustrates  why
    we have concluded that there is no error of law in the  FtJ's  decision
    as contended for on behalf of the respondent.  We should also add, that
    the conclusion by the FtJ that the appellant is an Iraqi national  was,
    on the facts of this appeal, determinative of the outcome on asylum and
    article 3 grounds.  The contrary  was  not  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

23. The FtJ identified with precision the evidence that she had before  her
    from both parties.  She summarised the  appellant's  claim  in  detail.
    That claim was to the effect that he was born in Basra in Iraq and that
    when he was aged about five, Iraqi intelligence officials came  to  the
    family home in Basra accusing the appellant's father of  attempting  to
    overthrow Saddam Hussain, as well as membership of an illegal political
    party.  The appellant's father and older  brother,  Haider,  were  both
    arrested and his father was killed.  The appellant's  mother  therefore
    sent the appellant and his middle brother, Hussain, to  Syria  to  live
    with a family friend.  The appellant  has  not  had  contact  with  his
    mother or Haider since then.  Whilst in Syria  the  appellant  and  his
    brother lived in a Palestinian  refugee  camp.   When  the  appellant's
    brother was identified as working illegally the appellant was put  into
    an orphanage but escaped.

24. The appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK at the age of about 16,
    his passage to the UK having been arranged by a family friend in  Syria
    following the appellant's arrest there for being an illegal  immigrant.



25. The case before the FtJ was that the appellant had no family or friends
    in Iraq and had never been to Lebanon.  He was persuaded  by  an  older
    man that the way to get immigration status in the UK was  to  work.  To
    that end he provided the appellant  with  a  false  Lebanese  passport.
    Thus, he used a false passport to obtain leave to remain in the UK.  He
    did not use the travel document which was issued to  him  by  the  Home
    Office when he was granted exceptional leave to  remain  ("ELR")  as  a
    minor because he thought he would be sent to an orphanage,  as  he  had
    been in Syria.  He used the false Lebanese  passport  to  obtain  work.
    When his leave to remain associated with the Lebanese passport  expired
    he was unable to find work.  He then became  involved  in  criminality.
    When he was arrested police found the Lebanese passport  and  documents
    relating to it.  He pleaded guilty to having false documents.  He  then
    became involved in further criminality.

26. In relation to the various names that have been attributed to  him,  he
    had only ever used  two  names,  his  own  and  that  in  the  Lebanese
    passport.  Other names had been attributed to him but his case was that
    that resulted from his name being misspelt or misheard, or  the  police
    recorded the names on the false documents seized at the time.

27. On 6 September 2010 the appellant was part of a group who were deported
    to Baghdad.  He did not have a travel document.  Being an  undocumented
    returnee, he was held in detention for his nationality and identity  to
    be determined by a judge in Iraq.  He was beaten,  sexually  assaulted,
    threatened, abused, kicked and urinated upon whilst in  detention.   He
    was asked a number of questions about  his  brother,  Haider,  and  his
    father.  He was unable to answer the  questions  and  was  punched  and
    kicked repeatedly,  such  that  his  teeth  were  broken  and  his  jaw
    fractured.  The Iraqi judge did not accept that the appellant was Iraqi
    because  he  was  unable  to  produce  a  family  member  or  otherwise
    demonstrate his nationality.  He was returned to the UK on 22 September
    2010 and detained on arrival.  He was sent  to  hospital  from  Gatwick
    Airport for medical treatment.

28. After referring to the appellant's further criminal offending  and  the
    circumstances in which  a  non-molestation  order  was  made,  the  FtJ
    summarised the appellant's claim  to  be  in  fear  of  persecution  on
    return, that is in terms of his imputed political opinion,  his  father
    and brother having opposed the regime of Saddam Hussain and his brother
    being wanted by the authorities in Iraq.  He was told by the  Chief  of
    Police, Colonel Hatem, that he and his brother,  Haider,  were  enemies
    and  that  the  appellant  was  being  ill-treated  on  senior  orders.
    Further, the appellant does not  have  a  Civil  Status  Identity  Card
    ("CSID")  or  any  reasonable  prospect  of  obtaining  one  within   a
    reasonable period of time.

29. The FtJ summarised the respondent's case and the appellant's grounds of
    appeal.  She set out the legal framework, including with  reference  to
    authority, and referred in detail to the  offence  of  possession  with
    intent to supply, quoting from the sentencing remarks.

30. At [62] she described in detail the documentary evidence relied  on  by
    the respondent in support of the  contention  that  the  appellant  was
    Lebanese rather than Iraqi, making certain findings along the way.  She
    referred first to a poor copy of part of the Lebanese passport used  by
    the appellant, and "a good copy" of  the  vignette  granting  leave  to
    enter as a student.

31. She then described two letters from the respondent  dated  11  November
    2014 to the Lebanese Embassy in London.  She said that, oddly  the  two
    letters have the same date yet are in different typeface and signed  by
    different members of staff in different departments at the Home Office.
     One letter was from a named member of staff at  the  Country  Returns,
    Operations and Strategy, Immigration Enforcement at the Home Office  in
    Croydon.   The  second  is  from  a  member  of  staff  in  Immigration
    Enforcement in Liverpool.  Both letters referred to  enclosing  an  ETD
    application and both have a similar Home  Office  reference.   In  each
    case the details for the appellant were those  cited  in  the  Lebanese
    passport.  The FtJ then said that "The existence of two such letters is
    unexplained".  What we consider the FtJ meant by that was that  it  was
    unexplained as to why there were two letters in  relation  to  the  ETD
    application, rather than just one.  In any event, she then went  on  to
    state that she had been provided with a copy  of  the  ETD  application
    which cited the appellant's name (not that in  the  Lebanese  passport)
    with his stated date of birth (not that in the covering letter from the
    Home Office) and his place of birth recorded as Basra.   She  concluded
    therefore, that the content of the application form did not  correspond
    with the content of the  Lebanese  passport  or  the  two  Home  Office
    letters.

32. She next referred to a screenprint relating to a visa application  said
    to have been made by the appellant on 12 February 2002.  She noted that
    that corresponded with the vignette  in  the  Lebanese  passport.   She
    further noted that the visa was delivered "in person" according to  the
    screenprint although stating that "there is no evidence to suggest that
    the appellant was in Lebanon in 2002".  She  referred  to  that  as  an
    unexplained anomaly.

33. The FtJ referred to a Bio-Data Information form giving the details that
    the appellant claimed as to his date of birth  and  Iraqi  nationality,
    but with a Home Office reference which was different from that  on  the
    correspondence to the Lebanese Embassy.  The form  was  signed  by  the
    appellant and dated.

34. She next referred to "various fingerprints" on  a  Home  Office  record
    which refers to the appellant by a name that is  not  on  the  Lebanese
    passport, citing his claimed date of birth (different from that on  the
    Lebanese passport) and referring to his being Lebanese.  She noted that
    the Home Office reference was not that on the two letters from the Home
    Office to the Lebanese Embassy.

35. She then referred to a screenprint of the respondent's  records  on  19
    January 2015, the screenprint itself referring to an e-mail  which,  to
    summarise, stated that there was no query from  the  Lebanese  Embassy,
    meaning that it was understood that the  fingerprints  were  acceptable
    (to the Lebanese Embassy).  The screenprint has a posed question as  to
    whether the Lebanese authorities were willing to accept  the  appellant
    as Lebanese. The response according to the screenprint  was  "On  [sic]
    principle, yes, but they have still conduct  verification  in  Lebanon,
    and if verification fails he may be rejected as Lebanese national".

36. The next screenprint referred to by the FtJ is dated 27 April 2015.  It
    states that an ETD  agreement  had  been  received  from  the  Lebanese
    Embassy on 24 April 2015 and that the appellant  had  been  granted  an
    approval to enter Lebanon with details as to his name and date of birth
    (not details that the appellant claims for himself).

37. At [63] she said that the screenprints were the only reference  in  the
    documentary evidence adduced by the respondent to  an  ETD  purportedly
    being issued by the Lebanese authorities.  She noted that there was  no
    correspondence from the Lebanese Embassy to confirm that they  accepted
    the appellant as being Lebanese.  She said that given  the  presumption
    in the Home Office records, for example that that there  was  no  query
    from the Lebanese Embassy so far, and the disparity in the  identifying
    data about the appellant in the various documents, she  was  "concerned
    that these screenprint notes are not wholly reliable".

38. At [66] the FtJ referred to the Sprakab report, noting that  it  stated
    that Arabic is not the appellant's mother tongue and that his  language
    cannot be attributed to any particular  country,  and  that  there  are
    features of his Arabic  which  are  found  in  various  Arabic-speaking
    countries.  She concluded that that analysis was not inconsistent  with
    the appellant's claim that he left Iraq at the age of 5 and lived in  a
    refugee camp with  many  other  refugees  of  different  nationalities,
    particularly Palestinians, until he came to the UK at the age of 16.

39. She referred to authority on the question of an  individual's  duty  to
    substantiate their nationality.

40. She then considered the medical  evidence  of  the  injuries  that  the
    appellant had when he returned from  Iraq  in  2010  with  a  suspected
    dislocated jaw.  When examined at Harmondsworth he is reported to  have
    had bruises and severe burn lesions.   The  medical  records  refer  to
    damage to his teeth.  To summarise, the medical evidence was  that  the
    overall  pattern  of  scarring  "entirely"  supported  the  appellant's
    claimed history.  He was also found to be suffering from PTSD.  The FtJ
    accepted the medical evidence and concluded that it was consistent with
    the claimed treatment in Iraq in September 2010.

41. In all those circumstances she concluded at  [72]  that  the  appellant
    could not be criticised for failing to approach the  Iraqi  authorities
    in the UK to confirm his nationality.  She also found that he could not
    be expected to approach the Lebanese Embassy given that it was his case
    that he had used a false Lebanese passport whilst  living  in  the  UK.
    She  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a   wholly   plausible
    explanation for his use of the Lebanese passport  which  she  said  was
    consistent with his having a record of using false credit cards in  the
    past.

42. She thus concluded that the appellant had demonstrated on a balance  of
    probabilities that he is Iraqi and that he  was  born  on  19  December
    1985.

43. There then follows in the FtJ's decision an analysis of the appellant's
    offending and the extent to which he had rebutted the  presumptions  in
    s. 72 of the 2002 Act.  As explained above, there is  no  challenge  to
    those conclusions.

44. In assessing the potential risk of persecution on return  to  Iraq  the
    FtJ again summarised the basis of the appellant's claim.  She  referred
    to his appeal in December 2006 against a decision to deport him and the
    dismissal of that appeal.  The conclusion in that earlier decision  was
    that he was not at greater risk than  other  Iraqi  nationals  at  that
    time.  The FtJ correctly took that 2006 appeal decision as her starting
    point.  She gave sustainable reasons for concluding that he  would  now
    be at risk on return having regard, amongst other things, to  the  ill-
    treatment that was meted  out  to  him  in  2010.   Again,  as  already
    indicated, there is  no  challenge  by  the  respondent  to  the  FtJ's
    analysis of the risk on return (on  the  basis  that  he  is  an  Iraqi
    citizen).

45. Part of the FtJ's decision  involved  consideration  of  the  appellant
    having said at Baghdad International Airport  (in  2010)  that  he  was
    Palestinian.  The circumstances referred to by the FtJ can be found  at
    [84] of her decision.  She referred to an e-mail from a member of staff
    at the Home Office who stated that he spoke to  the  appellant  in  the
    arrivals hall at Baghdad International Airport, and that he  complained
    that he was in fact Palestinian and should not be in  Baghdad.   He  is
    reported to have said that he was in good health and had no  complaints
    about his treatment.

46. The FtJ pointed out however, that the e-mail was written on 8 September
    2010 and related to his health on arrival, i.e. before he was  detained
    and mistreated.  She found that that evidence was of little weight  (in
    terms of the assessment of risk).  She then referred to  a  further  e-
    mail of 23 September 2010 from another member of Home Office staff  who
    reported a call from an immigration officer at Gatwick  to  the  effect
    that the appellant had claimed he was tortured in Baghdad and sent  for
    medical examination on arrival, describing that  he  had  a  dislocated
    jaw.  She noted that the appellant had not denied  stating  in  Baghdad
    that he  was  Palestinian  and  there  was  a  statement  from  another
    returnee, a Kurd, who also said  the  appellant  described  himself  as
    Palestinian while in Baghdad in September 2010.

47. The FtJ returned at [88] to the issue of how  the  appellant  had  been
    viewed in Iraq in terms of his nationality (in 2010).   She  said  that
    she acknowledged that there was a potential  discrepancy  in  that  the
    officers (who mistreated him in Iraq) knew who he  was  yet  the  Iraqi
    judge failed to accept he was Iraqi because no  member  of  his  family
    came forward to identify him.  She found that that was not  necessarily
    incompatible with his claim, in that the Iraqi judge  would  have  been
    following  due  process  and  required  formal  identification  of  the
    appellant.  She said that the appellant had in fact  described  himself
    as Palestinian whilst in detention to deflect adverse  attention.   She
    found that the security officers  took  action  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's name and his family associations as provided to them by the
    respondent and the appellant himself (at their request).  She said that
    she was satisfied that the manner in which the officers and  the  judge
    dealt  with  the   appellant   "is   not   materially   discordant   or
    inconsistent".

48. We observe at this point that aside from what the FtJ  said  about  the
    appellant having identified himself as Palestinian when he was in Iraq,
    it is  not  in  fact  the  respondent's  case  that  the  appellant  is
    Palestinian  but  is  Lebanese.   Accordingly,  his  having  identified
    himself as Palestinian does not in fact advance the  respondent's  case
    much, if at all.

49. The appellant's 'rule 24'  response  to  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal makes a number of points.  Thus, in  relation  to  the  Lebanese
    travel document, it is pointed out that the respondent had not in  fact
    produced a travel document from  the  Lebanese  authorities.   Further,
    there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant's  fingerprints
    actually match the fingerprints relating to the Lebanese passport  that
    the respondent alleges belonged to him.  Reference is also made to  the
    discrepancies in the identifying information  provided  in  the  travel
    document application and correspondence between the Home Office and the
    Lebanese Embassy, which indicated that even if a  travel  document  had
    been issued, it could not  reliably  be  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    nationality.  Confirmation  that  the  appellant's  fingerprints  match
    those of the Lebanese passport would be necessary it is said.

50. In relation to what the FtJ said about  the  two  Home  Office  letters
    dated 11 November 2014, to which we have already  referred,  the  point
    made on behalf of the appellant is that the FtJ was saying  that  there
    was no information or evidence about the provenance of  those  letters,
    what they mean or what documents were submitted with them.  Thus,  even
    taking that evidence at its highest, the documents could only show that
    the respondent applied to the Lebanese Embassy for  a  travel  document
    for the appellant.

51. In relation to the Sprakab report,  it  is  correctly  pointed  out  on
    behalf of the appellant that it states  that  the  appellant's  "speech
    pattern cannot be geographically placed in any specific Arabic-speaking
    country".   We  would  add  that  having  considered  that  report  for
    ourselves,  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant's  language  cannot  be
    attributed to any particular country.

52. Quite apart from our own analysis of the FtJ's  decision,  we  consider
    that the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant in  response  to
    the grounds of appeal before us have merit.

53. In one particular respect however, we consider that the FtJ's  analysis
    may have been incomplete in that the application for  a  visa  made  in
    Lebanon and the issuing of the visa were in February 2002, whereas  the
    first evidence of the appellant's presence in  the  UK  is  his  asylum
    claim in March of that year.  Thus, his presence in Lebanon in February
    2002 could not be ruled out.  However,  we  consider  that  within  the
    context of the FtJ's otherwise sustainable analysis  of  the  evidence,
    that is not an issue which reveals any error of law  in  her  decision,
    still less one that would require it to be set aside.

54. We have set out in detail the FtJ's assessment of the evidence in order
    to illustrate what we consider to have been  a  very  thorough,  indeed
    meticulous, examination of the evidence relied on  by  the  respondent.
    It is of course possible for argument to be advanced as to why, on  the
    facts, the FtJ ought to have come to different  conclusions.   However,
    it could  not  be  said  that  the  FtJ's  reasoning  was  perverse  or
    irrational or that she materially failed to  have  regard  to  relevant
    evidence, or wrongly took into account any evidence or information.  In
    our judgment she was entitled to make the findings that she did.

55. Accordingly, the decision to allow the appeal on asylum and  article  3
    grounds stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Its decision to allow the appeal on  asylum
    and article 3 grounds therefore stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      1/03/19

