
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00197/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th April 2016                           |On 19 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  1998.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  dated  20th
    September  2015  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge R  A  Cox
    on 26th October 2015 on the basis it was arguable that the judge failed
    to give adequate and sustainable reasons for  her  adverse  credibility
    findings and for her finding that the Appellant was  not  a  practising
    homosexual or in a long standing relationship as he claimed.

 3. The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  on  6th  January
    2016.  He set aside the judge's credibility findings  for  the  reasons
    given in his decision dated 6th January 2016.  The matter was adjourned
    for re-hearing before the Upper Tribunal.


Immigration History

4.   The Appellant came to the UK as  a  student  in  2011.   His  college's
    licence was revoked in June 2012 but he was granted  further  leave  to
    remain. His college's licence was again revoked in  2013  but  on  this
    occasion the Appellant was refused further leave to  remain  in  August
    2013.  He appealed the refusal of leave and his appeal was dismissed by
    the First-tier Tribunal. He became appeal rights exhausted in 2014.

5.   The Appellant made a further application for leave to remain which  was
    considered in October 2014 and refused in January 2015 with no right of
    appeal. The Appellant was arrested on 8th April 2015 and detained.   He
    claimed asylum on 14th April 2015.  Although he was initially  accepted
    into the detained fast track process, he was released from detention on
    26th June 2015.

6.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum  claim  for  the  reasons
    given in the refusal letter dated 18th May 2015. The Appellant's appeal
    was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 26th August and 10th  September
    2015.  His appeal was dismissed but the decision was set  aside  to  be
    remade.


Issue

7.   The issue  before  me  is  the  same  as  that  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, namely, whether the Appellant is homosexual and whether he is
    in a homosexual relationship with his partner SA. The burden is on  the
    Appellant to prove the facts of his claim and the standard of proof  in
    asylum and  protection  claims  is  that  of  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood or real risk.

8.   For the purposes of  this  appeal  it  is  not  disputed  that  if  the
    Appellant is homosexual  then  he  will  be  persecuted  on  return  to
    Pakistan. Further, if his claim is found to be credible then it is also
    credible that he would not live discreetly on return  to  Pakistan  and
    therefore  he  would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm.
    Accordingly, it is for me to consider the evidence and decide whether I
    find the Appellant's claim to be a homosexual to be a credible one.


The Appellant's claim

9.   The basis of the Appellant's  claim  is  that  at  the  age  of  10  he
    realised that he had feelings towards his cousin SA and he told him so.
     Those feelings were returned by SA. In 2002, whilst  still  living  in
    Pakistan, they  started  a  relationship  which  was  sexual  and  they
    continued that relationship until they  left  Pakistan  in  July  2011,
    although that relationship was not known to either the  family  of  the
    Appellant or SA.

10.  The Appellant and SA came to the UK in  2011  on  student  visas.  They
    have lived together whilst in the UK and, for part of that  time,  they
    have lived with their cousin HI in the same house. HI moved out of  the
    house, where he lived with the Appellant and SA, when he got married.

11.  Therefore, it is the Appellant's claim that he  is  homosexual  and  he
    has been in a long standing relationship with SA prior to coming to the
    UK and since he came to the UK.  He claims that his  family  found  out
    that he was homosexual by accident. They were urging him to  return  to
    Pakistan to get married  and  during  a  conversation  with  his  elder
    brother, F, he stated that  he  would  not  be  returning  to  Pakistan
    because he was in a relationship with SA.  At  that  point  the  family
    started to threaten him over the telephone. He fears return to Pakistan
    because of what his family might do to him but also because he would be
    unable to live openly as a homosexual and would be at risk of harm from
    the authorities given that homosexuality is  illegal  and  contrary  to
    Muslim religion.


The Respondent's decision

12.  The Respondent's refusal letter dated 18th May 2015 states that  it  is
    not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  gay  because  he   has   given
    inconsistent accounts about when he realised he was homosexual and when
    he disclosed his feelings about SA and other matters to his family.  It
    was accepted that the Appellant had lived at the same address as SA  in
    the UK, but not that  they  were  in  a  relationship  given  that  the
    Appellant did not know at which college SA was studying or  whether  or
    not he had in fact finished his studies. Photographs had been submitted
    but these just showed that the  Appellant  and  SA  were  friends.  The
    majority of the  photographs  submitted  post  dated  the  Respondent's
    decision. There were only photographs of HI's  wedding  which  predated
    the asylum claim.


The hearing

13.  The Appellant's partner SA has also claimed asylum and  his  appeal  is
    due to be heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 25th July 2016 (reference
    number PA/01491/2016). There was no application to  link  the  appeals.
    Having regard to the overriding objective, I decided  to  proceed  with
    the hearing.
14.  The Appellant relied on a consolidated bundle of  documents  containing
    71  pages  and  the  Respondent  relied  on  the  Respondent's   bundle
    containing the refusal letter, asylum interview record [AIR] and  other
    documentation.

15.  At the hearing the Respondent submitted a copy of SA's  refusal  letter
    dated  26th  January  2016  and  the  Appellant  submitted  a  skeleton
    argument. I heard evidence from the  Appellant,  his  partner  SA,  his
    cousin HI, his friend MR and HI's friend QAM.


Appellant's oral evidence

16.  The Appellant confirmed his name and address and relied on his  witness
    statement dated 26th May 2015.  He lived with his partner  SA  and  two
    others called M and L. The Appellant last had contact with  his  family
    on 3rd February 2016 when HI, his cousin, arranged for him to speak  to
    his sister S who was going to get married. During  the  telephone  call
    his sister became upset and the Appellant's elder brother F  took  hold
    of the telephone. At this point the Appellant gave the  telephone  back
    to HI who then received threats and abuse from F.  There  had  been  no
    contact since the telephone call of 3rd February 2016.

17.  The Appellant would not be able to go back to Pakistan and continue  to
    live with SA.  His family knew of the relationship and  had  threatened
    him and SA. The army, the police and other  Islamic  organisations  did
    not accept homosexuality which was illegal in Pakistan.

18.  In cross-examination, the Appellant stated that  he  did  not  have  an
    interpreter in his screening interview even though  he  had  asked  for
    one. He was able to speak Urdu and English and he confirmed that he had
    understood all the questions. He had replied  that  he  was  single  in
    answer to the question about his marital  or  relationship  status.  At
    this point in the evidence Ms Head referred to the  Appellant's  answer
    to question 4.1 in the screening interview  where  he  stated  that  he
    lived with his partner in the UK and he gave  SA's  name  and  date  of
    birth.

19.  The Appellant confirmed that  he  only  claimed  asylum  after  he  was
    arrested by an Immigration Officer and that he was not  aware  that  he
    could claim asylum on the basis of sexual orientation until  after  his
    arrest.  He did not have any gay friends other than his partner SA. His
    friends and family were all from Pakistan where homosexuality  was  not
    common. The Appellant had met  two  people  who  were  friends  of  his
    friend, one in central London and one at a club. These  were  the  only
    other two people he knew who were gay and  they  were  not  present  at
    court.

    20.  The Appellant had four sisters and his younger sister S  had  just
    got married.  It was her first marriage.  He was asked  about  question
    24 of the AIR where he had stated that all his  sisters  were  married.
    This was clearly incorrect given his evidence that his  younger  sister
    had only recently got married. The Appellant explained that the  nikkah
    was in October 2015 and therefore in his mind she was married. When  it
    was pointed out that the interview took place in May 2015 and therefore
    predated the nikkah, he said that his culture and traditions were  such
    that once his sister was engaged then it was  clear  the  nikkah  would
    follow and then she would leave her parents.

21.  The Appellant stated that the telephone call on 3rd February  2016  was
    on HI's mobile telephone, although he could not recall whether  HI  had
    made or received the call.   He  was  with  HI  at  that  time  at  the
    Appellant's home address. He was not sure if SA was present, but SA was
    in the property at the time and had not  gone  out  for  the  day.   He
    thought that SA was coming and going from the room. SA was aware of the
    threats received from the Appellant's brother F on that day  and  aware
    of the telephone call  which  was  received  about  3  o'clock  in  the
    afternoon.

22.  The Appellant could not remember the last time he spoke to  his  mother
    but it was a very long time ago.  She was his  only  surviving  parent.
    He had received threats from eight people in  Pakistan  which  included
    his elder brother, his brother-in-law, elderly members  of  his  family
    and SA's family including his father,  elderly  relatives  and  uncles.
    The Appellant had never been in a relationship with anyone  other  than
    SA who had no status in the UK.  SA had made a claim for  asylum  while
    his  student  leave  was  outstanding.   His  student  leave  had  been
    curtailed on receipt of the asylum claim.

23.  The Appellant stated that his friend MR was giving evidence  today  and
    MR first became aware of his  relationship  with  SA  in  2012  at  the
    beginning of the year. He had found out at the  Appellant's  home,  his
    previous address [46BD]. MR had come on a planned visit  and  they  had
    eaten pizza. MR had returned home to the north of  England  during  the
    evening.

24.  The witness QAM first became  aware  of  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with SA when QAM visited them at their own home. He did  not  see  very
    much of QAM who  was  a  friend  of  the  Appellant's  cousin  HI.  The
    Appellant had not changed his mobile  number  after  receiving  threats
    from his family because he wanted to be aware of conditions  there.  If
    he was granted asylum he would not go back to Pakistan.

25.  It was put to the Appellant that his answers at questions  44,  61  and
    89 of  the  AIR,  about  when  he  first  realised  he  was  gay,  were
    inconsistent. He first stated that he was 10 years old and  then  later
    stated that he was 13 or 14 years old. The Appellant confirmed that  he
    realised that he had feelings for his cousin in 1998,  but  it  was  in
    2002, when they actually had sex, that he came to know that he was gay.



26.  The Appellant was asked about question 182 of  the  AIR  and  explained
    that he had accidentally declared his sexuality to his  brother  F.  He
    had told SA about this disclosure and  they  were  very  worried.   The
    threats began very soon after telling SA and many calls  were  received
    but not all calls were answered.  They were always to  the  Appellant's
    telephone or SA's telephone.

27.  In answer to questions from me the Appellant stated that  he  expressed
    his feelings to SA in 1998 and in 2002 sexual activity took place.   It
    continued in Pakistan after 2002 up until he came to the  UK  in  2011.
    He had not claimed asylum soon after he arrived  because,  although  he
    knew of the asylum procedure, he was not  aware  that  he  could  claim
    asylum on the basis of sexual orientation. He first found out  that  he
    could claim asylum on that basis in April 2015 after he was detained.

28.  The Appellant's family found out that he was in a relationship with  SA
    around the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014, although he could not
    remember the exact time. They had found out because  they  kept  asking
    him to return to Pakistan to marry and he kept refusing to do so.  They
    then expressed their doubts that something was  wrong  because  he  was
    continuously refusing to marry such that, on one occasion, when he  was
    talking to his brother F on the telephone, he told him by mistake  that
    he was happy with SA.

29.   SA  has  studied  an  ACCA  course  at  LSBS  College,  then  business
    management at London Academy. He was unable to tell the interviewer the
    name of the  college  during  his  AIR  because  there  had  been  some
    confusion when selecting the college and the name of the second college
    had in fact gone from his mind at that time. He did not know whether SA
    had finished his course at the time of the interview because he was not
    aware of the exact date having not seen the CAS letter.

30.  In re-examination, the Appellant confirmed that he  did  not  know  who
    had made the telephone call on 3rd  February  2016,  but  that  he  had
    spoken on HI's telephone.


Oral evidence of SA

31.  SA relied on his witness statements dated 6th May 2015 and 18th  August
    2015.  He stated that  he  was  in  a  genuine  relationship  with  the
    Appellant and that if he went back  to  Pakistan  they  would  both  be
    killed or harmed because no-one accepted  their  relationship  not  his
    family, the government, the police or other Islamic organisations.

32.  In cross-examination he stated that his family had found out about  his
    relationship with the Appellant in 2014 from either a family member  or
    a friend, he did not know exactly. It was at the beginning of  2014  or
    at the end of 2013. He was unable to be more specific,  other  than  it
    was more than two years ago.  The Appellant's family  became  aware  of
    the relationship first because they were forcing the Appellant  to  get
    married and the Appellant told them by mistake. The Appellant had  told
    his older brother F that he was happy with SA.

33.  The Appellant last had contact with his family  on  3rd  February  2016
    when HI had told the Appellant that his sister was getting married.  HI
    facilitated the call so that the Appellant could speak to  his  sister.
    It became apparent during the telephone call that she was  weeping  and
    the Appellant's brother grabbed the telephone. The Appellant on hearing
    his brother's voice handed the telephone to HI who was then abused  for
    knowing about the relationship. SA could not remember  where  the  call
    was received, but that it had been facilitated by HI,  and  HI  had  in
    fact called the Appellant's sister. The Appellant and SA were not aware
    of the marriage until HI told them. SA was in the room  throughout  the
    call but he could not exactly remember what time the call was  made  or
    where they were other than they were with HI.

34.  SA had had no other relationships other than his relationship with  the
    Appellant.  He had not  claimed  asylum  upon  receiving  threats  from
    Pakistan because he was unaware that he could claim asylum on the basis
    of his sexuality. He had no other friends  who  were  homosexual  other
    than the Appellant. He did not discuss his studies  or  his  course  in
    detail with the Appellant.

35.  In re-examination, Ms Head asked SA to explain why  the  Appellant  had
    said the telephone call on 3rd February 2016 was made at their home. In
    response SA stated that he was not sure if HI had come to  their  house
    or they went to him because SA was under such stress.


Oral evidence of HI

36.  HI relied  on  his  witness  statement  dated  18th  August  2015.   He
    confirmed his name and that he had recently moved  address.  The  first
    time he realised the Appellant was gay was when he caught the Appellant
    and SA having sex in his bed in 2011. He confirmed  everything  in  his
    statement was true and that he could derive no benefit from  falsifying
    his evidence. If the Appellant was sent back he would  be  at  risk  of
    harm.

37.  HI had returned to Pakistan from 20th September to  October  2015  when
    he went to spend Eid with his family. He was asked several times of the
    whereabouts of the Appellant and SA by  their  families.  He  tried  to
    convince them that he did not know. He was told to find  out  and  sort
    them out. This meant there would be big harm for them. He  stated  that
    killing in his country was not a major thing and there were issues with
    law and order.

38.  He then referred to the telephone call on 3rd February 2016 and  stated
    that it was made on a Wednesday. No-one had told the Appellant that his
    younger sister was getting married  but  HI  knew  and  told  him.  The
    Appellant was upset and  in  tears  so  HI  decided  to  speak  to  the
    Appellant's sister and ask her to speak to the Appellant before she was
    married.  He was able to convince her and they decided a time when  she
    could speak alone which was about 3 to 4pm  in  the  afternoon  because
    Pakistan was five hours ahead.  HI had called  the  Appellant's  sister
    and as soon as she spoke to the Appellant she started crying.  All of a
    sudden F, the Appellant's elder brother, took the telephone and as soon
    as the Appellant realised he passed the  telephone  to  HI.   HI  said,
    "Hello how are you?" and F said, "I know you are telling  lies  and  we
    will definitely kill them now we know that you are behind  everything."
    There had been  no  contact  with  the  Appellant's  family  since  the
    telephone call on 3rd February 2016.

39.  HI was supporting the Appellant and SA because they  were  his  cousins
    and had been born and brought up in front of him.  When  they  came  to
    the UK he had looked after them and he loved them. They were  like  his
    brothers. Particularly at this time, everyone was against them. He  had
    seen their childhood and then school and college, so he  could  not  be
    hard hearted. It was their life and people needed to  understand  there
    was a lack of education in  Pakistan.  Even  in  the  UK  people  loved
    humanity  and  human  beings  for  what  they  were.  HI  accepted  the
    Appellant's and SA's chosen lifestyle.  He  supported  them  and  would
    continue to do so.

40.  In  cross-examination,  HI  stated  that  the  telephone  call  on  3rd
    February 2016 took place in his office.  He had called  on  his  mobile
    telephone. His office was in the same road  as  the  Appellant's  home,
    about 200 yards from where the Appellant and SA live.  When it was  put
    to him that the Appellant had said the conversation took place  at  the
    Appellant's home, he said that was not correct. It took  place  in  his
    office because he was always in the office from 10am to 7pm.

41.  The Appellant's sister, S, had just got married and had flown to  Dubai
    with her husband last month. The  family  first  became  aware  of  the
    Appellant's relationship about two years ago somewhere in the middle of
    2014, it was not spring or winter at all. He had no incentive  to  help
    the Appellant and SA remain in the UK and he had no reason  to  falsely
    support their claim in this country. He did  not  want  them  to  leave
    because he knew if they returned  to  Pakistan  they  would  be  killed
    because homosexuality was not acceptable in his culture. Even  if  they
    were not killed by their families, they would be in danger from society
    at large because homosexuality was illegal.

42.  The family had found out about  the  Appellant's  homosexuality  around
    summer 2014 because it was at the same time as the sun festival.  Other
    members of the family were not as liberal as HI because  they  remained
    in Pakistan where people were very strict and some were illiterate  and
    did not understand.  Homosexuality was contrary to Muslim religion.

43.  In answer to questions from me he stated that he had  not  advised  the
    Appellant or SA to claim asylum.  He did not  know  why  they  had  not
    claimed sooner.  HI did not know they could claim asylum on  the  basis
    of sexual orientation. The Appellant had told him when he was  arrested
    and he had no idea about the situation in the UK.

Oral evidence of MR

44.  MR relied on his statement dated 20th April 2016 which  he  signed  and
    dated in court.  He said although the Home Office did not  accept  that
    the Appellant and SA were gay he had seen them  and  they  were  living
    like a couple.  He did not have any other gay friends. He had just come
    to see the Appellant and SA.  He did not know of any other gay friends.
     He had come to support them today because if they were sent back  then
    a member of the family or the community would kill them.  He was  asked
    about his opinion on the Appellant and SA being gay.  He stated that it
    was their life.

45.  In cross-examination, he said that he had first visited  the  Appellant
    and SA in 2012 when they were living at their previous address  [46BD].
    He had come to the UK in 2011 and visited them in around June  or  July
    2012. The weather was hot at that time.  It was put  to  him  that  the
    Appellant had said he had visited at the  beginning  of  2012,  but  MR
    disagreed and stated that it was in June or July 2012.  When he came to
    visit them, they had called him and he had said when he was coming, and
    they had eaten pizza together.


Oral Evidence of QAM

46.  QAM relied on his statement dated 18th August 2015.   He  had  come  to
    give evidence because the Appellant and SA could choose how to live  in
    the UK, but they could not choose  how  to  live  in  Pakistan  because
    Pakistani culture did not accept homosexuality. If the Appellant and SA
    went back they would have problems with their families.  He  said  that
    their relationship was quite physical.  For example, he had visited one
    day and they were sitting on each other's lap.  He would not do such  a
    thing, not even as a joke, because a man could not sit on another man's
    lap.  It was not accepted and he had not been brought up like that.

47.  In cross-examination, he stated that he lived  and  worked  in  Reading
    and therefore he did not often see  the  Appellant  and  SA,  save  for
    festivals or religious ceremonies such as Eid.   He  did  see  HI  more
    often.  He had not realised that the Appellant and SA were gay for four
    years because he did not see them very much.  He  had  only  seen  them
    behave in an openly gay way rather recently in 2015 when  he  saw  them
    sitting on each other's lap.  He  was  surprised  by  this  display  of
    affection and had asked HI about it when they were going  home  in  the
    same car.  He wanted to know why HI had not mentioned it to him sooner.
    QAM  had  not  even  mentioned  the  situation  to  his  wife   because
    homosexuality was not accepted in his culture.


Submissions

48.  The Respondent relied on the refusal letter dated  18th  May  2015,  in
    particular, paragraphs 51 to 59 and 60  to  64.   The  issues  set  out
    therein were particularly relevant in deciding this appeal.

49.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  immigration   history
    adversely affected his credibility because he had claimed  in  his  AIR
    (216 to 219) that he intended to live permanently in the UK  which  was
    contrary to his student visa. Further, he had delayed  claiming  asylum
    and should have done so shortly after his  arrival  or  at  the  latest
    after he had received threats from family  in  Pakistan.  However,  the
    first time he raised his asylum claim was whilst he  was  in  detention
    and pending his administrative removal. Section 8 applied.  It was  not
    credible that he was unaware he could claim  asylum  on  the  basis  of
    sexual orientation. He had made several applications for a visa and was
    well aware of the immigration system in the UK.

50.  It was not accepted that  the  Appellant  was  a  homosexual  or  in  a
    relationship with SA because his answers in  interview  about  when  he
    realised he was gay were inconsistent.  He had stated aged 10 and 13 or
    14 years old.  It was unusual that neither the Appellant nor SA had had
    any other relationships. The Appellant  had  little  knowledge  of  his
    partner's studies at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and  it
    was evident from the AIR that SA had not visited the  Appellant  whilst
    he was in immigration detention.

51.  There  were  discrepancies  in  oral  evidence  today  about  when  the
    Appellant's family found out about the relationship. The Appellant  and
    SA claimed it was late in 2013 around the beginning of 2014 and HI  was
    sure that it was in the summer because the weather was warm  and  there
    was the sun festival. There were also discrepancies in relation to when
    MR visited the Appellant's home.  MR  stated  that  it  was  July  2012
    whereas the Appellant and SA stated  it  was  the  beginning  of  2012.
    There were clear discrepancies as to when others became  aware  of  the
    relationship which undermined the Appellant's credibility.

52.  The evidence in relation to the telephone call  on  3rd  February  2016
    was also inconsistent.  The Appellant had stated in interview that  his
    sisters were married but it was clear from the telephone  call  on  3rd
    February 2016 that in fact one of his sisters was not.  His explanation
    that he considered his sister married when she signed  the  nikkah  was
    not plausible given that it post-dated the interview.

53.  There was also an inconsistency in  relation  to  where  the  telephone
    call on 3rd February 2016 took place. The Appellant said it was at  his
    home, HI said it was at  his  office  and  S  could  not  remember.  Mr
    Whitwell submitted that the telephone call on 3rd February 2016 did not
    happen as the Appellant had in fact claimed.  The  Appellant's  answers
    were relatively vague, he could not say when he last had  contact  with
    his mother and he was unable to name the specific month when his family
    found out about his relationship with SA.

54.  The photographs did not take the matter  any  further  given  that  the
    only ones which pre-dated the decision related  to  a  family  wedding.
    The Appellant did not have any gay friends, which was odd, and the only
    witnesses were family members. There were no other members of  the  gay
    community.

55.  Mr Whitwell submitted that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  the
    relationship pre-dating the asylum  claim.  The  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness and the appeal should  be  dismissed.   If  however  I
    accepted the Appellant's credibility then I should also accept that  he
    would not live discreetly  in  Pakistan  and  therefore  there  was  no
    alternative argument in relation to risk on return.  If  the  Appellant
    was a credible witness and I found that he was a homosexual  and  in  a
    relationship with SA then his claim would succeed.


The Appellant's Submissions

56.  Ms Head relied on her skeleton argument and invited  me  to  allow  the
    appeal because the Appellant had discharged the burden on him  to  show
    that he was gay.  There was no inconsistency in  interview  about  when
    the Appellant discovered he was gay. He was attempting to  explain  his
    emotional feelings.  It was not unusual that he would have been unaware
    of his sexuality at the age of 10 save that he  was  attracted  to  his
    cousin.  He confirmed his sexuality at the age of 13 or 14 when he  had
    sex with his cousin.

57.  The Appellant claimed asylum when he was detained because  he  was  not
    aware he could claim asylum on that basis prior to that  date.  He  had
    been living in the community which was not part of a gay scene and  had
    been honest about it. He was not in a position  to  talk  about  it  to
    others.  When detained he was given a duty  solicitor  who  would  have
    explained his  rights  and  the  Appellant  mentioned  his  partner  in
    question 4.1 of the screening interview.

58.  SA had not made a claim for asylum because he had student leave and  he
    only claimed after being properly advised that he was able  to  do  so.
    Accordingly, the delay in making an asylum claim did not undermine  the
    Appellant's credibility or the basis of his  claim.  Homosexuality  was
    not accepted in the Appellant's community and therefore it  was  not  a
    common event.  It was plausible that he would not know he  could  claim
    asylum on that basis and in fact he did make a  claim  as  soon  as  he
    became aware.

59.  The discrepancies in the dates  and  places  where  conversations  took
    place were not significant. The core of the Appellant's claim  and  the
    facts relevant to the issues under consideration had  been  consistent.
    Any discrepancies in relation to dates and venues did not affect  this.



60.  Whether his younger sister was in fact  married  at  the  date  of  the
    interview was not a significant inconsistency.  It was  not  surprising
    that he did not know where his sister was living at that  time  and  he
    had deemed her married from her  nikkah.  They  did  not  fundamentally
    undermine his claim in any way.

61.  The adverse submission  that  SA  had  not  visited  the  Appellant  in
    detention was not put in evidence and there  was  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant did not want to see SA whilst he
    was in detention because he was too upset.  This  did  not  assist  the
    Appellant's case  in  any  event.   If  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    homosexual was false, then SA was more likely to have  visited  him  in
    detention in order to be able to put their false  claim  together.  The
    previous explanation that the Appellant and SA were too  upset  to  see
    each other whilst in detention was indeed plausible.

62.  This was in fact a unique case.  It was unusual that the Appellant  had
    not integrated into the gay community in the UK but that did  not  mean
    his claim was not genuine.  The Appellant  and  SA  had  been  together
    since the age of 13 or 14.  The fact that they did not feel the need to
    be part of the gay community or  the  gay  scene  in  the  UK  did  not
    undermine this.

63.  There  was  clear  evidence  that  the  Appellant  and  SA  were  in  a
    relationship and HI was a credible  witness.   He  loved  both  of  his
    cousins and did not want them to be at risk  of  harm  if  returned  to
    Pakistan.  He derived no benefit  from  the  Appellant  being  able  to
    remain in the UK. The other witnesses were also credible, they received
    no benefit in giving evidence and there was no reason why  they  should
    seek to lie about the circumstances  and  come  to  court  and  perjure
    themselves particularly when this  case  went  against  their  cultural
    traditions and religious beliefs.

64.  QAM did not find the Appellant's behaviour to  be  something  he  could
    condone and it did not fit into  Pakistani  society  so  there  was  no
    reason for him to fabricate his evidence. It  was  only  his  level  of
    humanity that compelled him to come to court in order to prevent  their
    return to Pakistan. His evidence that he had seen the Appellant and  SA
    holding hands over dinner and had asked  HI  about  it  afterwards  was
    plausible. The fact that the Appellant and SA did not shout about their
    relationship was not unusual. Their behaviour was out of  the  ordinary
    according to QAM. If QAM had wanted to fabricate evidence he could have
    done so much more.

65.  Even if the Appellant's family were not threatening him  and  SA,  they
    could not live openly in  Pakistan  because  it  was  illegal,  contra-
    cultural and against Islam. The Appellant and  SA  could  not  live  in
    Pakistan as they did here. They would not be able to live as  a  couple
    and as such the Appellant had satisfied the burden  of  proof  and  had
    shown that he was a refugee.


Discussion and Conclusions

66.  Having reviewed the whole of the evidence  in  the  round  I  make  the
    following findings. I find the Appellant to be a credible witness.   He
    has given  consistent  and  cogent  evidence  and  has  not  sought  to
    embellish his claim. It has been argued  that  the  claim  is  somewhat
    vague and lacking in specific detail, but the detail which  is  missing
    from this claim relates to dates and venues  which  are  understandably
    difficult to remember. The core of the Appellant's claim was consistent
    throughout and has not changed in any great  respect.   There  were  no
    inconsistencies identified in the evidence given at the previous appeal
    and in this appeal.

67.  The Respondent relies on the following inconsistencies:
     (i) The marriage of the Appellant's sister;
     (ii)     When the Appellant realised he was gay;
     (iii)    When his parents found out about his relationship;
     (iv)     When his friends found out about the relationship; and
     (v) The telephone call on the 3rd February 2016.
     I shall deal with each in turn.

68.  Firstly, the Appellant stated,  in  the  AIR,  that  his  sisters  were
    married, but it transpired from his oral  evidence  that  his  youngest
    sister, S, had only recently married earlier this year and  had  become
    engaged to be married in 2015. I  do  not  find  that  the  Appellant's
    answer in the AIR undermines his credibility. It was  not  relevant  to
    whether he was homosexual. It was relevant to  the  conversation  which
    took place on 3rd  February  2016,  namely  that  the  reason  for  the
    telephone call was that his sister S was going to get married  and  the
    Appellant wished to speak to her before she did so. There seems  to  be
    no reason for falsifying the purpose of the telephone call and  it  has
    little relevance to the core of the Appellant's claim.

69.  The second discrepancy relates to when the Appellant  realised  he  was
    gay.  Having looked at the questions in the AIR and assessing  them  as
    part of the evidence as a whole, I accept Ms Head's submission that the
    Appellant's ability, as a teenage boy, to understand his  feelings  may
    have been confused. He had however been consistent in stating  that  he
    had feelings for his cousin SA in 1998 which developed  into  a  sexual
    relationship in 2002.  The fact that he was unable to  say  whether  he
    realised he was gay at the age of 10 or 13 and 14 did not undermine his
    claim that he was in a homosexual relationship with his cousin SA.

70.  Thirdly, the date when the Appellant's family found  out  that  he  was
    homosexual. The Appellant had a conversation with his brother F on  the
    telephone. The Appellant and SA stated that this was at the end of 2013
    or the beginning of 2014. However, HI was  sure  that  it  was  in  the
    summer of 2014 because it was around the time of the sun  festival  and
    the weather was warm. I do not think  much  turns  on  this.  Whilst  I
    accept that this would have been a huge  shock  and  a  worry  for  the
    Appellant and SA, their ability to remember the specific month was  not
    sufficient to undermine their credibility.

71.  The fourth discrepancy relates to when the  Appellant's  friends  found
    out about his relationship with SA. The Appellant claimed that MR found
    out about the relationship at the beginning of 2012. MR stated in  oral
    evidence that it was in summer  of  2012.   I  do  not  think  anything
    material turns on which part of  the  year  in  2012  it  was.  It  was
    probably more of an event for MR given that it was rather  a  shock  to
    find out that the Appellant and SA were homosexual.

72.  The last point that is raised is  in  relation  to  the  oral  evidence
    about the telephone call which took place on  3rd  February  2016.  The
    Appellant stated that it took place at his home. SA stated that he  did
    not know where it took place, but that they were with HI at  the  time.
    HI stated that it certainly took place at  his  office  which  was  200
    yards away from the Appellant's home.

73.  Given the proximity of the office and the Appellant's home, again I  do
    not think much turns on the venue of the conversation given the  actual
    nature of the conversation and what was said. All three witnesses  gave
    consistent evidence on its content.  It would be somewhat suspicious if
    their evidence was entirely the same in every respect. Therefore, it is
    not unusual that there might be some misremembering or discrepancies as
    to minor issues given the nature of the conversation and how emotive it
    was. The actual place where the  conversation  took  place  is  not  of
    particular relevance to whether the Appellant is in fact homosexual  or
    whether he has sought to fabricate his asylum claim.

74.  I accept the Appellant's explanation for his failure  to  claim  asylum
    prior to his arrest and detention. He has lived  within  the  Pakistani
    community in the UK and has had limited contact with the gay community.
    His experience of applying for student visas would not necessarily lead
    to knowledge of the asylum system. I find that  his  failure  to  claim
    asylum soon after his arrival or soon after he was  threatened  by  his
    family does not undermine his credibility.

75.  I find the Appellant's explanation for why  he  was  unable  to  answer
    questions in the AIR about SA's studies to be  credible.  His  lack  of
    knowledge was understandable in the circumstances and did not undermine
    the core of the Appellant's claim in any event.

76.  I find  that  SA  was  also  a  credible  witness.   His  evidence  was
    straightforward and cogent. It was consistent with the  Appellant  save
    for the points I have indicated above. I find that HI  was  a  credible
    witness and was particularly passionate and sure of events. His account
    was largely consistent with the Appellant save for the  points  that  I
    have raised above, which I do  not  find  to  be  significant  for  the
    reasons already given.

77.  As for the two remaining  witnesses,  I  found  their  evidence  to  be
    credible. I am persuaded by Ms Head's submission that, had they  sought
    to fabricate evidence in order to support a false  asylum  claim,  then
    they could have done so much more.  Their evidence was  that  they  did
    not condone the Appellant's behaviour  and  homosexuality  was  against
    their culture and religion. However, they came to court  and  supported
    the  claim  without  embellishment  and  gave  evidence   in   a   very
    straightforward manner.


78.  The photographs neither enhance nor undermine  the  Appellant's  claim.
    The Appellant and SA have not sought  to  exaggerate  their  behaviour.
    They did not have any close friends within the gay community. This  may
    be considered to be unusual, but it did not detract  from  the  overall
    credibility of the Appellant's claim.

79.  Accordingly, I find that the Appellant is  a  credible  witness  and  I
    accept his claim  to  be  in  a  relationship  with  SA  and  to  be  a
    homosexual.  Having reviewed the evidence as a whole and  applying  the
    lower standard of proof, that of a reasonable degree of  likelihood,  I
    find that the Appellant has discharged the burden on  him  and  he  has
    shown on the evidence before me that there is a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that he is  a  homosexual  and  that  he  is  in  a  genuine
    relationship with his cousin SA.

80.  Given the matters set out in the Appellant's skeleton argument and  the
    fact that if the  Appellant's  credibility  is  accepted,  then  it  is
    accepted he would not live discreetly as a homosexual in  Pakistan,  it
    follows from the background evidence and the material  before  me  that
    the Appellant would be at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment  on
    return to Pakistan.  I therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

81.  Having done so there is no  need  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant
    qualifies for humanitarian protection. The appeal would also succeed on
    human rights grounds in relation to Article 3.  No claim was made under
    Article 8 and no submissions were made.


Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal on asylum and Article 3 human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


           J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 12th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 12th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
