

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00810/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On May 5, 2016                  |On 18 May, 2016                 |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR ARDALAN AZIZ MAJIDI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
      Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.  The  appellant  left  Iran
       illegally on May 10, 2015 and arrived in the United Kingdom  on  May
       18, 2015 and claimed asylum.

    2. The respondent refused his claim on August 9, 2015 under  paragraphs
       336 and 339M HC 395.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on August 24, 2015.

    4. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pacey
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on January 20, 2016 and in  a
       decision promulgated on January  27,  2016  the  Judge  refused  the
       appellant's appeal.

    5. The  appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  February  12,  2016
       submitting the Judge had erred by failing to consider the  objective
       evidence that post-dated the country guidance decision of  SB  (risk
       on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

    6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Designated  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Zucker on February 22, 2016 because  he  was
       not satisfied it had been shown to the lower standard of proof  that
       the appellant had left illegally. Permission to appeal  was  renewed
       to the Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Blum found  on  March
       7, 2016 there was an  arguable  error  of  law.  She  found  it  was
       arguable the Judge had erred by failing to engage with the  material
       that showed people who left  Iran  illegally  faced  a  sentence  of
       between one and three years' imprisonment or could receive a fine.

    7. The respondent served a  Rule  24  response  dated  March  23,  2016
       opposing the error in law.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction  and  I
       see no reason to make one now.


SUBMISSIONS

   10. Mr Schwenk did not challenge the Judge's credibility findings but as
       the respondent had accepted the appellant had left illegally it  was
       incumbent on the Judge to consider the evidence advanced as to  what
       happened to people who left illegally. This  evidence  showed  there
       was a real risk of serious harm for the appellant and  although  the
       Judge  considered  the  jurisprudence  of  such  cases  Mr   Schwenk
       submitted that did not involve consideration of  material  that  had
       been placed before the Judge.

   11. Mr Mills submitted that at aparagraph [26] the Judge had  considered
       not only the decision  of  SB  but  also  the  more  recent  Iranian
       decisions of BA (demonstrators in Britain-risk on  return)  Iran  CG
       [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and AB and Others (Internet  activity-state  of
       evidence)  Iran  [2015]  0257  (IAC).  He  submitted   the   Judge's
       assessment had regard to the evidence and there was no error in law.



   12.  Having  heard  the  representatives'  submissions,  I  reserved  my
       decision.


FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

   13. The issue to be considered was narrow namely would a person who  had
       left illegally  and  whose  account  had  been  found  to  lack  any
       credibility be at risk of treatment  that  would  breach  article  3
       ECHR.

   14. Contrary to the  finding  of  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Zucker it was not disputed  the  appellant  had  left  Iran
       illegally and the respondent had conceded that issue in her  refusal
       letter.

   15. It was also not disputed that the Tribunal in SB made clear  that  a
       person who left Iran illegally and was a failed  asylum  seeker  but
       had no profile would not be at risk.

   16. The issue raised by Mr  Schwenk  was  whether  the  Judge  erred  by
       failing  to  make  findings  on  the  evidence  contained   in   the
       appellant's bundle  at  pages  four  to  seven.  This  evidence  was
       contained in written submissions advanced on the appellant's behalf.
       The letter referred to the country of origin reports from 2011, 2012
       and 2013.

   17. In considering risk on return the Judge considered this at paragraph
       [25] of her decision. She reminded herself of the decision of SB and
       then at paragraph [26] she wrote-

    "The weight of jurisprudence seems to  suggest  that  returning  asylum
    seekers will only be at risk on arrival back in Iran where  there  were
    other factors which would make them stand out. For example, a political
    profile. There is nothing to indicate the appellant has such a  profile
    and he would not, then, in my judgement be in a risk category...."

   18. Mr Schwenk argues that as SB was decided in 2009 it was incumbent on
       the Judge to consider additional and more recent evidence. This,  he
       submitted, the Judge had failed to do.

   19. Mr Mills argues that the more recent decisions of BA and AB did,  to
       a degree, have regard to what has happened since 2009 and  they  did
       not stated SB was no longer good law.

   20. The decision in AB dealt with risks facing "bloggers"  and  did  not
       review the  findings  in  SB.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Tribunal
       considered the position as set  out  in  SB  namely  those  with  no
       profile were not at risk and then considered  the  effect  "internet
       activity" might have on return. To that extent it  is  arguable  the
       jurisprudence supported the Judge's  finding  that  those  who  left
       illegally with no profile were not at risk.

   21. Mr Schwenk pointed me to the articles from 2011 to 2013. At page [4]
       of the bundle there is a reference  to  an  extract  from  the  2013
       country of origin report. The article referred to  a  nineteen-year-
       old student activist namely a person who had  a  profile.  The  same
       article also  referred  to  a  person  who  had  been  arrested  for
       demonstrating against the authorities. Again this  person  could  be
       classed as having a profile. At page [5]  of  the  bundle  there  is
       reference to a nineteen-year-old Kurd who was forcibly  returned  in
       September 2013 from Norway and he was reportedly  arrested  and  was
       believed to still be detained. There is also  a  Swiss  report  that
       referred to quotes from an unnamed Judge.

   22. I do not find that any of the matters contained on those pages would
       have altered the approach of the Judge in this  case.  The  examples
       are either of people with profiles or unsubstantiated reports.

   23. On Page [6] of the bundle there is a reference in the  2012  Country
       of Origin Report to article 34 of the Penal Code. This was something
       considered by the Tribunal in SB and the Tribunal rejected the claim
       that this in itself would place a person at risk or  persecution  or
       serious harm.

   24. Mr Schwenk's submission was to the effect that AB did  not  consider
       changed circumstances and it would therefore  be  difficult  to  now
       argue that AB changed the position for persons who  left  illegally.
       Pages [8] to [10] do not add anything to the argument presented.

   25. The Tribunal in BA did consider risk  on  return  and  endorsed  the
       approach in SB.

   26. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge did  consider  the  relevant
       evidence and there is nothing adduced  in  this  appeal  that  would
       suggest there is an error in law.

   27. I am aware that there is a  pending  country  guidance  decision  on
       illegal exit from Iran but based on the  evidence  adduced  in  this
       appeal to the Judge I am satisfied there was no error in law.

DECISION

   28. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       decision.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I maintain the original fee award decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
