





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00061/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 28 September 2016                |On:  28 October 2016                 |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C B P
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Ijezie, solicitor (Curling Moore Solicitors and
                    Advocates)

                            Decision and Reasons

 1. I continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is to remain in
    place unless and until this Tribunal or any  other  appropriate  Court,
    directs otherwise. As such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall,
    directly or indirectly, identify the respondent or any  member  of  her
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.


 2. For the sake of convenience, I shall refer to the  respondent  as  "the
    claimant" and to the appellant as the secretary of state.


 3. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  23  June  2016  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  to
    grant her asylum and her human rights claims (Articles 2 and 3).


 4. The background to her appeal is set out in the decision of  the  First-
    tier judge at [16(1) -  (26)].  He  set  out  her  case  including  her
    comments about her experts' evidence.  This was set out  in  detail  in
    her witness statement dated 1 December 2015.


 5. The claimant is a national of the Philippines, born on  9  April  1969.
    She entered the UK on 1 October 2006 on a student visa valid  until  13
    September 2008. She was granted further leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules until 31  December  2010.  She  was  granted  further
    student leave until 20 April  2013.  That  leave  was  curtailed  on  6
    September 2012 and expired on 5 November 2013.


 6. Her application for a residence card as the family  member  of  an  EEA
    national was refused. Her appeal against the refusal was  dismissed  on
    13 September 2013. She became appeal rights  exhausted  on  16  October
    2013.


 7. On 17 April 2015 she claimed asylum. Following an interview, her  claim
    was refused on 29 April 2015.


 8. She claimed that she had left the Philippines for a number  of  reasons
    including the need to get away from her husband whom she had married on
    11 March 1989. He turned out to be a  drug  addict  and  alcoholic  who
    subjected her to verbal and physical abuse including rape. She left him
    before the end of April 1989 and did not return to him.  She  had  only
    seen him once since then, in 2002, when she asked him to sign  a  form.
    He continued to follow her home from work every night until she came to
    the UK.


 9. She contacted him in 2012 and asked him to sign her divorce papers.  He
    did this on condition that she provide him with money  each  month.  He
    told her  that  if  she  stopped  that  support  he  would  inform  the
    Philippines authorities that she had married in the UK.


10. She was granted a divorce in the UK and then married a  Czech  national
    in November 2012. She last saw her Czech husband in December 2013.


11. She contended that her ex-husband's consent to her divorce did not mean
    that she would not be prosecuted for bigamy  in  the  Philippines.  The
    State prosecuted bigamy of its own volition, without being prompted. If
    the State found out that she had been married  twice,  they  would  not
    accept her divorce in the UK and would prosecute her for  bigamy.  This
    did not need her ex-husband's involvement. There would  be  no  defence
    that he had ill treated her because this happened a long time  ago  and
    she had no evidence of that. It is likely that she would be convicted.


12. Internal relocation in the Philippines would not be sufficient to avoid
    her prosecution for bigamy. She would be  sentenced  to  prison  for  a
    period between 6 and 12 years and would face torture and ill treatment.




13. The Judge noted that her fears were supported by the  opinions  of  two
    experts on the Philippines law. Both concluded that she  had  committed
    an offence of bigamy by contracting a second marriage in the UK without
    a judicial declaration of nullity of her first marriage.


14.  However,  the  claimant  stated  in   her   witness   statement   that
    "surprisingly" it was the opinion of each expert that she would not  be
    prosecuted for the offence of bigamy in the  Philippines  because  that
    offence had been committed  abroad  paragraph  [20]  pages  6-7.  Those
    experts failed to appreciate the fact that bigamy  was  regarded  as  a
    continuing offence and she would be returning to the Philippines  as  a
    bigamist and, at that point, would come within the jurisdiction of  the
    Philippines court and be arrested and prosecuted  for  the  offence  of
    bigamy.


15. The experts had not explained "how her act to the second marriage in  a
    foreign land, which was regarded as an offence  of  bigamy  would  stop
    being an offence of bigamy on her return to the Philippines."


16. Even if not prosecuted on return, she would not be able to get  married
    to anyone else except her ex-husband. That amounted to  "gambling  with
    her Convention rights and freedoms" [22].


17. The claimant also contended that her marriage to her  EEA  partner  was
    still valid and subsisting and he was still in the UK exercising Treaty
    rights. Until that marriage was dissolved, she had a right to remain in
    the UK as his partner. She had lived here for more than nine years  and
    integrated into the UK. It would be disproportionate to remove her. She
    also feared that she would be harmed by  her  Filipino  ex-husband  and
    prosecuted [24-26].


18. The Judge had regard to the background material including  Articles  45
    to 47 of the family code of the Philippines [20]. He also had regard to
    the expert reports at [21].


19. The first report at pages 148-161  was  prepared  by  an  attorney,  Lu
    Mamangun, a senior partner of the law office in Manila. This is dated 8
    September 2015. The second report at pages 192-198 is from Mary  Ann  M
    Tolete-Juco, a member of the Integrated Bar  of  the  Philippines.  Her
    report is dated 12 June 2015.


20. Both experts stated that the  claimant  could  not  be  prosecuted  for
    bigamy on return to  the  Philippines  as  the  bigamous  marriage  was
    contracted in the UK. The Court could not exercise jurisdiction over  a
    person charged with an offence committed outside the jurisdiction.


21. The Judge made various findings. He stated that there seems  to  be  no
    doubt from the experts that her divorce, obtained in the UK, would  not
    be recognised in the Philippines. The  respondent  had  contended  that
    this would not put her at a real risk of being prosecuted for bigamy on
    return there.


22. The Judge however stated that he thought that there  was  a  real  risk
    that if returned, her husband would seek  to  get  the  State  to  take
    action against her for bigamy [41].


23. He had regard  to  "relevant  sections  of  the  family  code"  of  the
    Philippines in relation  to  the  obtaining  of  an  annulment  of  the
    marriage rather than the straightforward divorce. That led the claimant
    to be locked into an unfortunate situation where, although by  the  law
    of the UK she was divorced from her former husband, it may  not  appear
    to the authorities in the Philippines that this had been  an  effective
    and complete dissolution of the marriage - [42].


24. The Judge found that without an annulment, she  could  be  regarded  on
    return as someone who had not divorced her husband  and  had  therefore
    committed bigamy. He found that "bigamy is  a  continuing  offence  and
    that fact does not seem to have been properly considered within the two
    expert reports" - [43].


25. He also found that there was a danger that she could be prosecuted  for
    adultery. Her ex-husband appeared to be capable of carrying  a  grudge.
    He stated at [45]  that  "my  concerns  in  respect  of  this  somewhat
    ambiguous situation that it creates for her a  real  risk  (nothing  so
    concrete as a risk on the balance of probabilities but more than merely
    a speculative risk) of persecution of her on return".


26. On  19  August  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  granted  the
    secretary of state permission to appeal on the basis that in the  light
    of the two expert reports, it was arguable  that  the  Judge  may  have
    erred in law by reaching different conclusions  in  respect  of  likely
    prosecution by the State and in respect of the likely  actions  of  her
    first husband for the reasons set out in the grounds.


27. There has been a Rule 24 response to the notice of appeal. In addition,
    the claimant's solicitors have filed numerous authorities both  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing and subsequent thereto.


28. Mr Whitwell submitted that both expert reports were 'unequivocal'  that
    the claimant cannot be prosecuted on return on account of bigamy in the
    UK. He submitted that the Judge had allowed the claimant's appeal under
    the protection grounds which included asylum as well as Articles 2  and
    3 of the human rights convention.


29. He submitted that the Judge embarked on his  own  reading  of  relevant
    sections of the family code of the Philippines and stated his  concerns
    that bigamy is a continuing offence and that fact does not seem to have
    been properly considered by the two experts [42-43].


30. He submitted that the Judge did not however set out any reasons  as  to
    why  the  evidence  relating  to  non-prosecution  should  be  "lightly
    disregarded" and supplemented with the Judge's preferred  understanding
    of the Filipino family code. That is all the more  so  considering  the
    reference  to  the  "somewhat  ambiguous  situation  at  [45]  of   the
    decision."


31. He submitted that given the clear indications by the experts  that  the
    claimant would not be prosecuted on return, such  a  finding  "is  also
    perverse."


32. Moreover, the findings relating to the  claimant's  estranged  husband,
    whom she had left in April 1989, and whom she had not seen  since  2002
    "borders on the perverse."


33. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Ijezie has produced a  detailed  Rule  24
    response as well as the skeleton argument.


34. He submitted that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  fair,
    just and reasonable. There were no material errors of law. The  grounds
    amount to simple disagreement, or quarrel with the permissible findings
    of fact. In that respect he relied on well known authorities  including
    R (Iran) and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [8-17]. He  submitted
    that perversity represents a very  high  hurdle  and  was  a  demanding
    concept - R and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [11].


35. He submitted that the Judge was not bound to accept the opinions of the
    experts or to reach their conclusions in respect of likely  prosecution
    of the claimant by the State in the Philippines. That  is  particularly
    so where the experts did not properly have  regard  to  the  "important
    question" as to whether or not bigamy  is  a  continuing  offence.  The
    second expert concluded  that  the  claimant  would  be  likely  to  be
    prosecuted for  a  second  offence  of  adultery  upon  return  to  the
    Philippines.


36. The role of experts is merely to assist the Judge and not to usurp  his
    functions. He is not bound to rubber stamp their conclusions.


37. The Judge did not assume an expertise  that  he  did  not  possess.  He
    simply based his conclusion on the assessment of the factual and expert
    evidence before him including credible  evidence  and  publications  on
    prison conditions. He gave sufficient plausible and cogent reasons  why
    he rejected their opinion on the issue of likely prosecution.


38. The first expert did not answer the important question  as  to  whether
    bigamy is a continuing offence.  The  second  expert  misconstrued  the
    notion of "continuing offence" to mean "series of acts" and  reached  a
    wrong conclusion. The Judge preferred his understanding of the Filipino
    Family Code.


39. He submitted that the appeal was also allowed on the basis of  risk  on
    return in that she had committed adultery. There has been  no  separate
    appeal against that finding.


40. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that in his grounds seeking permission,
    he referred to the fact that the Judge found that there was a real risk
    of persecution on  return  to  the  Philippines.  That  was  enough  to
    encompass adultery as well.


41. In any event, the Judge at [44] found that there was a danger that  she
    could be prosecuted for  adultery.  That  still  relates  to  an  extra
    territorial offence committed in the UK. There was accordingly  absence
    of any reasoning relating to the danger  asserted  that  she  could  be
    prosecuted for adultery.


    Assessment


42. I have had regard to the claimant's supplementary  bundle  produced  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  13  May  2016.  In  the
    bundle there is an extract from the penal code of  the  Philippines  on
    pages 327-341.


43. Article 1 sets out when the penal code (Act no. 3815 dated December  8,
    1930) takes effect. The code takes effect on 1 January 1932.


44. Article 2 sets out the application of its provisions.  It  states  that
    "except  as  provided  in  the  treaties  and  laws   of   preferential
    application, provisions of this Code shall be in force not only  within
    the Philippine archipelago   including  its  atmosphere,  its  interior
    waters and maritime zone, but also outside of its jurisdiction, against
    those who:


      a) should commit an offence while on a Philippine ship or airship;


      b) should forge or counterfeit  any  coin  or  currency  note  of  the
         Philippine islands or obligations  and  securities  issued  by  the
         government of the Philippine islands;


      c) should be liable for acts  connected  with  the  introduction  into
         these islands of the obligations and securities  mentioned  in  the
         preceding number;


      d) while being public officers or employees, should commit an  offence
         in the exercise of their functions; or


      e) should commit any of the crimes against national security  and  the
         law of nations, defined in title one of Book two of this code.


45. The Code then sets out chapter 1 relating to felonies.  It appears from
    that code that the provisions of the penal code will be  enforced  with
    regard to those extra territorial offences set out in paragraphs 1 to 5
    of Article 2.


46. In the Code under Title 11, Crimes Against Chastity, including adultery
    and concubinage, are set out. There  is  also  the  offence  of  bigamy
    referred to at Article 349.


47. I have also had regard to the Family Code of the  Philippines  produced
    on pages 342 and following.


48. The claimant also produced a decision of the First Division Court dated
    July 31, 2000. The issue to be resolved in the petition  presented  was
    whether the subsequent filing of a civil action for  a  declaration  of
    nullity of a previous marriage constituted a prejudicial question to  a
    criminal case for bigamy. It was held not to be a prejudicial question.
    The  respondent  in  that  case  was  not  permitted  to  use  his  own
    malfeasance to defeat the criminal action against him.


49. There is also the decision of Panganivan, J. in the case of  Mercado  v
    Tran G.R No. 137110, August 1, 2000, produced at  p373  of  the  bundle
    which considered a claim relating to bigamy, where both marriages  took
    place within the jurisdiction of the court.


50. These decisions do not  appear  to  be  germane  to  the  issues  under
    consideration.


51. I have also considered the report of the experts.


52. Attorney Mamangun stated that the claimant has committed the  crime  of
    bigamy in accordance with Philippine statutes (paragraph  16).  She  is
    legally married to B. Their marriage has  not  been  legally  dissolved
    from the viewpoint of the Philippine  laws.  The  claimant  married  C,
    which she assumed had all the essential requisites for  validity  under
    UK law.


53. Accordingly the claimant has "consummated" the crime of bigamy from the
    moment  that  her  marriage  with  C  was  celebrated  without   having
    previously dissolved her marriage to B.


54. At paragraph 21 of her opinion, however, she noted that bigamy is not a
    continuing crime. She referred to the  revised  penal  code  where  the
    crime of bigamy is committed by the singular act  of  marrying  another
    person whilst the previous marriage is still valid and subsisting.  The
    criminal  act  is  "thus  consummated"  at  the  precise  time  of  the
    celebration of the subsequent marriage. (The parties  accept  that  the
    expert intended to state that the criminal act is "thus committed").


55. At paragraph 24 she stated that the crime of bigamy from the  viewpoint
    of Philippine laws is committed from the moment of the  celebration  of
    the subsequent marriage of A  to  C.   There  are  no  series  of  acts
    involved in the crime of bigamy which would  qualify  as  a  continuing
    crime. The crime is consummated by the  single  act  of  celebrating  a
    second marriage while the first is still validly subsisting.


56. Further  acts  of  cohabitation  or  sexual  intercourse  although  not
    elements of the crime of bigamy,  may  however  constitute  a  separate
    crime of adultery or concubinage.


57. At  paragraph  26  the  expert  stated  that  the  claimant  cannot  be
    prosecuted for the crime of bigamy upon her return to  the  Philippines
    since the bigamous marriage was contracted in the UK. The Court in  the
    Philippines cannot exercise jurisdiction over a person who  commits  an
    offence outside his jurisdiction.


58. Reference is  made  to  Article  14  of  the  new  Civil  Code  of  the
    Philippines which provides for the principle of  territoriality.  Penal
    laws and those of public security and safety shall be  obligatory  upon
    all who live or sojourn in the Philippines' territory, subject  to  the
    principle of public international law and treaty stipulations.


59. She stated that the aforesaid rule admits of those exceptions  referred
    to in Article 2 of the revised penal code, which  I  have  already  set
    out.


60. She concluded that the claimant's situation does not fall  among  those
    exceptional  circumstances   where   the   Philippines   could   retain
    jurisdiction for crimes committed outside its territorial boundaries.


61. This applies to the offence of adultery as well.  However,  should  the
    claimant and C  come  to  the  Philippines  to  cohabit,  they  may  be
    prosecuted for the separate and distinct crime of adultery.


62. I have had regard to the expert report of Ms Tolet-Juco dated  12  June
    2015. She stated  at  paragraph  17-18  that  the  claimant  cannot  be
    prosecuted for bigamy upon her return  to  the  Philippines  since  the
    bigamous marriage was contacted or solemnised in the UK. This was not a
    violation of Article 2 of the revised penal  code  of  the  Philippines
    which may be applied extra territorially. The Court has  to  find  that
    the offence was committed within its  jurisdiction.  Since  the  second
    marriage was contracted in the UK it does not fall within  any  of  the
    exceptions allowing for extra territorial jurisdiction (paragraph 21).


63. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has not undertaken any  analysis  of  the
    penal code of the Philippines which sets out the  basis  upon  which  a
    Philippines  court  is   entitled   to   exercise   extra   territorial
    jurisdiction  with  regard  to  offences  committed  outside   of   its
    jurisdiction.


64. The Judge had regard to the Family Code of the Philippines but did  not
    consider the penal code.


65. The Judge  then  asserted  without  any  reasoning  that  bigamy  is  a
    continuing offence and "that fact does not seem to have  been  properly
    considered within the two expert reports."


66. Both experts did however consider that question very  carefully  as  is
    plain from their respective reports. They have given proper reasons for
    their opinion that bigamy is not a continuing offence. Nor is adultery.




67. Although the Judge  raised  concerns  about  "this  somewhat  ambiguous
    situation" the opinions of the experts  were  not  ambiguous  but  were
    based on the relevant Codes applicable in these circumstances.


68. Although the secretary of state's grounds of appeal did  not  expressly
    rely on these conclusions with regard to the offence of adultery, it is
    evident that the Judge stated that it is also the danger that she could
    be prosecuted for adultery if her ex husband seeks vindictively to  get
    the state to act against her [44].


69. However, the adultery relied on was committed outside the  jurisdiction
    of the Philippines and was itself not a continuing offence.


70. In the circumstances, the finding by the  experts  that  the  appellant
    would not be prosecuted for either bigamy or adultery committed  whilst
    abroad was not properly analysed or dealt with by the First-tier Judge.




71. If the claimant could not lawfully be prosecuted for  either  of  these
    offences, there was no  real  risk  that  she  would  be  detained  and
    subjected to inhuman treatment as alleged.


72. I accordingly find that the making of the decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge involved the making of an error on a point of law.


73. I accordingly set aside the decision. Both parties agreed that in those
    circumstances the matter should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be determined afresh.


74. There will be  a  fresh  hearing  date  before  the  Tribunal  and  the
    claimant's solicitors are at liberty to  apply  to  that  Tribunal  for
    further case management directions should that become necessary.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside.


    The appeal by the secretary of state to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed
    to the extent that the claimant's appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined afresh by a different Judge of that Tribunal.




    Anonymity direction continued.






    Signed                                       Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer           22 October 2016

