
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00281/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 3rd February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by Aston Bond Law
Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms A Broklesby Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises out of a decision of the respondent, dated 12th June
    2015, whereby it refused to grant the appellant asylum or  humanitarian
    protection and determined that his removal from the UK would not be  in
    breach of Article 8 ECHR. The appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). The appellant now appeals
    the FtT's decision, which was promulgated on 7th October 2015.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1986.  He
    arrived in the  UK  in  October  2008,  by  clandestine  means,  having
    travelled through a number of countries since  leaving  Afghanistan  in
    June 2008. On 15 April 2014 he applied for an EEA residence card as the
    spouse of an EEA national and his application was refused.  On  13  May
    2015 he was served notice of  intention  to  remove  him  and  detained
    pending removal after being arrested following an attempt to enter into
    a  sham  marriage.  On  18  May  2015  he  applied  for  asylum.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  respondent's
    Reasons for Refusal Letter of 12 June  2015.  The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated a well  founded  fear  of
    persecution in Afghanistan. The appellant's Article 8  ECHR  claim  was
    also rejected.

 4. The appellant's claim is that he is an uneducated  illiterate  mechanic
    who owned his own garage from the Loghar Province  in  Afghanistan  who
    was forced by the Taliban to participate in a suicide bombing but threw
    away the suicide vest and fled. He believes his father has been  killed
    by the Taliban.  He claims to have received a "night letter"  from  the
    Taliban and to  be  at  risk  from  them  because  of  his  refusal  to
    participate in a suicide bombing. He further claims that he  is  wanted
    by Afghan authorities because he was identified  by  a  member  of  the
    Taliban.

 5. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account, describing it as
    inconsistent and incoherent, and rejected his asylum  application.  The
    appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by FtT Judge Robinson.

Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The FtT did not find the appellant credible. It rejected his  claim  to
    have been forced to undertake a suicide mission and  described  him  as
    having exaggerated and embellished his story to avoid removal from  the
    UK. The  FtT  identified  several  discrepancies  which  were  said  to
    undermine the appellant's credibility. These include:
      a. The appellant stated, at interview, that the Taliban sent a  letter
         (the "night letter") saying that if he did not  hand  himself  over
         they would kill his father.  However,  the  night  letter  did  not
         threaten the appellant's father or even mention him.  The  FtT  did
         not accept the appellant  would  have  been  uncertain  as  to  the
         contents of the night letter if it were genuine.
      b. The appellant gave inconsistent accounts about  his  location  when
         [MT] (the Taliban  member  the  appellant  claims  implicated  him)
         escaped from the Afghan authorities. He originally claimed to  have
         been in Afghanistan at the time of the  escape.  However,  this  is
         inconsistent with the summons for his arrest, dated 15 August 2008,
         which stated that [MT] was  in  custody.  On  15  August  2008  the
         appellant had already left Afghanistan.
      c. The appellant did not mention  the  death  of  his  father  in  his
         original statement.

 7. The  FtT  took  into  account  the  time  that  had  elapsed  from  the
    appellant's entry to the UK in 2008 until his application for asylum as
    well as his failure to apply for asylum in safe countries he  travelled
    through on route to the UK. The FtT noted the appellant, whilst in  the
    UK, had applied for a new Afghan  passport  and  had  taken  advice  in
    respect of a residence card but had not made an asylum claim.

 8. The FtT also took into account that  forgeries  of  documents  such  as
    Taliban night letters and Afghan arrest warrants are available for sale
    in Pakistan and the appellant spent two months there on his way to  the
    UK. The FtT found these documents to not be reliable.

 9. Having made findings of fact to the effect that the appellant  has  not
    experienced any problems with the Taliban or  Afghan  authorities,  the
    FtT concluded that he would not be at risk on return either in Kabul or
    in his home  area.  In  so  finding,  the  FtT  relied  on  2013  UNCHR
    Guidelines and the country guidance in AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan CG
    [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC). The FtT also referred, at paragraph [35] to  "an
    August 2015 update" that was highlighted by Counsel for the  appellant.



10. The FtT then considered  the  appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  claim  and
    concluded that the evidence before it did not substantiate there  being
    a family or private life in the UK that engaged Article 8.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

11. There are five grounds of appeal:
      a. First, that the FtT failed  to  address  the  up  to  date  country
         evidence  that   was   before   it   in   respect   of   subsidiary
         protection/indiscriminate violence.
      b. Second, that the FtT relied on a material error of fact in  stating
         that the appellant's father was not  named  in  the  night  letter.
         Moreover, it is argued  that  the  FtT  overlooked  the  particular
         circumstances, including that the appellant was illiterate and  the
         emotions involved, that might have resulted  in  him  thinking  the
         night letter threatened his father.
      c. Third, that the FtT misdirected itself by adopting the respondent's
         credibility findings  which  were  speculative  and  it  cannot  be
         discerned which inconsistencies in the refusal  letter  were  being
         relied on when they were referenced at paragraph [54].
      d. Fourth, that the FtT's finding that the appellant's closest  family
         were in Afghanistan and Lithuania was made without there  being  an
         evidential basis for such a finding.
      e. Fifth, that there is a material  conflict  of  fact  which  remains
         unresolved in respect of the appellant asking for voluntary removal
         to Lithuania and his uncle advising him against return for fear  of
         death, and the finding that he would not be in fear of  the  Afghan
         regime.

12. Mr Gaisford started his submissions by challenging  the  basis  of  the
    credibility findings.  He argued that the FtT had  failed  to  properly
    take into consideration, and make allowances for  the  fact,  that  the
    appellant was uneducated and illiterate. The interview record  confirms
    that the appellant is unable to recollect dates. Accordingly,  the  FtT
    should not have based its credibility  findings,  and  placed  so  much
    weight, on the appellant's inability to recall the  timing  of  certain
    events.  Mr Gaisford also argued  that  the  credibility  findings  are
    undermined because the FtT failed  to  appreciate  that  the  appellant
    could have been under an honest misapprehension as to  what  the  night
    letter said. He also submitted that the FtT's inaccuracy about what the
    night letter said about the  appellant's  father  weighed  heavily  and
    coloured the credibility findings. Further, the appellant's failure  to
    mention his father's death was given inappropriate weight  because  the
    appellant was never asked a direct question that  would  have  elicited
    this information. In addition, Mr Gaisford  argued  that  the  FtT  had
    failed to take into account that the appellant thought he had  made  an
    asylum claim in 2008 and in 2012 had followed it up.

13. In respect  of  the  current  situation  in  Afghanistan,  Mr  Gaisford
    submitted  that  the  appellant's  family  are  in  Kabul   where   the
    circumstances are bleak and the  up  to  date  evidence  indicates  the
    appellant would face serious  obstacles  upon  return  irrespective  of
    previous conduct. Mr Gaisford explained that he had  provided  the  FtT
    with important up to date country information post  dating  AK  in  the
    form of  the  UN's  Afghanistan  Midyear  report  2015:  Protection  of
    Civilians in Armed Conflict  and Country  Information  and  Guidance  -
    Afghanistan: Security and humanitarian situation (August 2015) but this
    had not been taken into account in the decision.  He  argued  that  the
    evidence before the FtT showed that the 15(c) threshold may be met.

14. Ms Broklesby-Weller submitted that the FtT was  aware,  and  took  into
    account, the issue of the appellant's illiteracy and lack of education.
    Having done so, it identified genuine and  significant  inconsistencies
    in the evidence and the FtT's findings on  credibility  were  based  on
    consideration of all of the evidence in the round. She also argued that
    the FtT had proper regard to the applicable Country Guidance.

Consideration

15. My starting point in considering this appeal is  that  I  am  satisfied
    that it was open to the FtT to find the appellant not  credible.  There
    were  significant  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  account.   They
    included, but were not limited to, his explanation of where he was when
    Mullah Timor escaped, which was inconsistent with documentary  evidence
    he produced; and the content of the Taliban's night letter. Mr Gaisford
    sought to argue that the discrepancies  may  have  arisen  because  the
    appellant was uneducated and illiterate. However,  the  nature  of  the
    discrepancies was such that they  cannot  adequately  be  explained  by
    illiteracy or lack of education. The FtT had a  range  of  reasons  for
    finding the appellant to not be credible and when the  evidence  before
    the FtT is considered cumulatively and in the round it is clear that it
    was entitled to so find.

16. I now turn to the five grounds of appeal.

17. The first ground is that the FtT failed to consider up to date  country
    guidance  about  indiscriminate  violence  in  Afghanistan.  The  FtT's
    consideration of the risk the appellant would face on return is set out
    at paragraphs [69] - [76]. The decision includes consideration  of  the
    2013 UNHCR Guidelines  and  AK.  Earlier  in  the  decision  there  are
    references to more up to date objective evidence: at paragraph [31] the
    FtT states that it was asked  to  consider  the  country  update  which
    indicated the security risk was heighted and generic and  at  [36]  the
    FtT  referred  to  Mr  Gaisford  highlighting  relevant  parts  of  the
    objective evidence to show Kabul was unsafe. However, the  up  to  date
    country information is not mentioned in the  section  of  the  decision
    where the FtT evaluates and makes a finding in respect of the  risk  of
    return.

18. As is made clear in the Tribunal Practice Direction at paragraphs  12.2
    and 12.4, the FtT must treat as binding any country guidance  authority
    relevant to the issues in dispute unless there is good reason  for  not
    doing  so,  such  as  fresh  evidence  which  casts  doubt   upon   its
    conclusions, and a failure to follow the country guidance without  good
    reason is likely to involve an error of law.

19. The country guidance in force in respect of indiscriminate violence  in
    Afghanistan is AK. The headnote to that decision states, inter alia:
         "(ii)    Despite a rise  in  the  number  of  civilian  deaths  and
         casualties and (particularly in the 2010-2011 period) an  expansion
         of the geographical scope of the armed conflict in Afghanistan, the
         level of indiscriminate violence in that country taken as  a  whole
         is not at such a high level as to mean that, within the meaning  of
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, a civilian, solely by
         being present in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his
         life or person.
         (iii)    Nor is the level of indiscriminate violence, even  in  the
         provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be taken to
         include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level."

20. The appellant submitted to the FtT evidence post dating  AK  which,  it
    was argued, justified a departure from that case. The fresh information
    took the form of the UN's Afghanistan Midyear report  2015:  Protection
    of Civilians in Armed Conflict and Country Information and  Guidance  -
    Afghanistan: Security and  humanitarian  situation  (August  2015).  Mr
    Gaisford handed to me even more recent articles indicating  an  upsurge
    in violence.

21. The FtT has assessed the appellant's risk of return on the basis of the
    relevant country guidance - AK - as well as the 2013 UNCHR  Guidelines.
    It does  not  appear  to  have  taken  into  account  the  up  to  date
    information supplied by the appellant. I accept that a failure to  take
    into account up to date information can amount  to  an  error  of  law.
    However, having carefully considered the material in  question,  it  is
    clear that any error of law was  not  material.  The  country  evidence
    submitted by the appellant about  Afghanistan,  although  describing  a
    situation where there is suffering by and harm to civilians, is  by  no
    means sufficient to cast doubt on the conclusions reached by the  Upper
    Tribunal in AK, which were  based  on  a  careful  consideration  of  a
    considerable volume of evidence. Although the fresh  evidence  is  more
    recent, it fails to  show  a  significant  difference  in  the  overall
    circumstances in Afghanistan in general or  Kabul  in  particular  from
    that which was before the Upper Tribunal in  AK.  Accordingly,  I  find
    that the FtT did not make an error of  law  in  following  AK  and  any
    failure to address more up to date evidence that was before it was  not
    material.

22. The second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  night  letter  that  the
    appellant claims was sent by the Taliban. The appellant argues that the
    FtT made a material error of  fact  in  stating  that  the  appellant's
    father was not mentioned in the  letter.   However,  the  night  letter
    refers to the appellant's father only  as  a  way  of  identifying  the
    appellant. It is clear from the context in which the  FtT  stated  that
    the appellant's father was not mentioned that it  was  contrasting  the
    wording in the letter, which makes no threat  against  the  appellant's
    father and does not mention him (other than to identify the  appellant)
    with the appellant's statement that his father was  threatened  in  the
    letter, which is not the case.

23. The third ground concerns the FtT's  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    credibility. I have already explained why it is my view  that  the  FtT
    was entitled to conclude the appellant was not credible and  for  these
    reasons I find that this ground has  no  merit.  The  fifth  ground  of
    appeal is rejected for the same  reason:  given  that  the  appellant's
    account has been rejected on the basis  of  him  not  being  considered
    credible, there is not a material conflict of  fact  arising  from  his
    claim (which is not  believed)  that  his  uncle  advised  him  against
    returning to Afghanistan because of a fear of death.

24. The fourth ground takes issue with the FtT's  approach  to  Article  8,
    arguing that the FtT did not have a basis for its  assertion  that  the
    appellant's closest family were in Afghanistan and Lithuania  and  that
    it overlooked that the appellant's cousin and cousin's family in the UK
    are the appellant's only family. There is no merit to this ground.  The
    FtT found that the relationship between the appellant and  his  cousin,
    who do not live together  and  who  only  see  each  other  on  special
    occasions, does not engage Article 8 ECHR. That finding was open to the
    FtT irrespective of whether or not  the  appellant  has  closer  family
    elsewhere and there is no basis for arguing the FtT has made a material
    error of law in respect of its assessment under Article 8.

Decision
      a. The appeal is dismissed.
      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.
      c. An anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 1 February 2016               |

