
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00648/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th July 2019                    |On 13th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                   k y m a
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Yemen born in Abu Dhabi, United  Arab
    Emirates, on 31st December 1981.  He has never lived in Yemen.

2.   On 15th October 2017 the appellant left Abu Dhabi and  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom upon a visitor's visa.  On 23rd October 2017 he  claimed
    asylum.

3.   By  a  decision  of  8th  January  2019,  the  respondent  refused  the
    application for asylum but granted humanitarian protection instead.

4.   The appellant however sought to renew  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of asylum.

5.   That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell  for  hearing
    on 22nd February 2019 and  was  dismissed.   The  appellant  sought  to
    appeal against that decision and permission to do so was granted by the
    Upper Tribunal.  Thus the matter comes  before  me  to  determine  that
    issue.

6.   The appellant advances his claim for asylum on two  bases.   The  first
    being that of a social group, it being his contention  that  he  is  in
    danger from his father's family  in  Yemen  were  he  to  return.   The
    detailed circumstances  are  set  out  in  several  witness  statements
    submitted on his behalf.  The statements are  dated  19th  April  2018,
    21st May 2018 and 12th February 2019.

7.   His father's family is said to be of the  Alshami  tribe.   His  father
    was disowned by the family because he married outside  of  that  tribe.
    His father left Yemen in 1962.  He said that in  1991  his  father  was
    tricked into returning to the Yemen on the understanding that  a  visit
    from him would then be welcomed. Instead  there  was  an  assassination
    attempt  made  on  him  which  left  him  requiring  extensive  medical
    treatment.

8.   In 2006 one of the cousins from Yemen was working in Qatar  and  wished
    to marry the appellant's sister and take her back to  the  Yemen.   The
    sister refused.

9.   In 2009 the appellant sought to marry and his proposed wife  asked  him
    about his family background.  He contacted his aunt in Yemen to try and
    find out that information.  She was somewhat hostile  to  him  but  did
    indeed give him the  information  that  he  wanted.   That  information
    revealed also that the family were Shia whereas he and his father  were
    Sunni.

10.  It was the appellant's claim that not only was he marrying out  of  the
    family but was also of a different faith. This resulted in the father's
    family threatening him from  2006  until  2015.  He  then  changed  his
    telephone number and the treats ceased. Thus it is that  the  appellant
    fears violence from the family upon return.

11.  The second basis is that of racial/political grouping.   The  appellant
    says he is from the Alshami tribe and that his uncle  was  a  Chief  of
    Airforce  in  the  civil  war  in  1994.   Such  a  clan  is  part  of,
    alternatively a supporter of the Al-Houti tribe.  That there is tension
    between that tribe and the  Government  supported  by  Saudi  and  Arab
    allies.  It is said that all the families from the Al-Houti tribe  were
    Shia Muslims and support the rebels.  As his father's family tribe  the
    Alshami's are one of the Al-Houti militia.  He will  be  targeted  upon
    suspicion if returned.

12.  In the reasons for refusal dated 8th January 2019  the  respondent  set
    out in some detail the account of the appellant.  It was accepted  that
    the appellant belonged to the Alshami tribe.  It was accepted that  the
    appellant was a Sunni Muslim.

13.  It was considered that the claim that  the  cousin  from  the  father's
    family proposed to the sister did not stand well  with  the  contention
    that his father and family have been disowned.   It  was  not  accepted
    that the appellant would be at risk as a Sunni from the Shia given that
    there were a few sectarian issues in Yemen, as the conflict was  mainly
    political and that often both Sunni and Shia sects  pray  in  the  same
    mosques.  It was not accepted, for the reasons  set  out,  that  simply
    being a member of the Alshami tribe would place the appellant in danger
    and risk.  However, it was accepted that the general situation in Yemen
    was such that there was a general risk  on  return  such  as  to  grant
    humanitarian protection.

14.  In the short determination by Judge Russell, the concerns as  expressed
    by the respondent were note. The credibility of the claim  as  to  risk
    from the family was not accepted.  It was found  that  there  would  be
    little interest that the family in Yemen would have in  the  appellant.
    It  was  not  accepted  that  the  Shia  /Sunni  tensions  created  any
    difficulties for the appellant upon return.

15.  The grounds of appeal, as developed also by the  skeleton  argument  of
    Mrs Brown, contend that the analysis of  the  evidence  of  the  Judge,
    particularly as to the family feud  was  wholly  inadequate.   Further,
    there was no real consideration of  the  socio-political  dimension  of
    family groupings and there was a total  lack  of  engagement  with  the
    report of Dr George, which it is said was helpful to the  appellant  in
    all respects.

16.  It is said in particular, that it was wrong to criticise the  appellant
    for failing to clarify his claim and correct any inconsistencies,  when
    he had sought to do so by a  subsequent  statement.  For  example,  the
    appellant explained, with reference to the cousin's marriage  proposal,
    that it was traditional for the first son of the  father's  brother  to
    marry his cousin.  It is said that because the father had been disowned
    the proposal was not carried out in the traditional manner by the uncle
    coming to the family  home,  rather  that  the  cousin  came  for  that
    purpose.  It is said that such an action without  the  intervention  of
    the uncle was in effect an insult.

17.  Notwithstanding such an explanation as subsequently offered,  it  would
    seem somewhat unusual for the family, holding such strong  and  adverse
    views  of  the  appellant's  family,  that  such  an  offer  should  be
    contemplated  at  all.   It   was   submitted   by   Mr   Kotas,   that
    notwithstanding that the aunt  seems  to  have  been  dismayed  by  the
    appellant's wish to marry outside  the  family  and  his  Sunni  faith,
    nevertheless she provided him with the family tree that was  requested.



18.  The report  of  Dr  George  of  12th  February  2019  was  said  to  be
    supportive of the appellant's account of a family feud.   It  seems  to
    me, and indeed Mr Kotas submits that the reverse would seem to  be  the
    position.  In dealing with the appellant's position  at  paragraph  115
    the expert contends that marriages  between  individuals  of  different
    tribes are not unusual in Yemen and would not normally be  regarded  as
    bringing dishonour on a family or tribe.  Although the expert does  not
    seek to rule out as implausible the account  which  the  appellant  has
    given, particularly in that the applicant's own marriage  to  a  Yemeni
    woman  from  another  tribe  would  have  deeply  upset  his  immediate
    relatives to the extent that they would target him, the comment however
    is made in the report that "such intense disapproval and sense of shame
    over persons marrying outside  their  tribe  would  be  very  unusual".
    Although the expert did not entirely rule out as implausible  that  the
    applicant's father's family might have disowned him and his father  for
    not following the Shia religion, the expert comments  that  again  such
    would have been unusual.

19.  Mrs Brown contends that, because  the  expert  could  not  definitively
    rule out the explanation, the report  was  capable  of  supporting  the
    account.  It appears  to  me  however  that  is  a  somewhat  difficult
    proposition to sustain when one reads  the  report  as  a  whole.   The
    expert also in paragraph 126 refers to a report  from  the  US  Embassy
    dated 7th February 2007, to the effect that the line between Sunni  and
    Shia in Yemen is highly blurred and the two groups often  pray  in  the
    same mosques and worship much  in  the  same  manner.   Identities  are
    derived chiefly from tribal rather than religious affiliation.

20.  In terms of the ethnic, social and political profile of  the  appellant
    it is contended that the Judge wholly  omitted  consideration  of  that
    matter.  Prima facie there is merit in that contention.  However,  once
    again the report of Dr George is instructive on that  issue.   Firstly,
    Dr George, at paragraph 129 of the report, indicates that there  is  no
    Alshami tribe.  Alshami is transliterated into English as Hashemite who
    are simply persons who claim the prophet Mohammed as  an  ancestor.   A
    proportion of the Yemeni population claiming to  be  Hashemites  varies
    between 7 and 12%.  The Al-Shami or Hashemites can be  Sunni  or  Shia,
    although the majority are Shia of the Zeibi  persuasion.   It  is  said
    that they are not all members of  a  defined,  coherent  group.   While
    Hashemites play a significant role in the Houthi movement,  the  latter
    by no means represents all Hashemites.  The expert goes on to say:-

         "In  view  of  the  extreme  diversity  of  Al-Shami  or  Hashemite
         families, it is not possible to generalise about the  political  or
         socio-cultural stances of individual families.

         To the best of my knowledge and belief  the  Saudi-led  anti-Houthi
         alliance does not engage in  the  arbitrary  targeting  of  persons
         carrying the name Al-Shami simply because of their names.   Indeed,
         there are numerous Al-Shamis who are citizens of Saudi  Arabia  and
         the other Arab states comprising the coalition.".

21.  Dr George concludes that Mr Alshami would not face  undue  difficulties
    in Yemen on account of his ethnic, social or  political  identity.   Dr
    George can ascertain no obvious reasons why the appellant might  be  at
    real risk from  the  Government.  Some  Al-Shami  can  of  course  face
    discrimination, harassment because  of  their  significant  involvement
    with the movement. This does not apply to the appellant.

22.  Given the comments of Dr George it is difficult to understand how  that
    report could said to be supportive  of  the  case  for  the  appellant,
    rather the reverse.

23.  Permission to challenge the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the report of Dr George
    could have made a material difference to the outcome of the  appeal  in
    favour of the Appellant.

24.  It seems to me, having read the report in detail  and  putting  matters
    into context, it is a report that gives the  appellant  little  if  any
    support. Indeed is a report which materially  undermines  the  case  as
    presented for the appellant.

25.  Clearly, as Mrs Brown indicates,  the  Judge  ought  properly  to  have
    considered that report and made reference to it in  the  determination.
    That having been said, it  is  abundantly  clear  that  had  the  Judge
    considered that report it would have  afforded  no  assistance  to  the
    appellant in  the  presentation  of  the  case,  indeed  quite  to  the
    contrary. Clearly the Judge was in error not  to  have  considered  the
    issues raised as to being Alshami but it is not a material error  given
    what the Report had to say.

26.  Although the reasons of the Judge were very brief he  was  entitled  to
    rely upon the comments made in the reasons for refusal and  adopt  them
    as his own.

27.  Even  if  there  were  some  substance  as  to  hostility  between  the
    appellant and his father's family it was  the  finding  of  the  Judge,
    given the context of life in  Yemen  and  the  nature  of  the  overall
    conflict and difficulties that are faced by  the  population  that  the
    issue of mixed marriage was unlikely to be a  significant  one  in  the
    practical considerations.  It seems to  me  that  that  was  a  comment
    properly open to be made. The appellant was now separated  or  divorced
    from his wife and would have no need to return to his Father's  family.
    Given the general disorder in the Yemen there would be little  prospect
    of the family tracing him even if they had any interest in doing so.

28.  Although there are clearly shortcomings with the determination  I  find
    that such, particularly in light of the report of Dr George,  discloses
    no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

29.  In  those  circumstances  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed. The Grant of  humanitarian  protection  clearly  remains  in
    force.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 2 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
