
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00965/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th September 2017                |On 9 October 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     B O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born  on  1st  January  1988.
    She entered the UK illegally on 19th July 2016 with her husband A H  Z,
    who claimed to be an Iranian citizen, and her son M A born in Turkey on
    8th October 2013.  The Appellant subsequently applied for asylum as  an
    Iraqi Kurd.  That application was refused for the reasons given in  the
    Respondent's letter of 17th January 2017.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  S  Clarke
    sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 1st March 2017.  He decided to dismiss the
    appeal on asylum grounds but to allow  it  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated  19th  March  2017.
    The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  25th  July
    2017 such permission was granted.  There was no cross-application  from
    the Appellant.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian
    protection grounds contained an error on a point  of  law  so  that  it
    should be set aside.

 3. The Judge decided  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds as he found the Appellant to be credible and accepted that  the
    Appellant feared persecution on her return to Iraq from her  father  as
    she had dishonoured her family by separating from her first husband who
    was a high ranking official in the PUK and had influence throughout the
    IKR.  The Judge was satisfied that on return the Appellant faced a real
    risk of suffering serious harm and for that reason would  be  unwilling
    to avail herself of any State  protection.   Further,  because  of  her
    personal circumstances it would be unreasonable by way of being  unduly
    harsh for the Appellant to relocate to other areas of Iraq.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to this conclusion.  He relied only on Ground  2  of  the
    Grounds of Application  which  referred  to  the  Judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 28 of the Decision.  That "it is far  from  certain  that  he
    (AHZ) would  be  able  to  return  to  Iraq  with  her".   This  was  a
    fundamental error of fact.  The Appellant's husband is in fact an Iraqi
    citizen who made a voluntary return to  Iraq  in  2012  under  the  VAR
    programme.  He did not make use of any fraudulent documents to  do  so.
    It was irrational of the Judge to find to the contrary.   Therefore  it
    was open to the Appellant to return to Iraq with her husband  and  have
    his support there.  The Judge failed to provide a reasoned finding that
    the Appellant would be destitute in Iraq.

 5. In response, Mr Sidhu submitted that the Judge had made  findings  open
    to him on the evidence before him.  He had looked at all  the  evidence
    in the round and found the Appellant to be  credible.   The  Respondent
    had not disputed that the Appellant's husband was from Iran.  The Judge
    was entitled to find that the Appellant's husband could not return with
    the Appellant to Iraq as he was an Iranian citizen.

 6. I find a material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  to  allow
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  which  I  therefore  set
    aside.  Reading the Decision, and in particular  paragraphs  26  to  30
    inclusive thereof, it  is  apparent  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant qualified for humanitarian protection because she would  face
    a real prospect of suffering serious harm on return to  Iraq  from  her
    own family.  This decision is based upon the Judge's  finding  that  on
    return to Iraq the Appellant would not have  the  support  of  her  own
    family and that AHZ would not be able to return with her as  he  is  an
    Iranian.  There was sufficient evidence before the Judge to  find  that
    despite what AHZ said on his arrival in the UK, he is  not  an  Iranian
    citizen but a citizen of Iraq who had previously  returned  voluntarily
    to that country in order to visit the Appellant there.  The  Judge  did
    not deal at all with this evidence which amounts to an error of law.

 7. This evidence is referred to in paragraphs 35 to 41  inclusive  of  the
    Refusal Letter.

 8. I decided not to proceed to remake the decision in the appeal.  This is
    in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7.2(b) of  the  Practice
    Statements as fresh fact-finding  needs  to  be  carried  out.   It  is
    appropriate to remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be remade there.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal as to humanitarian protection will be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date   6th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
