
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00360/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 April 2018                              |On 19 April  2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Symes, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    for ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. This appeal concerns the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  persecution  on
    return to Jamaica on account of his sexuality as a gay man.

 3. He is a citizen of Jamaica, born in 1988.  He  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    August 2002 as a visitor with leave to enter until 8 February 2003.  An
    application for leave to remain as a dependant of settled  parents  was
    refused in August 2003. In 2008 he was detained as  an  overstayer  and
    then granted temporary release.

 4. On 11 August 2011 he received a sentence of 6 months  imprisonment  for
    offences or burglary and theft, although  deportation  action  was  not
    pursued.  In March 2012, a human rights claim was refused with no right
    of appeal and in October 2014 he was noted as an absconder for  failing
    to report. In April 2015 he was arrested for failing to appear at court
    and possession of drugs. Again he was released on  temporary  admission
    and again failed to comply with reporting conditions.

 5. He was encountered by police on 25 September 2017 and detained. He then
    claimed asylum on 9 October 2017. Because he claimed that he  had  been
    forced to deal in drugs a referral via the National Referral  Mechanism
    ("NRM") was made and on 1 November 2017 a negative 'reasonable grounds'
    decision was made.

 6. His asylum (and human rights claim) was rejected by the respondent in a
    decision dated 12 December 2017. His appeal against that decision  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi ("the FtJ") at a hearing on  20
    February 2018 whereby she allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights
    (Article 8 grounds).

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The respondent's grounds in relation to the FtJ's decision contend that
    the FtJ failed to give clear reasons as to why she found the  appellant
    to be credible as regards his sexuality. Complaint is made  that  there
    is no reference in the FtJ's decision to the negative NRM  decision  or
    the human rights application made on 14 November 2011, and both matters
    were relevant to an assessment of the appellant's credibility.

 8. Further, the FtJ had noted that the appellant had been able to keep his
    sexuality secret from his family and according to his evidence only two
    of his friends know about it. Accordingly, the FtJ had failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  live
    discreetly on return to Jamaica, with  the  decision  of  HJ  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 31 being
    relied on.

 9. The further complaint about the FtJ's decision is that although the FtJ
    found that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration in Jamaica, primarily  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    mental health, there is no reference in the FtJ's decision to any  GP's
    notes, or any consideration of whether or not the condition is a  short
    or long-term condition, or whether there would be  treatment  available
    for him in Jamaica.

10. It is necessary to refer to the grant of permission to appeal made by a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal. In that grant of  permission  it  was
    stated as follows:

         "2.  It is arguable that the Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to
             material evidence in arriving at its credibility findings, and
             that it failed adequately to address  the  Appellant's  stated
             reasons for not leading an openly gay lifestyle in the  United
             Kingdom in its assessment of the reasons why he may choose not
             to do so on return to Jamaica. Permission to appeal  on  these
             grounds is accordingly granted.

         3.   It  is  not  however  arguable  that  there  was  insufficient
             evidence to support the findings relating to  the  Appellant's
             learning and mental health difficulties in paragraph 22 of the
             decision given the existence of the reports of Robert Zellwood
             and Dr Lisa Wooton that are referred to at paragraph 18 of the
             decision.  Permission  to  appeal  in  this  ground  (sic)  is
             accordingly refused."

11. In submissions, Mr Jarvis relied on the respondent's grounds of appeal.
    It was submitted that the limitation in the grant  of  permission  only
    related to part of paragraph 4 of the grounds in terms  of  a  lack  of
    evidence to support the FtJ's findings. The reports before the FtJ  did
    not deal with conditions in Jamaica  for  the  appellant  in  terms  of
    available treatment. It was submitted that the  refusal  of  permission
    was not a complete refusal in terms of the issue raised in the  grounds
    relating to very significant obstacles to integration. I  was  referred
    generally to the decision in  Ferrer  (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)
    Philippines [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC) to the  effect  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not complied with the  guidance  in  that  decision  about
    notifying a party that permission had been granted on limited grounds.

12. Otherwise, it was submitted that the  appellant's  immigration  history
    was relevant as regards the lateness of  the  claim  for  asylum.  Even
    though not raised in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  the
    FtJ should as a matter of law have considered s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, and there  was  no
    clear finding on that issue.

13. In his submissions, Mr  Symes  relied  on  the  appellant's  'rule  24'
    response. He accepted that the FtJ did not  refer  to  'section  8'  by
    name, but she did not need to. At [19] she had referred to the delay in
    claiming asylum.  Furthermore, it does  not  appear  that  this  was  a
    matter that was relied on on behalf of the respondent  at  the  hearing
    before the FtJ.

14. As to the point in relation to the NRM, the decision letter does not go
    into detail in that respect.  It  is  furthermore,  only  a  reasonable
    grounds decision, not a conclusive grounds decision. It  was  submitted
    that the NRM assessment was using the same standard of  proof  as  that
    used by the FtJ in the asylum assessment. The FtJ did not have to  deal
    with the issue unless relied on by the respondent at the hearing.

15. In addition, this is an issue which relates only to  one  part  of  the
    FtJ's decision in terms of whether or not he was forced to  sell  drugs
    which was a modest part of the appellant's history. It is not a  matter
    that could undermine the FtJ's overall conclusions.

16. As to Article 8 and the 'very  significant  obstacles  to  integration'
    point, permission was refused in relation to that ground. Regardless of
    what notice was sent to the parties notifying  them  of  the  grant  of
    permission, the Secretary of State could have written to  the  Tribunal
    to complain that the wrong notice had been sent out. It  was  submitted
    that in any event the FtJ was entitled to make the  findings  that  she
    did  in  terms  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.  Her
    conclusions could not possibly be said to have been perverse.

17. In reply, Mr Jarvis submitted that there was no  obvious  duty  on  the
    part of the respondent to have referred in detail  to  the  NRM  letter
    when the appellant would have known its contents. Albeit  that  it  was
    not given the "push" on behalf of the respondent  that  it  could  have
    been, it was nevertheless part of the evidence.

18. The appellant's claim that he was forced to sell drugs was not a  minor
    issue, and the NRM letter refers to information in a letter provided by
    the appellant's father which contradicts  the  appellant's  account  of
    having to sleep rough.

19. As to the grant of permission, it  was  not  obviously  the  case  that
    permission was granted on limited  grounds  only,  and  the  respondent
    could not therefore have been expected to raise  the  matter  with  the
    Tribunal.

    The FtJ's decision

20. The appellant's claim before the FtJ  was  that  the  appellant  feared
    return to Jamaica on account of his sexuality as a  gay  man.  The  FtJ
    concluded that the appellant had been consistent  in  relation  to  the
    "core  issue"  of  his  sexuality,  through  his  witness   statements,
    interviews and oral evidence.

21. Part of that account was that he had become homeless because  he  could
    not tell his father that he was gay. He had then been  forced  to  sell
    drugs.  His  oral  evidence  was  that  he  had   been   offered   free
    accommodation which had led to his being forced to sell  drugs  to  pay
    for the accommodation.

22. He had only been able to have casual relationships because of his  lack
    of status and had not been able to maintain contact with  those  people
    because of his homelessness. He claimed to have travelled  to  Brighton
    where he had slept rough and where he was able to be  more  comfortable
    as a gay person. The FtJ concluded that the appellant had not been able
    to  maintain  contact  with  his  sexual  partners   because   of   his
    homelessness. She  also  concluded  that  he  had  been  consistent  in
    relation to having gone to Brighton in  order  to  keep  his  sexuality
    secret from his family. There he had visited the homeless shelter where
    he was provided with food and basic  necessities.  This  the  FtJ  also
    accepted as credible.

23. She referred to his account of having had a sexual relationship with  a
    man named Barry in Brighton, a matter that she found credible. She also
    referred to his account of having contacted an  ex-partner  called  Ian
    who had initially agreed to attend as a witness and provide  statements
    but the appellant was then unable to contact him as he did  not  answer
    his calls.

24. The FtJ concluded that the appellant had given a  credible  account  of
    fearing return to Jamaica on account of his sexuality and at [20]  that
    he would lead a gay lifestyle there. On the other hand she said at [17]
    that he had consistently made it  clear  that  if  he  is  returned  to
    Jamaica he would have to "leave in Secret" [live in secret] because  of
    his fear of harm.

25. She referred to medical evidence indicating that the  appellant  has  a
    moderate learning disability, PTSD, a severe depressive disorder and  a
    generalised anxiety  disorder  in  the  context  of  his  inability  to
    remember names and other details. She considered that he needed  to  be
    dealt with as a vulnerable adult in the proceedings before her.

26. At [19] she  went  on  to  state  that  the  appellant  had  adequately
    addressed the issues raised in the decision letter.  She  accepted  his
    account of how his sexuality developed. She  said  that  she  found  it
    credible (although she wrote "incredible")  that  due  to  his  anxiety
    about  his  finding  out  about  his  sexuality  he  did  not  have   a
    relationship until he was aged 20.

27. In the same paragraph she said this in relation to  the  delay  in  the
    appellant claiming asylum:

         "In considering the Appellant's delay in claiming  asylum,  I  have
         regard to the fact that the Appellant  has  undergone  considerable
         emotional and psychological ordeal in  coming  to  terms  with  his
         sexuality, which he continues to keep secret from his family."

28. At [22] she concluded that there would be very significant obstacles to
    his integration in  Jamaica,  citing  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, on account of his  learning  disability  and  mental
    health problems. She stated that she attached  considerable  weight  to
    those matters given that the appellant was only 14 years  old  when  he
    arrived in the UK. She referred to his travel to  the  UK  having  been
    organised by his father, as his grandmother who had  looked  after  him
    had passed away. She found that the appellant has no contact  with  his
    mother, and has no siblings or any other relative he could turn to  for
    support on return to Jamaica. The fact that he had been living  in  the
    UK for 16 years during the formative years  of  his  life  was  another
    factor that she took into account in this respect.

29. She concluded that if he returned to Jamaica there was a real risk that
    he would face destitution and a deterioration in his mental health.

    Assessment and Conclusions

30. It was not suggested by either party that there was  any  ambiguity  in
    the grant of permission in relation to the FtJ's conclusions as to  the
    risk of harm to the appellant on return to Jamaica on  account  of  his
    sexuality.  It  is  convenient  therefore,  to  deal  first  with   the
    respondent's complaints about that aspect of the FtJ's decision.

31. I do not consider that there is any merit in the 'section 8' issue.  In
    the first place this is not a matter raised in the respondents' grounds
    of appeal. Secondly, although it is in fact in the decision letter, the
    FtJ did in fact deal with the appellant's delay in claiming asylum,  as
    can be seen from my quotation from her decision at [27] above.  If  the
    reference in the grounds to the FtJ  not  having  mentioned  the  human
    rights application made on 14 November 2011 is  a  reference  to  delay
    (and Mr Jarvis did not say that it was), as I have indicated,  the  FtJ
    did deal with the issue of delay.

32. I do consider that Mr Symes was correct to accept that  it  would  have
    been better if the relevant statutory provision had been identified and
    referred to by the FtJ,  but  that  omission  does  not  undermine  her
    conclusions  on  the  matter,  albeit  that  her  decision  would  have
    benefited from a little more detail in its analysis here.

33. As regards the NRM issue, I consider that there would  have  been  more
    force in the argument if the respondent could point to any  submissions
    made on her behalf to the FtJ on the point, or any particular detail of
    the NRM letter set out in the decision refusing the asylum  claim.  The
    decision letter in  this  context  simply  refers  in  the  appellant's
    immigration history to  the  fact  of  a  negative  reasonable  grounds
    decision having been made. The next and only other reference to  it  is
    under a subparagraph headed  "National  Referral  Mechanism"  where  it
    states that:

         "Your NRM decision  was  made  on  01  November  2017  and  it  was
         concluded that you  are  not  a  victim  of  human  trafficking  or
         slavery,  servitude,  or  forced/compulsory  labour.  This   letter
         considers whether you need international protection."

34. It would appear from those references to the  NRM  letter/consideration
    in the respondent's asylum decision letter that the fact of a  negative
    reasonable grounds decision  was  only  referred  to  as  part  of  the
    background to the appellant's claim. It does not appear  to  have  been
    suggested that it had any wider significance and equally  it  does  not
    appear that the FtJ was invited to take into account  the  analysis  in
    that letter as part of her assessment of the  appellant's  credibility.
    It was open to the respondent to invite the FtJ to consider those parts
    of the NRM letter which are said adversely to  affect  his  credibility
    because of inconsistencies or inherent implausibilities, but  that  was
    not done.

35. I do not share Mr Symes' characterisation of this issue as  being  only
    "a very modest part" of the appellant's history. The  NRM  letter  does
    highlight inconsistency in relation to the appellant's  claim  to  have
    been homeless, a matter that has a bearing on his claim  to  have  been
    sleeping rough in Brighton. That was a  matter  that  featured  in  the
    FtJ's positive assessment of  his  account.  Nevertheless,  as  already
    indicated, it was for the respondent to  advance  before  the  FtJ  the
    significant adverse credibility matters that she relied on. As a matter
    of interest, I note that in  the  NRM  letter  with  reference  to  the
    appellant's immigration history, it does  in  fact  state  that  on  25
    September 2017 he was "encountered rough sleeping in a park".

36. Furthermore, the FtJ concluded that the appellant's  account  had  been
    consistent throughout his screening and asylum interviews, his  witness
    statements and his oral evidence. She found his  account  plausible  in
    terms of his description of the development of his  sexuality  and  his
    desire to have kept it secret from his family.

37. The contention that the FtJ failed to give adequate reasons as  to  why
    the appellant would be unable to live discreetly on return  to  Jamaica
    was said by Mr Jarvis to  relate  to  the  NRM  letter  issue.  I  have
    explained why I consider that that there is no error  of  law  in  that
    part of the FtJ's decision.

38. Otherwise on the issue of return to live discretely (as a gay  man)  in
    Jamaica, I reject the contention that the FtJ's reasons are inadequate.
    Whilst it is true that the appellant's account is that only two of  his
    friends know of his sexuality, the FtJ  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would want to live openly as a gay man in Jamaica, which he  would  not
    be able to do because of his fear of persecution. There is no  want  of
    reasons for that conclusion. She accepted his evidence that he has kept
    the matter secret from his family.

39. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    FtJ's assessment of the asylum aspect of the appeal.

40. In those circumstances, it is  not  strictly  necessary  to  go  on  to
    consider the remainder of the  respondent's  grounds  which  relate  to
    Article 8 and the conclusion  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  in  Jamaica.  However,  for
    completeness I do so.

41. Firstly, I consider that it is apparent that permission was refused  on
    this ground; the sentence "Permission to appeal  [on]  this  ground  is
    accordingly refused" in itself could not be clearer. The  reference  to
    "this ground" must be a reference to the distinct complaint in relation
    to very significant obstacles to integration/Article 8.

42. Whilst I note the respondent's reliance on Ferrer, it would have  been
    open to the respondent to contact  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    position to be clarified or to ask for a proper notice  informing  her
    that permission had been granted on limited grounds (as  explained  at
    [20] and [21] of Ferrer).

43. In any event, it is not apparent that any  argument  was  advanced  on
    behalf of the respondent in terms of the availability of treatment for
    the appellant in Jamaica in relation to his mental health and such  is
    not relied on in the decision letter. The FtJ had before  her  medical
    evidence from which she concluded that the appellant's  mental  health
    and lack of family support on return to Jamaica were such as  to  mean
    that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
    there, taking into account the age at which he came to the UK and  the
    length of time that he has been here. I am not satisfied that there is
    any error of law in her conclusions in this respect.


44. Therefore, not being satisfied  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  any
    respect, her decision to allow the  appeal  on  all  grounds  therefore
    stands.

    Decision

45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Her decision to  allow  the  appeal  is  to
    stand.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 17/04/18



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given the nature of the claim and the background to it, unless and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

