
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00240/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2019                           |On 21 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                   mr D a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Boylan-Kemp MBE dated 2  May  2019  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of  23  November
    2018 refusing his human rights and protection claim.

2.   The Appellant is  a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  origin  and  from
    Sulamaniyah in the IKR.  He gave an account that  he  was  at  risk  of
    serious harm in the IKR by reason of  his  family  and  extended  tribe
    being in a feud with another tribe in the IKR.  The Appellant  was  not
    able to give many details of the origins of the feud  but  stated  that
    one family member had been killed as a result of it and that he himself
    had experienced two incidents; one being that unknown persons had fired
    upon a car in which he was travelling and his cousin had  been  injured
    in the shoulder, and another occasion when the house in which he  lived
    was fired upon.

3.    The  Respondent  in  its  decision  refusing  the   protection   claim
    disbelieved the Appellant's account that there  was  any  feud  on  the
    grounds that the Appellant knew very few details of the  alleged  feud.
    There was also said to be a  discrepancy  as  between  the  Appellant's
    evidence  in  interview  as  to  how  many  occasions   the   Appellant
    experienced any problems himself (refusal  letter,  para  [26])  and  a
    discrepancy between an alleged fear of his own father  (resulting  from
    the Appellant refusing to take part in the feud) and information  given
    in an age assessment interview in which he had stated  that  he  had  a
    good relationship with his family members (para [31]).

4.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  matter  came
    before the judge at the Birmingham hearing centre  on  18  March  2019.
    The Appellant was represented and gave evidence.  At the date  of  that
    hearing the Appellant would have been  18  years  of  age.   A  further
    document was relied upon by the Respondent at  that  hearing,  being  a
    EURODAC search result, demonstrating that a person in  the  Appellant's
    identity was fingerprinted in Dresden in Germany on 22 March 2016.  The
    Appellant's account as given in his SEF interview and confirmed in oral
    evidence before the judge was that he only left Iraq in December  2017.
    The Appellant denied before the judge that the person identified in the
    EURODAC search was him but the judge stated that she was  satisfied  by
    the details contained within the document, and  looking  at  the  clear
    photograph on the EURODAC  match,  that  the  person  fingerprinted  in
    Germany was indeed the Appellant.

5.   The judge found at paragraph 14 onwards as follows:

         "16. The evidence provided by the EURODAC document is  unequivocal.
             The photograph contained within the document  is  clearly  the
             Appellant who appeared before me and I have no reason to doubt
             that the document relates to  him.   Therefore  this  document
             upon which I am satisfied I can place significant weight  puts
             him in Germany on 22 March 2016.   Consequently  I  find  that
             this evidence undermines the credibility of his entire account
             and his credibility as a witness in his own cause and that  it
             renders his entire account unreliable.


         17.  Further I also find his inability to recall the details of the
             alleged feud which caused him to leave his family and flee the
             country to also not be credible.  If a young man  was  leaving
             his life behind because of his reluctance to  become  involved
             in an ongoing family feud then  I  would  anticipate  that  he
             would have knowledge of what he is in fear of and so I do  not
             find it plausible that he would not know the details  of  this
             feud if he held such a genuine fear.  Also I note that even on
             his own evidence there has been no  specific  risk  or  threat
             made to him which would cause him to fear for his  own  safety
             beyond what is a more general tribal threat and  of  which  he
             cannot provide much detail.  ...


         18.  As I have found the Appellant's alleged reasoning for  leaving
             Iraq to not be credible then  I  also  find  that  it  is  not
             plausible that his family have consequently threatened him  as
             claimed due to his alleged desertion because  of  the  alleged
             feud.  Instead I find that he has travelled to the UK with the
             assistance and knowledge of his family for reasons other  than
             escaping a risk of persecution.   As  such  I  find  that  his
             family would therefore be able to assist him with obtaining  a
             copy of his identification documents and CSID which would help
             facilitate his return to Iraq.  I also find that he  would  be
             able to return to the help and support of his family there."

    The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

6.   The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on  grounds  dated  15  May
    2019 which argue very briefly that the judge erred in law at paragraphs
    15 to 20 by giving inadequate reasoning  for  finding  the  Appellant's
    account to not be credible and secondly that the judge  had  failed  to
    apply relevant country guidance.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane on 24 June 2019.  The judge stated as follows:

         "The judge arguably had  regard  to  irrelevant  considerations  in
         finding that the Appellant had not  given  a  credible  account  of
         events.  The judge's findings as to  the  credibility  were  to  be
         found at paragraphs  15  to  18  inclusive  of  her  decision.   At
         paragraph 15 the judge attached  weight  so  as  to  undermine  the
         Appellant's credibility to  a  EURODAC  printout  provided  by  the
         Respondent which as the judge found proved that the  Appellant  was
         photographed and printed in Germany on 22 March  2016.   The  judge
         however  did  not  explain  why  such  circumstance   damaged   the
         Appellant's credibility.  If the judge had in mind the  Appellant's
         apparent failure to claim asylum  in  Germany  the  judge  arguably
         should have stated so.  At paragraph 16 of the decision  the  judge
         again accorded weight to the EURODAC document without stating  why.
         At paragraph 17 of the decision the judge  stated  that  the  judge
         would have anticipated that the Appellant would have had  knowledge
         of the alleged feud which on his  case  caused  him  to  leave  his
         family and indeed his country.  The judge arguably substituted  her
         own  understanding  of  what  constituted  reasonable  conduct   in
         circumstances where arguably she  should  not  have  done  so.   At
         paragraph 18 the judge stated that it was not  plausible  that  the
         Appellant's family have consequently threatened him on  account  of
         his ostensible desertion and the judge  was  arguably  disbelieving
         the Appellant's account without providing any or adequate  reasons.
         It was incumbent on the judge in resolving the issue of credibility
         to embark upon a global assessment of the  Appellant's  credibility
         and to provide adequate reasons in support of a finding that he had
         not done so.  This the judge arguably failed to do."

     Submissions

8.   Mr Sharif relies upon the grounds of appeal  and  the  admittedly  more
    extensive grant of permission to appeal in support of  his  Appellant's
    case.

9.   Mr Sharif points out that  the  only  date  given  in  the  Appellant's
    account for any particular incident was in  relation  to  the  incident
    when the car in which the Appellant was travelling had  been  shot  at.
    The date for that is to be found in the SEF interview at [86]  and  was
    simply '2016'.  The Appellant gives no other dates for the matters that
    he relies upon in support of the proposition that he is at risk because
    of a blood feud in Iraq.  He does however consistently  state  that  he
    left Iraq in December 2017.  Mr Sharif argues that  the  Appellant  had
    accepted in the course of his evidence that he  had  travelled  through
    Germany and therefore the evidence from the EURODAC  search  confirming
    that did not alter the credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account.   Mr
    Sharif also argued that the judge's findings in relation  to  it  being
    incredible that the Appellant would not have had more  knowledge  about
    the details of the feud was an irrational finding on the  part  of  the
    judge.

10.  For his part Mr Mills defends the judge's decision and argues that  the
    dishonest statement that the Appellant had remained  in  December  2017
    was clearly capable of affecting the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account.  I raised with him whether or not such a discrepancy could  be
    treated as determinative of the account given that there were no  dates
    given in the Appellant's account of matters occurring in Iraq any later
    than 22 March 2016.  Mr Mills appeared to accept that it was  right  to
    say that the Appellant's credibility was not determinatively decided by
    the discrepancy of his whereabouts in March  2016.   However  Mr  Mills
    points to the other findings at paragraph 17 in support of the  judge's
    reasoning.

    Discussion

11.  I find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    suggestion in the grant of permission to appeal by Judge Keane that the
    judge had arguably had regard to irrelevant considerations is difficult
    to sustain.  The Appellant  has  clearly  given  inconsistent  evidence
    about his whereabouts, on the one part insisting that  he  remained  in
    Iraq in December 2017 but incontrovertible evidence existing  from  the
    EURODAC search result that he was present in Germany on 22 March  2016.
    These two items of evidence simply cannot sit  together.   True  it  is
    that there are no details of the Appellant's account of  any  incidents
    that he has set out which are dated any later than 22 March  2016,  and
    therefore being shot at in '2016' and him departing Iraq  prior  to  22
    March 2016 does not necessarily make his account impossible to believe,
    but it is clearly a very significant matter that the Appellant has lied
    about his continued presence in Iraq up to the point of  December  2017
    and the judge was fully entitled to treat that as  a  very  significant
    matter.  Whether or not she was entitled to treat it as rendering  'his
    entire account unreliable' is moot.

12.  However the judge does not  stop  there  in  her  credibility  findings
    because she continues, as is clear at paragraph 17, to  set  out  other
    reasons for finding the Appellant's account incredible.  Whereas it may
    be expected that a young person may not be as fully informed about  the
    details of a feud affecting his family and the wider tribe as  might  a
    fully-grown adult, the judge's point is  that  the  Appellant  decided,
    together with the assistance of a relative, to leave  Iraq  because  of
    this feud and the judge was entitled to find that  it  was  implausible
    that the Appellant knew so little about the feud whereas  it  had  been
    the specific cause of his decision to leave the country.  I  find  that
    it was not irrational for the judge to make the findings that  she  did
    at paragraph 17.  There are a number of reasons therefore given by  the
    judge for finding the Appellant's account incredible and  I  find  that
    none of those reasons is vitiated by any error of law.

13.   Judge  Keane  in  granting  permission  did  not  comment   upon   the
    Appellant's actual second ground which was that the judge had failed to
    apply country guidance relevant to the issue of obtaining documents for
    readmission and residence in Iraq.  However in the light of my decision
    that the judge's  credibility  findings  are  sustainable  it  is  also
    sustainable that the  Appellant  can  have  the  assistance  of  family
    members in Iraq to obtain any replacement documents that are needed  to
    facilitate his return to, and residence in Iraq.

    Notice of Decision

    The judge's decision did not involve the making of any  material  error
    of law.


    I do not set aside the decision.


    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                     Date 20.11.19
[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                     Date 20.11.19
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
