
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00222/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                 |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   MR S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jaferji, counsel instructed by Pambrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  8  March  1981.   He
    arrived in the UK unlawfully on 26 January 2016 and claimed  asylum  on
    18 February 2016.  The basis of his claim is that he is from the Bajaur
    Region of the Federal Administered  Tribal  Area,  known  as  FATA,  in
    Pakistan.  He stated that on finishing his education he  began  working
    at a chemist's in Khar in 2001 and subsequently completed a diploma  in
    medical technology from 2008 to 2009.  Following this he began  working
    with a GP  as  part  of  his  paramedic  staff.   His  duties  included
    dispensing medication  to  patients,  prepare  the  operation  trolley,
    ensure pain killers and anaesthetics were available.   He  stated  that
    the area where he comes from  is  not  developed,  there  is  only  one
    government hospital and pharmacies are unregulated.

 2. The Appellant stated that on a date after 10 July 2015 he was kidnapped
    by the Taliban, taken to an unknown location and required to treat over
    60 injured Taliban members.  After three days he was released  but  was
    told by the Taliban that they would come for him if he was ever  needed
    again.  The Appellant on his return told  his  family  what  had  taken
    place and went to stay in Peshawar for four weeks during  which  period
    the Taliban came twice looking for him.  Upon his return to his home in
    Bajaur the Appellant reported what had happened to the political  agent
    in the army but said he was unable to explain where he had  been  taken
    because he had been blindfolded.  He was told to report  daily  to  the
    army.

 3. Ten to eleven days later the Appellant stated the Taliban came  looking
    for him again.  He was this time taken away by three members.   He  was
    with his brother and instructed his brother to tell his  work  that  he
    would not be attending.  He was on this occasion  asked  to  treat  one
    injured man.  He was then escorted home.  He  was  on  the  back  of  a
    motorbike but there were two Taliban members  in  a  car  driving  with
    them.  During the journey they encountered some soldiers.  The  Taliban
    members in the car opened fire killing two soldiers.  The army returned
    fire killing those two Taliban members.  The Appellant and the  Taliban
    member on the motorbike escaped.  On his return the political agent and
    the army were at his house and the army told him  that  their  soldiers
    had been killed because of him.  The Appellant went to  Peshawar  where
    stayed with his brother in hiding for two and  a  half  months,  during
    which time he was told the Taliban came looking for him as well as  the
    army and consequently his brother arranged for an agent to take him out
    of Pakistan to safety.

 4. The Appellant stated he feared return to Pakistan both by the army  who
    think he is responsible for the deaths of two  of  their  soldiers  and
    from the Taliban.

 5. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused in a decision  dated
    15th December 2017.  The Appellant appealed against this  decision  and
    his appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Aziz  for
    hearing on 8 May 2018.

 6. In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  22  May  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal.   Whilst  he  accepted  some  aspects  of   the
    Appellant's case, he did not accept other aspects concluding  that  the
    Appellant's account was not plausible. In particular at [85] the  judge
    held as follows

         "Documents.  In arriving at the above findings I  have  taken  into
         account all the documentary evidence relied upon by  the  Appellant
         (mainly contained at pages 38 to 51 of the Appellant's bundle).  In
         particular the arrest warrant (contained at pages 43 to 44  of  the
         Appellant's bundle) even if the Appellant had submitted an original
         copy of the arrest warrant to the Home Office looking  at  all  the
         evidence in the round and applying the principles in Tanveer  Ahmed
         IAT [2002] UKIAT 00439 I place little weight upon this evidence."

 7. Permission to appeal was sought in time on a number of grounds but most
    particularly the third ground of appeal asserted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law  in  that  firstly  the  Appellant  had  adduced  evidence
    comprising the original  arrest  warrant  and  also  evidence  from  an
    advocate in Pakistan  confirming  that  the  arrest  warrant  had  been
    verified by him as being genuine: page 42  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    refers.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had erred in failing  to  consider  the
    letter from the advocate in Pakistan and thus had erred in  failing  to
    provide proper reasons for placing little weight on the  documents  and
    consequently  had  erred  in  failing  to  apply  the   Tanveer   Ahmed
    principles.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  in  the
    decision dated 1 August 2018 in which he held at [3] as follows:

         "at [85] the judge placed no weight on the arrest  warrant  finding
         it unreliable (by applying the  principle  established  in  Tanveer
         Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318).  The judge did so having  considered  the
         evidence "in the round".  In light of the judge's other credibility
         findings including the delay in issuing the arrest warrant  he  was
         rationally entitled to attach little weight to the arrest  warrant.
         I am however troubled by the failure of the judge  to  engage  with
         the letter from Arif Ullah  Khan  at  page  2  of  the  Appellant's
         bundle.  Although the letter was not supported by  any  independent
         evidence confirming the author's qualifications and  profession  it
         was nevertheless incumbent on the judge to explain why he  did  not
         find this letter  reliable.   Albeit  with  some  hesitation  I  am
         satisfied that the absence of any  engagement  with  this  evidence
         establishes an arguable material legal error.'

     Hearing

10. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jaferji on behalf  of  the
    Appellant sought to rely on the terms of the grant of  permission.   He
    submitted that it was a short but important point.  The  Appellant  had
    given an account of events in Pakistan which was consistent.  There was
    no concern about inconsistencies in the account or with the  background
    evidence.  Moreover the judge made findings in the  Appellant's  favour
    in relation to his educational and work history  at  [66].   The  judge
    followed the Respondent in rejecting the Appellant's claim on the basis
    of implausibility.

11. However Mr Jaferji submitted it was very clear from  the  decision  and
    reasons as a whole that there was  no  consideration  of  the  evidence
    relied upon by the Appellant in establishing that  the  arrest  warrant
    was a genuine document.  The letter from  the  lawyer,  Mr  Arif  Ullah
    Khan, dated 22 January 2018 at page 42 of the Appellant's bundle states
    that Mr Khan attended the office of political Tehsildar in Khaar Bajaur
    Agency on 16 January 2017 and  inspected  the  record  stating  "I  can
    confirm that the warrant issued  on  21  October  2015  bearing  number
    21/10Z0QPT(K) is genuine."

12. Mr Jaferji pointed out  there  was  no  evidence  from  the  Respondent
    countering this evidence or challenging the validity  of  the  warrant.
    Whilst he accepted that the judge could have rejected this evidence, in
    order to do so properly  he  had  to  have  first  considered  it.   He
    submitted that this was a clear error in that the judge had  failed  to
    take into consideration this key element of the evidence and the  judge
    was required to look at all the evidence in the  round.   This  clearly
    impacted on his assessment of credibility.

13. I sought clarification from Mr Jaferji as to how  the  lawyer's  letter
    came to be in the United Kingdom whereupon having  sought  instructions
    from the Appellant he produced two envelopes which  appear  to  emanate
    from Pakistan and are envelopes from courier services.

14. In her submissions, Ms Aboni submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge directed himself appropriately,  reached  conclusions  that  were
    open to him on the evidence.  Whilst the judge had made  some  positive
    findings regarding the Appellant's employment  he  had  given  adequate
    reasons for finding the Appellant's account  to  be  implausible.   She
    submitted he had considered all the evidence in the round and has given
    adequate reasons for finding that  the  arrest  warrant  could  not  be
    relied upon.  She submitted that the grounds  of  appeal  were  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact  which  were
    open to him on the evidence.

15. In reply Mr Jaferji submitted that  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
    Appellant was simply disagreeing with the judge's findings of fact  but
    rather the judge had erred in failing to  take  into  account  the  key
    aspect of the evidence.

     Decision and Reasons

16. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz made a material error of law
    and that is his failure when considering the genuineness of the  arrest
    warrant to either refer to or make any findings in respect of a  letter
    from a Pakistani advocate, Mr Arif Ullah Khan, in which he states  that
    he inspected the requisite record and confirmed  that  the  warrant  is
    genuine.  I find this error does go to the heart of the credibility  of
    the Appellant's case, as a result of which the hearing would need to be
    remitted for a further hearing de novo before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    I make the following directions:

16.1.     the judge's findings in respect  of  the  Appellant's  educational
    and work history at [66] are preserved;

16.2. the Appellant's representatives are to submit further evidence  as  to
    how the lawyer's letter came to be in the United Kingdom along  with  a
    witness statement from the Appellant explaining this.  The  First  tier
    Tribunal would further be assisted by evidence of the qualifications of
    the Pakistani advocate.

16.3.    The hearing is to  be  listed  for  two  hours  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Birmingham not before Judge Aziz;

16.4. A Pashto interpreter will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 13 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
