
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00279/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16 April 2021                    |On 29 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     FOU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kemp MBE, promulgated on 3 November  2020.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by on Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 27 January 2021.



Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this is a protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18  November  2019  with
    leave to enter as a visitor. He applied for asylum after his  leave  to
    enter was cancelled. The appellant's protection claim is based  on  his
    involvement with a political group, the Biafra Group and  his  fear  of
    the Nigerian authorities as a result of his activities.

 4. The Secretary of State made a decision,  dated  18  December  2019,  to
    refuse the appellant's claims for asylum and  humanitarian  protection,
    principally owing to inconsistences between the accounts he had  given.
    While the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  Nigerian
    national  who  belonged  to  the  Igbo  tribal  group,  his  claim   of
    experiencing difficulties from the Nigerian authorities  was  rejected.
    In addition, the appellant's delay in seeking asylum  until  after  his
    leave to enter was cancelled was considered to damage  the  credibility
    of his claim.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  common  ground
    that the principal issue was that of the credibility of the appellant's
    protection claim. Two medico-legal reports  by  the  same  author  were
    before the Tribunal, one scarring and one psychiatric. Submissions were
    also made under Article 3 on medical grounds owing to  the  appellant's
    mental state which included a risk of suicide.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant's scarring  was  a
    result of accidental injury rather than as a result  of  an  attack  by
    assailants at a  political  event.  Otherwise,  the  judge  found  many
    aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  implausible  or   lacking
    credibility and concluded that he was of no  adverse  interest  to  the
    Nigerian authorities. The judge did not accept that there was a risk of
    suicide and concluded that the appellant would be able  to  access  any
    required treatment for his mental health in Nigeria.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal criticised,  firstly,  the  judge's  findings  of
    inherent  implausibility.  Secondly,  the  treatment  of  the  scarring
    report. Thirdly, the findings as to  the  availability  of  appropriate
    medical treatment in Nigeria and lastly,  the  freestanding  Article  3
    assessment.

 8. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  grounds  one  and  two,  with
    permission being perfused on grounds 3 and 4.

 9. No Rule 24 response was received from the respondent.



The error of law hearing

10. From the outset, Mr Moriarty stated that there was no ongoing challenge
    to the refusal of the Upper Tribunal to grant permission in respect  of
    the third and fourth grounds.

11. Mr Clarke confirmed that the respondent had not sent a Rule 24 response
    however, he conceded that there were material errors in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In  particular,  he  drew  attention  to  the
    judge's misunderstanding as to how the appellant's injuries  were  said
    to have been caused and indicated that this alone  was  sufficient  for
    the appeal to be conceded.  In  addition,  he  criticised  the  judge's
    misunderstanding  of  the  background  material   and   a   series   of
    unsustainable credibility findings. He invited  me  to  set  aside  the
    judge's findings on the protection claim and send the  appeal  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  He  suggested  that  the  judge's  record  of
    proceedings could be agreed by  the  parties  for  use  at  any  future
    hearing.

12. Mr Moriarty agreed with Mr  Clarke's  submissions  and  confirmed  that
    there was no intention to reopen the freestanding Article 3  claim.  He
    was  reluctant  to  make  any  concessions  regarding  the  record   of
    proceedings, which he had not  seen,  and  which  led  to  the  judge's
    erroneous findings. He too sought a de novo hearing at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

13. At the end of the hearing, I announced that  the  judge  made  material
    errors of law and that the protection claim alone would be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. I was  not  prepared  to
    make any directions regarding  the  record  of  proceedings  given  the
    errors made in this case concerning credibility issues.

Decision on error of law

14. As indicated above, I concur with the parties' view that the judge made
    material errors of law as set out in the detailed grounds, specifically
    grounds one and two. My reasons,  expressed  briefly  given  that  both
    parties were in agreement, are as follows.

15. The first ground takes issue with the judge's  many  conclusions  which
    relied  on  aspects  of  the   appellant's   claim   being   inherently
    implausible. Examples of the problematic, unreasoned, findings  include
    that it was implausible that the appellant survived a  violent  attack;
    that it was implausible that his attackers would have  left  him  alive
    and that it was implausible he was  able  to  hide  from  the  Nigerian
    authorities for a period of time or indeed leave the country. The judge
    also appears to have misunderstood the background material  and  formed
    the impression that the Nigerian government had issued an order to kill
    [23] Biafran activists whereas the CPIN report establishes  that  there
    is a range of ill-treatment meted out to those involved in the  Biafran
    cause.

16. The judge materially erred in rejecting the majority of the appellant's
    account on the basis of implausibility and failed to apply the guidance
    in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, specifically:
         29. Inherent probability, which may be  helpful  in  many  domestic
         cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate,  factor  to
         rely on in  some  asylum  cases.  Much  of  the  evidence  will  be
         referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which  are
         very different from those of which the members of the  fact-finding
         tribunal have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
         likely that the country which an asylum-seeker  has  left  will  be
         suffering from the sort of problems and dislocations with which the
         overwhelming majority of residents of this country will  be  wholly
         unfamiliar. The point is well made in Hathaway on Law  of  Refugee
         Status (1991) at page 81:
         "In assessing the general human rights information, decision-makers
         must constantly be on guard to avoid implicitly recharacterizing
         the nature of the risk based on their own perceptions of
         reasonability."

17. The second ground concerned  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  scarring
    report.  The  judge  was  under  the  mistaken  impression   that   the
    appellant's injuries were caused by machetes and guns and noted at [19]
    the absence of significant injuries.

18.  The  appellant  addressed  his  injuries  in  his  witness  statement,
    explaining that he sustained knife injuries. In addition, the author of
    the scarring report lists a series of injuries  which  he  was  of  the
    opinion  were  "consistent  with"  or  "highly  consistent  with"   the
    appellant's account of being attacked with a  small  blade.  The  judge
    further  erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  nine   separate
    injuries, which ranged from his face  to  his  left  foot,  were  "more
    consistent" with accidental falls. While the  scarring  report  rightly
    considered whether the scars  could  have  been  caused  in  any  other
    manner, it was not open to the judge to find the injuries  were  caused
    accidentally in the absence of expertise or any other evidence to  that
    effect.

19. Both parties were in favour of a remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his protection appeal  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of  such
    consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, solely in relation  to
the protection appeal.

The protection appeal is remitted, de novo, to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
be reheard at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of 4 hours by  any  judge
except First-tier Tribunal Judge Kemp MBE.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
