
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00042/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                              TALENT MACHARIKA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Thomas, Counsel, instructed by Irving and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   We have before us an appeal and a cross-appeal against a decision  made
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs promulgated on 23 June in which  she
    was considering an appeal by the  appellant  against  a  decision  that
    refused an application for leave to remain on the basis of a protection
    and human rights claim.

2.   The appellant himself is a national of Zimbabwe.  He  arrived  in  this
    country in September 2002 and was granted six months leave to enter. He
    made an application the following year and was granted leave to  remain
    as a student.  A further application to stay on the same basis was made
    and granted until May 2005.  However, he did not leave nor did he  make
    any fresh application when  that  expired  and  he  next  came  to  the
    attention of the Home Office when he was arrested in December  2006  on
    suspicion of possession of a false instrument, that was an  application
    for a national insurance number and on 2 March 2007 he was convicted of
    possession  of  a  false  instrument  and  sentenced  to  nine  months'
    imprisonment.

3.   In December 2006 he had been served with an  IS151A  as  an  overstayer
    and on 2 April 2007 following his conviction at the Crown Court he  was
    notified he was liable to deportation and a letter was sent telling him
    of that, but he made an asylum claim to the Home  Office  and  he  also
    lodged an appeal against the decision to deport  him.  His  application
    for asylum was rejected and his appeal processes against that  decision
    which included a judicial review claim failed.  By March  2009  he  was
    appeal rights exhausted.

4.   It seems he was granted permission to work in  October  2010.   However
    the decision with which this appeal is concerned is a decision made  in
    March this  year  which  followed  a  decision  in  August  2014  which
    purported to refuse to revoke a deportation order.  That apparently was
    withdrawn a few days after it was made.

5.   However the Home Office by the time it made its decision  to  refuse  a
    protection and human rights claim realised that a deportation order had
    never been signed and  accordingly  the  decision  not  to  revoke  the
    deportation order was withdrawn for  the obvious reason that one cannot
    revoke something that has never been in place.

6.   In the course of  being  here  he  has  met  an  Irish  national,  Miss
    McSweeny, who is here pursuing her right to work in accordance with the
    EEA Regulations and it is his case that that is  a  relationship  which
    not only is still continuing and has continued since  2012,  but  is  a
    solid relationship which is going to  be  maintained.   That  would  if
    accepted entitle him to apply for an EEA residence card  in  accordance
    with the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It is  clear  that  there
    has never been  any  formal  application  for  such  a  residence  card
    submitted by the appellant or on his behalf.   Miss  Thomas  makes  the
    point that the Regulations do not set  out  any  particular  manner  in
    which such an application should be made nor is there  any  form  which
    covers precisely that.

7.   Nonetheless it is reasonable to expect that it will be  made  clear  to
    the Secretary of State that such an application is  indeed  being  made
    and the nearest we get to it in correspondence certainly prior  to  the
    beginning of this year was that it was a matter that might fall  to  be
    considered.

8.   However we note from a letter of 2  March  2015  from  the  appellant's
    solicitor to the criminal case work department in Liverpool  which  was
    the department in the Home Office that was  dealing  with  this  matter
    that he said as follows:
         "Further to our telephone  conversation  on  25  February  2015  we
         understand that the asylum team has taken conduct over deciding our
         client's representations under the  Citizens  Directive  2004/38/EC
         and you have agreed to consider this without requesting  a  payment
         of a fee.  Please note that the representations were made initially
         on 22 August 2014.  We are drawing your attention to the fact  that
         the representations made in respect of our client's EEA status have
         yet to be decided and  it  is  now  over  six  months  since  these
         representations have been  outstanding in this respect."

    And they draw attention to Article 10 of the Directive  which  requires
    decisions on residence cards to be made within six months.

9.   It is plain  from  that  that  they  thought  that  they  had  made  an
    application albeit it is clear that they had not directly done so.

10.  So far as the no fee is concerned, that would appear to relate  to  the
    Citizens Directive and it is  not  entirely  clear  to  us  quite  what
    materiality that has. However it is apparent and it was  drawn  to  the
    attention of the Secretary of State by that letter  that  there  was  a
    belief that an EEA application was before the Secretary of State.

11.  But when one looks at the decision letter against which the appeal  was
    brought one sees that it is headed "Decision to refuse a protection and
    human rights claim".  There is reference to the EEA 2006 Regulations in
    paragraphs 17 and 18 and it is there said:-
         "18. The Secretary of  State  has  considered  the  merits  of  any
         potential application  you  could  make  to  the  Home  Office  for
         confirmation of a right to reside under European law.  It has  been
         concluded that although it may be accepted that you  are  currently
         in a genuine and subsisting relationship with an  EEA  national  as
         per Regulation 8(5) the serious threat you pose to the  fundamental
         interest to society of the United Kingdom as demonstrated  by  your
         criminality and resultant  terms  of  imprisonment  would  make  it
         necessary for the Secretary of State to invoke Regulation 17(4) and
         deem it inappropriate to issue you with such confirmation.   It  is
         considered that any application for  confirmation  of  a  right  to
         reside under European law would fail on this basis."

12.  That is not a decision to refuse a residence card because  it  has  not
    been considered that such an application had to be  determined  by  the
    Secretary of State notwithstanding what was drawn to the  attention  of
    the Home Office in the letter of 2  March  to  which  we  have  already
    referred.

13.  The decision letter then went  on  to  consider  first  the  protection
    claim which it rejected, and then the Article 8 claim, which  again  it
    rejected on the basis that neither family life  nor  private  life  was
    sufficiently compelling to permit  the  appellant  to  remain  in  this
    country.  It is clear that he has no right under  the  Rules  as  such.
    One has to look at Article 8 outside  the  Rules  which  of  course  is
    something which can be done and may in certain circumstances mean  that
    an Article 8 claim succeeds.

14.  Paragraph 62 of the decision letter stated that  "Your  protection  and
    human rights claim has been refused.  Therefore the decision to  deport
    you  pursuant  to  Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act   1971   is
    maintained."  And that refers back, we are told (we have no  reason  to
    doubt) to the decision made as long ago as 2007 that deportation  would
    take place.   That of course is on  the  basis  essentially  of  public
    policy.

15.  The right to appeal was then specified and it was stated to be a  right
    of appeal against the decision  to  refuse  the  protection  and  human
    rights claim and the right arose under Section  82  of  the  2002  Act.
    There is no suggestion  that  there  was  a  right  of  appeal  or  any
    consideration of appeal under Regulation  26  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    which would have been the correct route for an appeal had there been  a
    refusal of a residence card.   When  one  goes  back  to  Judge  Gibbs'
    decision one sees in paragraph 7 that she recognises that that  is  the
    basis of the appeal that is before her.

16.  In the course of her decision she considered, she said,  Regulation  21
    in relation to the EEA Regulations.  That was not before her  and  that
    was not for her to consider in connection  with  the  appeal  that  was
    before her.  She did however consider  that  the  appellant  would  not
    suffer any material ill-treatment were he to be  returned  to  Zimbabwe
    and she made the point, she called it serious harm, but  she  made  the
    point that the issue had not been pursued with any vigour by  his  then
    representative.  I am bound to say we are not in the least surprised at
    that in the light of the present evidence that exists  in  relation  to
    the situation in Zimbabwe.  But we need not go into that further.

17.  However, what Judge Gibbs did not do was to consider in any  depth,  or
    indeed really essentially at all, the Article 8 issue  which  had  been
    set out in some detail in the refusal letter and it is not contended on
    the Secretary of State's behalf that she did satisfactorily  deal  with
    that issue.

18.  However what she decided was as follows in paragraphs 22 to 24  of  her
    decision.
         "22. The appellant should be issued a residence card in  accordance
             with Regulation 17 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
             Regulations 2006.
         23.  I dismiss the appeal.
         24.  The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds."

19.  It is perhaps fairly obvious that there is something of  a  discrepancy
    between 23 and 24 because 23 appears to be general.  However since  she
    had not dealt with the human rights grounds in any  proper  manner  she
    was not entitled to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.  And so
    far as the residence card is  concerned  she  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    require that that be issued because it was a matter for  the  Secretary
    of State to make a decision and  exercise  her  discretion,  which  she
    would have because of the appellant's past history and she might reject
    the application.  The basis upon  which  that  would  be  done  is  not
    necessarily precisely the same as the basis upon  which  an  Article  8
    claim would fall  to  be  considered,  although  there  is  an  obvious
    materiality between the two.

20.  In those circumstances it is entirely clear to us that the decision  of
    Judge Gibbs cannot stand and must therefore be set aside.

21.  We have then to consider what is the sensible approach that  we  should
    adopt in relation to this  appeal.   As  we  have  indicated  in  going
    through the background and the correspondence it is  clear  that  those
    representing the appellant believed, albeit it was not put  as  clearly
    as it should have been, that  there  was  a  claim  being  made  for  a
    residence card but it is equally clear that that had not been the  view
    of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of State had not dealt with
    that matter and decided whether or not to grant a residence  card.   It
    seems to us in those circumstances that it would be somewhat futile  to
    send the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to deal with the appeal
    on the same basis as Judge Gibbs had to deal with  it,  namely  without
    direct consideration of the EEA aspect.

22.  Since we are clearly of the view that it was drawn to the attention  of
    the Secretary of State that there was an application being made, albeit
    not in perhaps a particularly formal fashion, for a residence  card  it
    seems to us that the sensible course is for us to send this back to the
    Secretary of State for the Secretary of State to make a decision on the
    application for a residence card. If of course  that  is  allowed  that
    will be the end of matters. If it is rejected then  since  there  is  a
    decision that deportation will take place an appeal could be made  with
    a combination of Article 26 of the EEA Regulations and Article 8 of the
    Human Rights Act and all matters which are material to deciding whether
    the appellant has the right to remain in this country can  be  properly
    considered.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 12 November 2015

Mr Justice Collins



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 12 November 2015

Mr Justice Collins

