
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/00841/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2017                        |  On 25 January 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SIO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the
    appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
    court proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26 July 1995 who entered
   the UK in August 2013 on a student visa with leave until 24 October 2015.
   On 3 September 2015 she applied for asylum on the basis that she faces a
   risk of persecution in Nigeria because she is a lesbian.


2. Her application was rejected by the respondent as it was not accepted
   she was a lesbian.


3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") where her
   appeal was heard by Judge Andonian. In a decision promulgated on 28 July
   2016 Judge Andonian did not accept the appellant's account of being a
   lesbian and dismissed the appeal.


4. The decision of Judge Andonian was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and
   remitted to the FtT where it came before Judge Devittie. In a decision
   promulgated on 27 June 2017 Judge Devittie also did not accept that the
   appellant was a lesbian and dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now
   appealing against this decision.

5. In the appeal before Judge Devittie, the appellant relied on numerous
   witnesses to support her case, eight of whom (including herself) were
   called to give oral evidence. Oral evidence was given by the appellant's
   claimed partner (Samantha), mother, brother, aunt, and several friends.
   The judge summarised this evidence in paragraphs 6-12. Witness statements
   were provided by a number of other relatives and friends, as well as the
   woman the appellant claims is her former partner (Jade). This evidence is
   summarised in paragraph 13 of the decision.


6. Only four of the 8 witnesses who gave oral evidence were cross examined
   by the respondent.


7. The judge concluded that the appellant's account of being a lesbian was
   not credible. The reasons given for this finding include that:


     a) The appellant's evidence about when she realised she was a lesbian
        was not consistent.


     b) There were discrepancies between the evidence of the appellant and
        Samantha about when the appellant told Samantha about her
        immigration status and when she became open about her sexuality on
        social media. The discrepancies indicate the relationship is
        contrived.


     c) Much of the appellant's evidence is dated shortly before or after
        her claim for asylum.


     d) The appellant is an educated person who has family members who are
        gay, yet failed to give a coherent account in response to simple
        questions.

     e) The timing of the claim is opportunistic.


8. In reaching his decision, the judge evaluated in detail the evidence
   given by the appellant (paragraph 15) and by Samantha (paragraph 16).


9. At paragraph 19  the judge stated:


         "I have taken into account the submissions made on the appellant's
         behalf. I have also given full weight to all the witnesses who
         testified on the appellant's behalf in support or her claim that
         she is a lesbian. I shall consider in the round the evidence of
         those witnesses whose evidence was not challenged in cross
         examination but I must make it clear but [sic] I do not take the
         view that the fact that the they were not challenged must lead to
         the conclusion that their evidence is to be accepted without
         further enquiry."


10. At paragraph 21 the judge stated that:


         "the unsatisfactory features I have identified in this case
         significantly undermine the credibility and weight to be attached
         to the evidence that has been presented in support of the
         appellant's claim."

11. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge erred by failing to
   address the evidence of the numerous witnesses who gave evidence either
   orally or in writing which corroborated the appellant's account of being
   a lesbian.


12. Before me, Mr Chelvan stated that the evidence of six witnesses who
   gave oral evidence was not addressed by the judge. He commented that
   their evidence was detailed and went to the central matter in contention
   - whether the appellant is a lesbian. He noted that the evidence of four
   witnesses was not challenged by the Secretary of State as the witnesses
   were not cross examined.


13. Mr Tufan, on behalf of the respondent, accepted that Mr Chelvan had a
   "strong point" that the evidence of several witnesses was not addressed
   in the decision. However, if this amounted to an error, it was not
   material as the judge had made clear that he had taken into account all
   of the evidence and considered the evidence in the round. The judge was
   entitled, as he did, to focus on the most significant evidence (from the
   appellant and the woman she claimed was her partner) and he had reached a
   conclusion based on all the evidence.

Consideration


14. The only issue in contention before the FtT was whether, applying the
   lower standard of proof applicable in asylum appeals, the appellant was a
   lesbian.


15. The appellant, in order to establish she is a lesbian, submitted
   numerous statements from friends, family, a former partner and her
   present partner. Seven of her witnesses attended the hearing with her in
   order to give oral evidence.


16. The decision contains a detailed and thorough evaluation of the
   evidence of the appellant. It is apparent that the judge has carefully
   assessed the oral and written evidence of the appellant and for reasons
   that are clearly expressed reached a conclusion about its credibility.


17. The judge has similarly considered the evidence of the woman who claims
   to be the appellant's current partner (Samantha) and - as is entirely
   proper - has highlighted the discrepancies that he identified.
18. However, although in my view the judge has dealt appropriately with the
   evidence of the appellant and Samantha, the decision lacks any engagement
   with, or assessment of, the evidence of other witnesses.


19. It is apparent from paragraph 21 of the decision (as quoted above at
   paragraph 10) that the reason the judge did not accept the evidence of
   the numerous other witnesses who gave evidence was because he did not
   accept the evidence of the appellant and Samantha. He stated at paragraph
   21 that the unsatisfactory features he identified in the decision (which
   all pertain to the appellant's and Samantha's evidence) undermine the
   credibility of the other witnesses.

20. The other witnesses gave a range of reasons to corroborate the
   appellant's account of being a lesbian and it was necessary for that
   evidence to be evaluated and addressed. The judge may well have had good
   reason to not accept this evidence. He may, for example, have thought
   that the evidence was largely based on what the witnesses had been told
   by the appellant. In respect of some of the witnesses, the judge might
   have been cautious about their evidence because they hardly knew the
   appellant. In the case of others, the judge might have attached little
   weight to the evidence on the basis that the witnesses had no first hand
   knowledge of the appellant's sexuality. However, no such reasoning was
   given in the decision and in the absence of reasons being given as to why
   each of the witnesses (other than the appellant and Samantha) were not
   believed, I agree with Mr Chelvan that there has been an error of law.
   The error is material because the evidence of the numerous witnesses
   whose evidence was not addressed is relevant to, and potentially
   determinative of, the question of the appellant's sexuality.


21. In order to remake the decision, a judge will need to evaluate the
   question of whether the appellant is a lesbian and this will turn on
   witness evidence. Noting the number of the witnesses the appellant has
   relied upon, the extent of judicial fact finding that will be necessary
   to remake the decision is such that, having regard to section 7.2(b) of
   the President's Practice Statement, it is appropriate for the case to be
   remitted to the FtT.


Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
   law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
   afresh.


23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a different judge.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  10 September 2017            |

