
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00342/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2016                         |On 14 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   a s e n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Dirie instructed by Trinity Chambers Birmingham


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  as  the  respondent
    ("ASEN") is a refugee.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify the respondent, ASEN.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the
    appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who was born  on  10  August  1970.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 November 2009 with  a
    student visa.  He remained in the UK and on 28 April  2015  he  claimed
    asylum.  On 4 June 2015, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR
    and made a decision to remove him by way of directions  under  s.10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 4. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Buckwell
    allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Arts 3 and 8
    of the ECHR.

 5. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  that  decision
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pedro) on 3 June 2016.

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 7. Judge Buckwell accepted the appellant's case.  At paras  78-80  of  his
    determination, Judge Buckwell accepted that the appellant  had  been  a
    lecturer and registrar in the University of Zawia and that he had acted
    as a liaison person within his faculty with the Revolutionary Committee
    in Libya.  He provided information on students who might be of  concern
    to the Gaddafi regime.  Judge Buckwell found  that  the  appellant  was
    someone upon whom the (then) government and security forces relied  and
    that he occupied  a  position  of  seniority  or  significance.   Judge
    Buckwell found (at [80]) that the appellant would:

         "... be of interest to those  now  governing  his  part  of  Libya,
         because of his actual or perceived political opinion.   His  family
         members, who now live with him in  this  country,  would  face  the
         consequences of that risk."

 8. In reaching that finding Judge Buckwell found that the  appellant  fell
    within the risk category set out in para 3(b) of the  country  guidance
    case of AT and Others (Article 15(c): risk categories) Libya CG  [2014]
    UKUT  318 (IAC) which states as follows:

         "Having regard to the general hostile attitude of  society  to  the
         former regime, the following are,  in  general,  at  real  risk  of
         persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return to Libya:-

         ...

         (b) others with an association at senior level with that regime."

 9. Having found the appellant to be  at  risk  in  his  home  area,  Judge
    Buckwell went on in para 82 of his determination to conclude  that  the
    appellant could not safely relocate within Libya.  He said this:

         "I have of course considered whether it would  be  appropriate  for
         the Appellant and his  family  to  return  to  Libya  and  then  to
         relocate to another area within the country.  However  the  reality
         of that prospect would in my view not be without significant  risk.
         The degree of risk would be sufficient to reach  the  threshold  of
         risk by which would breach his absolute rights under  the  European
         Convention and would not avoid the risk of a breach to  his  Geneva
         Convention rights."

10. Thus, Judge Buckwell allowed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds
    and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

Discussion

11. The Secretary of State's grounds  do  not  challenge  Judge  Buckwell's
    finding that the appellant was at risk in his home area.  Instead,  the
    ground challenge the judge's finding in  para  82  that  the  appellant
    could not internally relocate on the  basis  that  it  is  inadequately
    reasoned.  Further, if that is established, the grounds argue that  the
    judge's conclusion in respect of Art 8 is likewise flawed.

12. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards accepted that the  only  challenge
    was  to  the  judge's  finding  in  para  82  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation.  Mr Richards, at least initially, submitted that the  judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons and, in particular, to indicate why
    the appellant's relocation would "not be without significant risk".

13. Although Mr Richards drew my attention to  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC),  he
    accepted that that decision only affected the country  guidance  in  AT
    and Others in respect of Art 15(c) and not in relation to a risk  based
    upon an individual's particular profile.

14. As I have already said, the judge's finding that the appellant  was  at
    risk in his home area because he fell within the risk category in  para
    3(v) of the head note in AT and Others is not  challenged.   That  risk
    category is unaffected by FA.  However, as regards internal relocation,
    in AT and Others at [83] the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "For those in the risk categories that we have identified below  we
         do not consider  that  there  would  be  a  viable  alternative  of
         internal relocation as a means of avoiding the risk of harm."

15. One of the risk categories "identified below" is  that  found  in  para
    3(b) of the head note which Judge Buckwell  concluded  applied  to  the
    appellant.  It is clear from  [83]  of  AT  and  Others,  that  the  UT
    concluded that a person such as the appellant, falling within that risk
    category, could not safely relocate.  Judge Buckwell's finding in  para
    82 of his  determination  is  entirely  consistent  with  and,  indeed,
    applies the country  guidance  set  out  in  [83]  of  AT  and  Others.
    Although the country guidance based on [83] and set out in para  18  of
    the head note of AT and Others states that "in general" individuals  at
    risk such as the appellant could not  internally  relocate,  there  was
    nothing before the judge, nor raised before me, which would  place  the
    appellant outside the risk that prevented his internal relocation.

16. Judge Buckwell's reasoning and decision  reached  in  para  82  of  his
    determination  is,  in  my  judgment,  entirely  consistent  with   and
    correctly applies the country guidance in AT and Others.

17. For these reasons, Judge Buckwell did not err in law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

18. In the light  of  that,  the  Secretary  of  State's  parasitic  ground
    challenging Judge Buckwell's decision to allow the appeal under  Art  8
    falls away.  The  grounds  do  not  seek  otherwise  to  challenge  his
    decision to allow the appeal under Art 8.

Decision

19. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and under Arts 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law.  The decision stands.

20. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 Date 14 October 2016


