
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00397/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2017                   |On 12 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                    [A G]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Jemek Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated 28.2.17, dismissing his  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  4.1.17,  to  refuse  his
    claim for international protection.  The  Judge  heard  the  appeal  on
    14.2.17.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.6.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 4.9.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Gillespie stated that the first
    two grounds of appeal were "fairly  arguable,"  but  did  not  restrict
    permission to those grounds alone.

 6. There is no merit in  the  first  ground,  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the appellant's social media pages at A62-63, purported to  be
    pages promoting Christianity. The pages are photocopies of  screenshots
    from a mobile phone. It is not clear on what social media  platform  or
    that these are necessarily the postings of the appellant. They  contain
    only  mosaic  compilation  of  generally  Christian  memes,   with   no
    commentary. There is no  indication  of  how  this  material  would  be
    accessible to the Iranian authorities, even if he disclosed his  social
    media account information. That this is apparently the sum total of his
    social media posting might well be regarded  as  entirely  self-serving
    and inconsistent with a commitment  to  Christianity.  The  photographs
    relied on at A64 were referred to at [57] of the decision. At  [7]  the
    judge confirmed that she had considered  all  the  evidence,  including
    those documents in the bundle. It is not necessary  for  the  judge  to
    address specifically each and every  item,  or  even  to  schedule  the
    evidence in the decision. The judge can be taken at her word  that  she
    had taken it all into consideration. Read as a whole, the decision gave
    a very careful and comprehensive assessment of the claim  to  Christian
    conversion. In all the circumstances, I find insufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that specific reference to these documents would  or  could
    have made any difference to the outcome of the appeal and  this  ground
    of appeal appears to be no more than a 'nit-picking' trawl through  the
    decision looking for anything and everything  that  might  be  used  to
    attack the decision.

 7. The second ground is that the judge failed to consider the letters from
    church members at A16 & 18 of the bundle, which it is said  corroborate
    the appellant's Christian conversion. Again, the judge has confirmed at
    [7] and again at [16] consideration of all of the  evidence,  including
    the documentary evidence in the  appellant's  bundle.  The  letters  in
    question were not supported by  attendance  of  those  persons  at  the
    hearing, although a different person, Dr Constantine gave evidence, and
    thus could only have limited probative value as to the  genuineness  of
    the appellant's conversion, particularly  given  that  these  were  not
    persons in authority tasked with assessing the genuine  nature  of  the
    conversion. In the light of the overall credibility findings,  and  the
    conclusion at [61] that the claim had been manufactured to  support  an
    untrue account, I do not accept  that  absence  of  reference  to  this
    evidence can amount to a material error of law.

 8. The third ground complains that at [88] & [89] the  judge  irrationally
    attached little weight to the letter from Reverend Isgrove, because  it
    states that the appellant is no longer a Muslim but  a  Christian.  The
    judge  suggested  that  this  betrayed  a  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
    appellant, as he has never been a practising Muslim.  My  attention  is
    drawn to [2] where the judge noted that the asylum  claim  was  on  the
    basis of conversion from Islam to Christianity. Read as  a  whole,  the
    judge was concerned about the strong  way  in  which  this  letter  was
    drafted, when it  would  appear  that  the  author  had  only  met  the
    appellant on one occasion. That interpretation was  certainly  open  to
    the  judge  from  the  evidence,  even  though  the  letter  does   not
    specifically state that was the only occasion. I am also satisfied that
    it was reasonably open to the judge to  criticise  the  letter  on  the
    basis that the way in which it was drafted suggested  that  the  author
    believed the appellant to have converted from Islam to Christianity, so
    that he was no longer a Muslim. It is common ground that the  appellant
    was not a practising Muslim, but would have been born into the  Islamic
    faith. In my view the interpretation of the letter and the criticism of
    the author's bold statements was  fully  open  to  the  judge  and  not
    irrational.

 9. The fourth ground criticises the judge's statement at [80] that she did
    not find that the appellant's answers were "on balance"  indicative  of
    an evangelising Christian. It is submitted that the  judge  erroneously
    applied a balance of probabilities test  to  this  issue.  It  is  also
    argued that the judge failed to  give  the  appellant  credit  for  the
    questions answered correctly in interview.

10. It does appear that the judge erroneously referred to "on balance" when
    the correct standard of proof  is  the  lower  standard  of  reasonable
    likelihood. At [14] and [15] the judge set out the correct standard  of
    proof. Given the absence of other references to the correct standard of
    proof when discussing the evidence and making  finding,  it  cannot  be
    safely concluded that the judge has properly applied the correct  lower
    standard of proof of  reasonable  likelihood  to  other  findings.  The
    finding in relation to Christianity cannot be separated  out  from  the
    overall credibility findings and thus  on  this  ground,  it  would  be
    unsafe to allow the decision to stand.

11. The fifth and final ground asserts that in applying Ali Dorodian v SSHD
    (01/TH/01537), at [68] the judge applied too high a standard  of  proof
    to the appellant's claim, making an erroneous assumption that ministers
    will be aware of the need to attend. There is no merit in this  ground.
    Despite what the judge stated about ministers being well aware,  it  is
    not the responsibility of the ministers, but it is for the  appellant's
    representatives to be aware that ministers should attend to  support  a
    claim of conversion. There is no error of law disclosed by this ground.



12. In summary, the decision discloses a material error of law in  relation
    to one ground only, that of the  application  of  the  correct  (lower)
    standard of proof. In the circumstances it must  be  set  aside  to  be
    remade.

Remittal

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the findings are on a crucial
    issue at the heart of an appeal are undermined, as  they  are  in  this
    case, effectively there has not been a  valid  determination  of  those
    issues. The  errors  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  vitiate  all  other
    findings of fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has
    not been a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke,  or
    the appropriate closest venue;

17. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

18. The ELH is 3 hours;

19. An interpreter in Farsi will be required;

20. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Cox and Judge Gillespie;

21. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

