
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 26 August 2016                    |on 1 September 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  AW (Iraq)
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Wilkins instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING


    1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  Designated  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge McClure ('the Judge') promulgated on  the  18  January
       2016, following a hearing at Manchester on the 16  October  2015,  in
       which the appellants appeal against the decision to deport  him  from
       the United Kingdom, following the refusal of  his  asylum  and  human
       rights claims, was dismissed.
    2. On the 25 August 2016 the Upper Tribunal received a letter  from  the
       appellant's solicitors, written by Shayela Khan,  stating  that  they
       intended to serve a supplementary  bundle  including  a  new  experts
       report and up to date objective evidence in the region of  180  pages
       in length. The letter states they had been unable to serve the bundle
       as a result of  problem  with  their  photocopier,  scanner  and  fax
       machine, all week. A request is therefore made that if  an  error  of
       law is found the matter is listed at a later date for  a  substantive
       hearing to enable the additional evidence to be filed.
    3. Whilst it is  accepted  that  office  machinery  can,  at  times,  be
       temperamental and break down it appears unfortunate to say the  least
       that this firm found itself in difficulty with all  three  pieces  of
       equipment at the same time.  If  what  is  being  said  is  true  the
       problems are only said to have  arisen  in  the  week  commencing  22
       August 2016. The directions issued  by  the  Resident  Judge  on  the
       granting of permission to appeal specifically state that parties  are
       required, not later than 21 days after the directions were  sent,  to
       file an indexed and paginated bundle containing all  the  documentary
       evidence they are intending to rely upon pursuant to rule  15(2A)  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  The  directions
       were sent by first class post on the 30 March 2016. The  time  period
       therefore expired on the 20 April 2016. The error of law hearing  was
       initially listed for 11 August 2016 but changed to 26 August 2016.
    4. No rule 15(2A) application has been  made  and,  if  legal  error  is
       found, an application to file the additional  evidence  out  of  time
       shall have to be made. The conduct of the appellant's representatives
       in relation to  this  aspect,  including  a  wilful  disregard  of  a
       direction of the Tribunal is not acceptable. The  whole  incident  is
       suggestive of a last minute rush to try and get the papers in, having
       realised the hearing date was imminent, rather than by  reference  to
       the directions.
    5. The Senior Partner in Barnes, Harrild & Dyer is  therefore  directed,
       no later than 14 days from service of this decision upon  that  firm,
       to write to the Upper Tribunal explaining how this situation has been
       permitted to develop, what supervisory arrangements the firm  has  in
       place for recording key dates such as those contained in  directions,
       how the same are monitored to ensure compliance, and why in this case
       the situation set out in the letter of the 25 August 2016 was allowed
       to develop. Confirmation of the failure of the  office  equipment  is
       required and why, if this did occur, use was not made of  other  copy
       and fax services of which there are many commercial outlets providing
       the same in Croydon (in addition to other  solicitors  who  may  have
       been  willing  to  assist).  The  dates  of  the  expert  report  and
       additional materials shall also be provided.
    6. The date of the immigration decision is after 5 April 2015 and one to
       which the appeal provisions in force from 10 November 2014 apply.  It
       is not suggested this is an appeal affected by the issues  identified
       by the Upper Tribunal in Nkomo [2016] UKUT 00285.  It is  also  clear
       that Designated Judge McClure was fully aware of the relevant  appeal
       structure as evidenced by the 'Decision' section of the determination
       where the conclusions on the protection and human rights  issues  are
       set out.




Background

    7. The appellant is a national of Iraq born on the 1  January  1980  who
       claims to be from the Kirkuk area. This was not disputed  before  the
       Judge.
    8. The appellant was charged with an offence  of  violent  disorder  for
       which he was convicted at Bolton Crown Court on 21 October  2002  and
       sentenced to three years imprisonment. A detailed chronology  is  set
       out at paragraph 3 of the decision under challenge.
    9. The respondent attempted to exclude the appellant from the protection
       of the Refugee Convention  on  the  basis  of  the  commission  of  a
       particularly serious crime but the Judge found that  the  presumption
       the appellant constituted a danger to society had been rebutted [35].
       The respondent has not appealed this element of the decision.
   10. In relation to the protection claim the Judge found:


             a. That the appellants account is not credible [39].
             b. The appellant was 21 or 22 when he left  Iraq.  It  was  not
                found credible that he was unaware of what  his  father  was
                doing [39].
             c. The appellant's assertions with regard to the  circumstances
                in which he came to leave Iraq are not credible [40].
             d. At the time the appellant left Iraq it was found he  was  at
                no risk of mistreatment from any source [40].
             e. There are clearly areas of Iraq which would be safe for  the
                appellant [42].
             f. "Whilst the Appellant was reluctant to  admit  that  he  had
                family members, his father although he  is  dead,  did  have
                brothers including at least one uncle.  Whilst the Appellant
                claimed the uncle has a family of his own in the  short-term
                I am satisfied that the uncle could provide some  assistance
                to support the appellant."[42].


   11. At paragraphs 43 and  44  the  Judge  sets  out  his  conclusions  in
       relation to the protection claim in the following terms:

           "43.   Taking into account the circumstances in Iraq and  taking
           account of the current country guidance case I am satisfied that
           the Appellant has family members on who  he  can  rely  and  who
           would provide him with support and assistance.  I  am  satisfied
           therefore that the Appellant could return to  Iraq  without  any
           problems.


           44.    In the circumstances I find that  the  Appellant  is  not
           entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection."

   12. The Judge thereafter consider the human rights  claim  in  which  his
       conclusions are set out at paragraph 50 in the following terms:

           "50.   As a final matter having considered all the circumstances
           I am satisfied that the decision is  proportionately  justified.
           It has to be noted that the Appellant must have well known  that
           there were deportation orders against him going  back  to  2005.
           He must have known that he had no right to remain in the  United
           Kingdom.  Taking all those factors into account the fact he then
           seeks to establish a relationship has to be taken into  account.
           Having considered all those factors I find that the decision  to
           remove the Appellant is proportionately justified."

   13. Permission to appeal was sought  by  the  appellant  but  refused  by
       Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart on the 19  February  2016.
       The application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  permission
       granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, on the 24 March 2016, on the
       basis "It is arguable that Designated Judge McClure erred by  failing
       to take into account the expert report  put  before  him  as  to  the
       difficulties the appellant would face on return to Iraq". Although it
       was recognised that the remaining grounds had less  merit  permission
       was granted to pursue these aspects of the claim too.

Error of law

   14. Before the Upper Tribunal, in relation to Ground 1 which asserts  the
       Judge failed to take into  account  relevant  matters,  Miss  Wilkins
       submitted that the appellant's case was that even  if  Judge  McClure
       had read the expert report he had not incorporated its findings  into
       the decision. As  the  appeal  was  heard  shortly  after  the  Upper
       Tribunal handed down its decision in AA(Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]
       UKUT 000544 (IAC) a supplementary bundle was  provided  containing  a
       copy of the decision. It is accepted Judge McClure  set  out  the  AA
       factors but it is asserted he failed to examine  them  in  sufficient
       depth in light of the expert report.
   15. It was also submitted Judge McClure  failed  to  consider  where  the
       appellants family that he found lived in Iraq will be and that  there
       was no basis for the Judge finding that such family support existed.
   16. I find that Judge McClure was aware of both the decision  in  AA  and
       the expert report and records in his note of the evidence submissions
       being made in relation to the same. It is not  legal  error  for  the
       Judge not to set out detailed findings on each and every  element  of
       an appeal provided a reader of the decision is able to understand the
       conclusions reached and reasons for the same.
   17. The report by Nadje Al-Ali is dated 27 July 2015 which  predates  the
       decision in AA which is dated 30 September 2015. It is noted  Mr  Al-
       Ali was not the country expert who appeared before the Upper Tribunal
       in AA.  The submissions  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  fail  to
       address the key issue which is in what way the opinion of  Mr  Al-Ali
       differs from that set out in AA. Both the report and case  law  speak
       of difficulties that will be faced by returnees.   It  has  not  been
       made out that the Judge was entitled to depart from the  findings  in
       AA on the basis of the report.   The  Judge  clearly  considered  the
       country conditions and  difficulties  that  will  be  experienced  by
       returnees through the prism of the findings in AA.  No arguable legal
       error is made out.
   18. The appellant was interviewed for his asylum claim. At question 25 of
       that interview he was asked when he last had contact with his  family
       in Iraq to which he replied "Never since I arrived in  the  UK"  [R's
       bundle, copy of SEF interview, page 6].
   19. The  issue  of  family  in  Iraq  arose  during  the  course  of  the
       appellant's oral evidence.  Judge  McClure's  note  of  the  evidence
       records:


        |Question                         |Answer                           |
|You are an Iraqi Kurd - any      |No                               |
|family in Kurdistan              |                                 |
|Last contact with family in Iraq |It is was moment when I fled     |
|Very young - but 22 when left.   |Well my dad was providing for me.|
|How survive without working      |Until you get married that is the|
|                                 |way it is. When get married have |
|                                 |own family                       |
|When left Iraq what family in    |Mother and sister                |
|Iraq                             |                                 |
|Dad                              |He had been injured and due to   |
|                                 |injury he passed away            |
|No contact family when left since|Yes                              |
|2002                             |                                 |
|Any contact anyone               |No                               |
|How enter the UK                 |When I left my paternal uncle    |
|                                 |arranged people smugglers for me.|
|                                 |I don't know how must paid       |
|What extended family [ref to     |Have no other family.  My uncle  |
|paternal uncle]                  |has his own family. Cause father |
|                                 |passed away mother asked uncle to|
|                                 |help me.                         |
|No answer                        |My mother didn't have any        |
|                                 |brothers or sisters.             |


   20. There was sufficient evidence to enable the Judge to  find  that  the
       appellant has family in Iraq. The appellant has not claimed that  all
       the family are dead, all he states is that he  has  made  no  contact
       with them since he arrived in the UK. His  reluctance  to  admit  the
       existence of family members was  noted  by  the  Judge  who  had  the
       opportunity of seeing and hearing the appellant give  evidence.   Two
       issues arise. The first is that Miss Wilkins confirmed there  was  no
       evidence before Judge McClure from  the  Red  Cross  or  any  similar
       organisation confirming they had been unable to trace the appellant's
       family, at his request. The appellant knew where the family lived  as
       he must have liaised  with  his  mother  and  paternal  uncle  before
       departing. He was a young man in his 20's at  that  time  and  not  a
       child. It is also the case that Judge  McClure  was  unable  to  make
       further findings in relation to the family as the  appellant  clearly
       failed to provide the required additional evidence to enable  him  to
       do so.
   21. The second issue is that the remainder of the  appellant's  case  has
       been found, for arguably sustainable reasons, to  be  a  lie.  It  is
       noted the grounds of appeal challenge the finding in relation to  the
       ability of the appellant to return to Iraq  and  relocate  internally
       and not the adverse credibility findings. The Judge was  entitled  to
       put little weight upon the appellant's  claims  in  relation  to  his
       family in light of the lack of credibility in the claim  in  general.
       The Judge clearly considered the evidence  made  available  with  the
       required degree of anxious scrutiny and has  given  adequate  reasons
       for the findings made. As such the weight to be given to the evidence
       was a matter for the Judge.
   22. The existence of family is a key element of life in Iraq  and  for  a
       person returning after a period of absence of greater importance,  as
       family are not only able to provide funds  and/or  accommodation  but
       also to assist with employment and the practical issues faced in  day
       to day life in any community. A person settling within an established
       family of their own is also not likely to be viewed as a stranger.
   23. The Tribunal in AA wrote at length about the contested areas of  Iraq
       in light of the advances made by  ISIS  who  at  one  point  captured
       Kirkuk. It was not found that the conclusions on the evidence  before
       the Tribunal in AA were wrong but it is  necessary  to  consider  the
       country situation that existed at the date of the hearing.
   24. The restriction on those not from  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Area  in
       gaining access to that part of Iraq is not disputed in  the  decision
       and nor is the fact that without the correct identity  documents  the
       appellant will not be able to return  to  Iraq  as  he  will  not  be
       permitted entry. There was no evidence that  he  will  be  unable  to
       obtain such documentation that will enable him to fly to Baghdad  and
       be admitted to the country.
   25. If the appellant was to remain in Baghdad the  input  of  the  family
       will be important in providing assistance and the appellant  did  not
       claim they were unable to assist. Indeed it was his evidence that his
       paternal uncle had paid a 'people smuggler' to bring him the UK which
       ordinarily can cost as much as $5,000US. The  Tribunal  has  judicial
       notice of the modus operandi of such people which often involves  the
       person being trafficked informing the person responsible for  payment
       that they have arrived safely to enable the balance of the  funds  to
       be paid.  The fact the uncle was willing to assist in this manner  is
       a clear demonstration of the extent to  which  family  are  able  and
       willing to help the appellant. Even if the family are based in Kirkuk
       this is a city now in the control of the Kurdish  Peshmerga  and  not
       ISIL and it has not been shown that find  cannot  be  made  available
       from there to assist the appellant.
   26. The country material shows that Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDP)
       are returning to all 'contested' governorates, including Kirkuk.   It
       was not made out before the Judge that if the family  are  in  Kirkuk
       that they will be unable to assist the appellant  on  his  return  in
       2016. The respondent's Operational Guidance Notes (OGN) published  in
       August 2016 show that the situation in all bar two of the  'contested
       areas' is now such that an automatic grant of humanitarian protection
       will not be made. This change is based  upon  the  successes  by  the
       Iraqi army and Kurdish  Peshmerga  forces  in  displacing  ISIS  from
       territory they captured in the past and when  atrocities  arose.  Any
       alleged error is therefore arguably not material, even if made out.
   27. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal on protection issues has been made out in relation  to  Ground
       1. No real risk of persecution for a Convention reason was  made  out
       and nor  was  it  shown  the  appellant  faced  a  credible  risk  of
       destitution or treatment sufficient to breach the high  threshold  of
       Articles  2  and  3  or  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
       protection.
   28. Ground 2 asserts a  failure  to  consider  the  family  life  of  the
       appellant and best interests of the appellant's  child,  but  such  a
       claim has no arguable merit.
   29. The grounds are critical of the Judge for not considering  paragraphs
       398 or 399. These would require the  Judge  to  consider  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh for  the  appellants  'partner'  and  child  to
       remain in the UK without him [399 (a)(ii)(b) and 399(b)(iii)]. It  is
       not suggested the 'partner' or child can accompany the  appellant  to
       Iraq. This is a family splitting case.
   30. Judge McClure did consider the relationship issues and the  needs  of
       the child. It was found the child's needs are being met by her mother
       with whom she lives. The appellant and the child's mother have chosen
       to live apart "as a result of  the  benefits  system"  but  there  is
       contact. The difficulty with this ground is that there was little  if
       any evidence before  the  Judge  to  show  that  the  impact  of  the
       appellant being deported upon the child will be so  severe  that  the
       child's best interests will  become  the  determinative  factor.  The
       child born to Miss H was born on the 12 January  2014  and  is  still
       very young.
   31. When assessing the issue of whether separation will be  unduly  harsh
       the case of MAB [2015] UKUT 00435(IAC), a copy of  which  is  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal papers, is  not  to  be  followed.   The  correct
       approach is that set out in the court of Appeal decision MM  (Uganda)
       [2016] EWCA Civ 450 in which it was  held  that  the  phrase  'unduly
       harsh' plainly meant the same in section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act  as
       it did in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules. It was an  ordinary
       English expression coloured  by  its  context.  The  context  invited
       emphasis on two factors: first, the public interest in the removal of
       foreign  criminals  and,  secondly,  the  need  for  a  proportionate
       assessment of any interference with  Article  8  rights.  The  public
       interest factor  was  expressly  vouched  by  Parliament  in  section
       117C(1). Section 117C(2) provided that the more serious  the  offence
       committed, the greater  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  That
       steered  the  tribunals  and  the  court  towards   a   proportionate
       assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any   given   case.
       Accordingly, the more pressing the public interest  in  his  removal,
       the harder it would be to show  that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
       partner would be unduly harsh. Any other approach would dislocate the
       'unduly harsh' provisions from their context such that  the  question
       of undue hardship would be decided wholly without regard to the force
       of the public interest in deportation. In such a case 'unduly'  would
       be mistaken for 'excessive', which imported a  different  idea.  What
       was due or undue depended on all the circumstances,  not  merely  the
       impact on the child or partner in  the  given  case.  The  expression
       'unduly harsh' in  section  117C(5)  and  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)
       required  consideration  of  all  the  circumstances,  including  the
       criminal's immigration and criminal history. MAB was wrongly  decided
       (paras 22 - 26).
   32. On the basis of the limited evidence made available on this issue  it
       has not been established that the appellants removal will  result  in
       unduly harsh consequences for the appellants 'partner' or  child.  It
       has not been shown  the  appellant  is  able  to  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules.
   33. The Judge considered Article 8 ECHR and found any interference with a
       protected rights relied upon to be proportionate.  In relation to the
       child the Judge found at paragraph 48:

           "48.   Whilst the Appellant has a limited family life  with  the
           mother of his child it is not so close at that moment that  they
           are living together or they appear to have made plans to  marry.
           He has an involvement with his chid.  Whilst it may be  that  he
           would have limited contact with his child  I  am  not  satisfied
           that given that the child will be properly looked after  by  the
           mother that such would be so material.  I do take  into  account
           the best interests of the child.   However  the  child  will  be
           looked after by the mother and the best interests are served  by
           the child remaining with the mother."

   34. On the basis of the evidence it  has  not  been  made  out  that  any
       alleged error is material or that the Tribunal is likely  to  make  a
       different decision on the facts. No arguable legal error material  to
       the decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds  has  been
       made out.

Decision

   35. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


   36. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 to protect
       the identity of the minor child.


       I make such an order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 August 2016

