
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 November 2016                   |on 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 R T YOHANES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant sought recognition as a refugee, saying  that  he  risked
    renewed persecution in Eritrea as a Pentecostal Christian.

 2. For reasons explained in a letter dated 13 August 2015, the  respondent
    found that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  credible  account.  The
    respondent did not accept that he is Eritrean, and  held  that  in  any
    event  he  would  be  entitled  to  reassert  a  right   to   Ethiopian
    nationality.  Being Ethiopian, he was not entitled to protection.

 3. The appellant  appealed  to  the  first-tier  tribunal.  Judge  Robison
    dismissed his appeal by decision promulgated on 1 July 2016.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  UT  on  grounds
    which may be condensed as follows:

      i) Arrested aged 18. The judge found it significant that the appellant
         was arrested at age 18 but was not required to  undertake  military
         service. This was  an  incorrect  calculation.  As  he  said  in  a
         statement, he was aged 17 when released from jail.  The  judge  was
         also wrong in thinking that the appellant had reached  aged  20  by
         the time he left Eritrea.

     ii) Said he was Ethiopian not Eritrean. The judge  indicated  that  one
         reason she did not accept the  claimed  nationality  was  that  the
         appellant he said he was Ethiopian when first questioned in the UK.
         No explanation has been given for this assertion.  A reading of the
         screening  interview  does  not  bear  it  out.   Throughout   that
         interview the appellant consistently described himself as Eritrean,
         not Ethiopian.

    iii) Approaches to Embassy. The judge refers  to  ST  (ethnic  Eritrean:
         nationality) 2011 UKUT 00252 which lays out  the  requirements  for
         someone in the appellant's position... to  approach  the  Ethiopian
         embassy with all documentation... failing which to set out relevant
         details in a letter to the embassy... The appellant did both... all
         that is required.  The  judge  contrary  to  country  guidance  has
         indicated that more is required... [including]  details  about  all
         attempts he made to contract his school... The judge concluded that
         the appellant was required to give the embassy  officials  time  to
         investigate.... not a requirement of ST. The judge  concluded  that
         the appellant was required to produce a letter from the  embassy...
         not a requirement of ST. On the contrary ST is quite clear  that...
         the Home Office should assist... at an early  stage...  no  attempt
         was made by the Home Office to assist... ST is quite clear that the
         embassy are... unhelpful to those  of  Eritrean  ethnicity...  very
         unlikely  they  would  try  and   assist   the   appellant...   The
         appellant...  visited  the  Ethiopian  embassy  twice.  On  neither
         occasion did any official indicate that they required further time.
         The judge has engaged in speculation... that the embassy would have
         wished to assist the appellant either by investigating or providing
         a letter to assist... one... deported from the country  at  a  time
         when those of  Eritrean  ethnicity  were  viewed  as  enemies.  The
         judge's  failure  to  consider  the  terms  of   country   guidance
         constitutes an error in law.

     iv) Further ... The judge should have considered whether the  unhelpful
         attitude  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  was  rooted   in   their
         perception of the appellant as an ethnic Eritrean.

      v) Description of currency. The  judge  correctly  accepted  that  the
         appellant  had  given  "good"  information  is  regarding  Eritrea.
         Despite this failure to describe the currency was considered to  go
         against his credibility. "Most people  in  the  UK  may  well  have
         difficulty recalling the coins in their  pockets."  The  judge  has
         failed to adequately explain why such matters had any significance.

     vi) Section 8 issues. The  judge  considered  section  8  issues  as  a
         starting point for assessing credibility... Contrary to  SM  (Iran)
         (section 8 issues) 2005 UKAIT 116. The judge was  not  required  to
         take this as her starting point and has given inadequate  reasoning
         for doing so.

 5. Permission was refused by the FtT, but  renewed  on  all  grounds,  and
    granted by the UT.  The numbering above follows the first application.

 6. A rule 24 response dated 30 September 2016 for the  respondent  submits
    as follows.

      The judge's reasons for concluding the appellant is not  Eritrean  are
      not inadequate, but comprehensive, in particular at paragraphs  40  to
      47. The grounds quibble with minor details as to whether the appellant
      was 17 or 18. In the grand scheme of the  dispute  about  nationality,
      such matters were peripheral. The complaint about starting with  delay
      [section 8] was a criticism regarding form rather than substance.  The
      judge had to start somewhere and did not treat delay as determinative.

 7. The grounds do not  specify  where  the  judge  went  wrong  about  the
    appellant saying he was Ethiopian. In course  of  submissions,  it  was
    gradually clarified that this is based on paragraph 43 of the decision,
    "... the respondent relied on the fact that the appellant said  he  was
    Ethiopian when first questioned in the  UK.   I  did  not  consider  it
    likely that he was asked where he was born rather than his  nationality
    ...".  The point was then found to relate back to paragraph 18  of  the
    respondent's refusal letter, which says that when first encountered  in
    the UK the appellant stated his nationality as Ethiopian,  and  on  the
    basis of the information he then provided he was noted as an  Ethiopian
    national.  In his witness statement the appellant said at paragraph 35,
    responding to paragraph 18 of  the  refusal  letter,  that  when  first
    encountered by the police he was asked about his place of birth not his
    nationality, which came  up  only  at  the  screening  interview.   The
    respondent relied on the statement to the police in framing the refusal
    letter.  The respondent did not produce any  record  of  the  interview
    with the police.  The appellant has never asked for its production.

Submissions for appellant.

 8. Mr Bradley said that in his  witness  statement  and  in  evidence  the
    appellant dealt with all issues raised by the Home  Office.  The  judge
    accepted some of his explanations, including the point of language  and
    knowledge of Eritrea, so some significant points taken against him  had
    been  eliminated.  The  appellant  visited  the  Ethiopian  embassy  in
    September 2013, and his solicitors wrote to the Embassy on  his  behalf
    on 18 September 2015,  admittedly  with  sparse  information.  However,
    proceedings in the first-tier tribunal had been adjourned for a further
    approach to be made, and a letter dated 7th June 2015 gave much  fuller
    information. The judge referred to both letters,  but  said  there  was
    "not much difference", a fundamental error. The second letter  complied
    with the requirements of the country guidance, ST at headnote (iv). The
    judge gave 6 reasons for dismissing the appeal, 3 of which could now be
    shown to be wholly erroneous.

 9. Turning to the particular grounds, Mr Bradley submitted that the  judge
    clearly went wrong about the appellant's  age.  On  ground  2,  judge's
    finding was not based on any evidence, and the only evidence was to the
    contrary, being the appellant's statement.  The finding was simply  not
    open to her.

10. Grounds 3 and 4 ran together.  The  letter  to  the  embassy  not  only
    complied with all the requirements of country guidance,  it  even  went
    further, providing the telephone number of the primary school which the
    appellant attended. The judge was wrong about  the  letters  being  the
    same, and should not have taken this point against the appellant.

11. The only points left were the appellant's failure to  claim  asylum  in
    Italy or France, and not knowing the details of the  currency  used  in
    Eritrea. Those matters were not sufficient for the decision  to  stand.
    The errors identified, taken together, required a remit to  the  first-
    tier tribunal.

Submissions for respondent.

12. Mrs O'Brien said that ground 1 at first sight appeared  to  identify  a
    clear error of fact, perhaps arising from the  respondent  not  putting
    the matter as clearly as it might have  been  in  the  refusal  letter.
    However, the appellant's evidence was not as exact as now claimed about
    his age in relation to his dates of detention and release. This alleged
    incident clearly took place around the period when he  was  turning  18
    years of age, and he was hazy about the details. The judge  might  have
    been wrong in saying that he was 18 when arrested,  and  the  appellant
    now said in reply that he turned 18 only after release, but  there  was
    still an overall lack of specific times and dates. The essential  point
    remained: it was not credible that at around the age of conscription he
    would have been released from detention.

13. Ground 2 was accurate insofar as the appellant said  at  the  screening
    interview that he was Eritrean not Ethiopian,  but  that  was  not  the
    point - on proper scrutiny, the adverse issue arose elsewhere.  In  the
    refusal letter, the respondent made her position clear:  the  appellant
    when first encountered said he was Ethiopian. It did  not  matter  that
    the record had not been produced, the requirements of evidence in  this
    jurisdiction being flexible, no objection having been  taken,  and  the
    appellant never having requested the record. It might be at best second-
    hand hearsay but it was not correct to say there was "no evidence",  as
    now asserted. The judge had been entitled to  prefer  the  respondent's
    version of what had been said.  It  was  a  sensible  reason  that  the
    appellant was likely to  have  been  asked  his  nationality,  but  his
    country of birth.

14. Grounds 3 and 4, regarding the approach to the  embassy,  disclosed  no
    error. The second letter might be more detailed, but  it  did  not  add
    anything significant. It was in effect just a reiteration, and  it  was
    sent only shortly before the hearing. In any event,  the  question  was
    not the amount of detail in a letter. The important issue  was  whether
    the details regarding the appellant's identity were  reasonably  likely
    to be true. The appellant had not generally been found to be a reliable
    witness, for good reasons, so there was no error in  holding  that  the
    letter to the embassy did not significantly help his case.

15. Ground 5, relating to knowledge of the currency, was to  be  understood
    by reference to paragraph 12 of the refusal letter.  The  point  raised
    there is that the appellant could answer general questions about  Assab
    but gave only a vague account of the colour of the currency  saying  it
    "could be silver" and that "some can be diamonds, they  all  differ  in
    value and size". When asked what he meant by "diamond", he  said,  "the
    ones that are brown in colour". This made no sense.  Objective evidence
    was that coins are all made of nickel  alloy  and  are  all  round  (Mr
    Bradley accepted this to be accurate). The appellant's response in  his
    statement was that this was a slip of the tongue, which  again  was  no
    explanation at all. The judge was  entitled  to  give  the  issue  such
    weight as she did.

16. As to ground 6, it was no error to deal with the  section  8  issue  at
    that point of the decision. There would only be error of  law  if  that
    issue was taken as decisive in itself, and the judge  directed  herself
    clearly at paragraph 39 that it was not.

17. The determination should stand.

Reply for appellant.

18. The judge was wrong to say that the appellant  was  "already  18"  when
    arrested, and failed to make any attempt to resolve the evidence on the
    point. There was nothing whatsoever to justify the judge's finding that
    the appellant gave his nationality as Ethiopian.  She  gave  no  reason
    for finding it "not likely" that he would be  asked  about  nationality
    rather than place of birth. The letter to the embassy  said  much  more
    than the judge acknowledged, and met the requirements  of  the  country
    guidance. Taking out the  errors,  the  judge's  decision  was  legally
    inadequate.

Discussion and conclusions.

19. It cannot be  satisfactorily  resolved  whether  on  all  the  evidence
    advanced the appellant had reached the age of 18 by  the  time  he  was
    allegedly released from detention. If anything turned on his exact age,
    it would be at that point and not at the beginning  of  his  detention.
    The reason the judge finds the matter adverse is that it  was  unlikely
    that he would be released at about the age of conscription. Any factual
    slip about age at detention is immaterial.

20. There was much more detail in the 2nd  letter  to  the  embassy,  which
    became Mr Bradley's main point in submissions.  However, what the judge
    actually says is that is that the letter "apparently  contains  nothing
    more than was known on 13th April". That appears to be  accurate.   The
    judge's criticism is not the lack of any  difference  between  the  two
    letters, but the fact that the second letter was not prepared until 7th
    June although it could as easily have  been  sent  on  or  before  13th
    April, when a hearing was adjourned for this purpose.  The  observation
    that "... notwithstanding any potential reluctance on the part  of  the
    Ethiopian  embassy...  officials  were  given  very  little   time   to
    investigate", is sensibly made. Reading paragraph 46 fairly  and  as  a
    whole, it is based on the timing, not on the comparative detail in  the
    letters.

21. It is also important to consider that a letter of this  nature  to  the
    embassy, even one replete with details, is  not  a  "magic  bullet"  to
    establish refugee recognition. The more  fundamental  question  is  not
    whether  such  a  letter  has  been  sent,  but  whether  an  appellant
    establishes that the alleged identity  details  in  it  are  reasonably
    likely to be true.

22. The lengthy narration in ground 2  of  the  appellant's  assertions  at
    screening interview of Eritrean nationality  is  apt  to  mislead.  The
    judge derived nothing adverse from those assertions  at  the  screening
    interview. What she found was that when encountered by  the  police  in
    the first place the appellant  said  he  was  Ethiopian.  She  gave  an
    adequate explanation. She accepted the record as it had found  its  way
    into the refusal letter, and she thought  that  a  policeman  was  more
    likely to ask the appellant his nationality than his country of  birth.
    That was a view it was open to her to take. Judges are not required  to
    give endless "reasons for reasons".

23. There was no argument  before  the  FtT  or  before  the  UT  that  the
    respondent should have produced  the  best  available  evidence,  which
    would be the record kept by the police, rather than relying on at  best
    second-hand hearsay.  In any event, these would be  matters  of  weight
    not admissibility.  The submissions that the  judge  made  her  finding
    without  any  evidence,  or  without  giving  any  reasons,   are   not
    sustainable.

24. Ground 5 is no more than disagreement. It was open to the judge to find
    that the appellant failed to  describe  the  currency  in  his  alleged
    country of residence as he might reasonably be expected to  have  done.
    This was not a question of simple difficulty  recalling  coins  in  his
    pockets. He gave a senseless description and explanation, at odds  with
    the accepted background evidence.

25. There is no error in mentioning section 8 issues at the outset  of  the
    credibility assessment, provided they are  not  taken  as  decisive  on
    their own. Ground 6 discloses no error.

26. In summary: the judge went wrong in saying that the appellant was  aged
    18 when detained. The evidence was not to that effect. That  error  was
    not material.  The other alleged errors are not, on  full  examination,
    errors at all.

27. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            4 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




