
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00707/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Determination Promulgated            |
|on 10 October 2016                   |on 13 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     M I
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The parties shall be referred to as they appeared before the First-
         tier Tribunal for  ease  of  reference,  notwithstanding  the  fact
         permission to appeal has been granted to  both  the  appellant  and
         respondent.
      2. The decision under challenge is that of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Shanahan promulgated  on  the  17  May  2016  in  which  the  Judge
         dismissed the protection claim but  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
         rights grounds.

Background

      3. MI is a national  of  Somalia  born  on  the  10  July  1980.  MI's
         immigration history is summarised by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
         being that he entered the UK in September 1998 and  claimed  asylum
         on 24 September 1998. The claim was refused on  8  July  2002.  The
         appellants appeal against the  refusal  was  dismissed.  The  Upper
         Tribunal found an error of law in that decision  and  remitted  the
         appeal which was reheard. The protection claim  was  dismissed  but
         the claim  allowed  under  article  8  ECHR.   The  appellant  was,
         therefore, granted discretionary leave on 24 March 2004 valid to 24
         March 2007. The appellant was convicted of criminal acts  following
         which the respondent issued a Notice of Liability to Deport  on  23
         May 2012. On 27 April 2015  the  respondent  made  the  Deportation
         Order. On 10  July  2015  the  appellants  outstanding  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection claim was  refused  and  his  human  rights
         claim refused on the 28 July 2015. The appeal before the First-tier
         Tribunal is against the refusals of these claims.
      4. The appellant was convicted of the possession of Class A drugs with
         intent to supply for which he received a sentence of 2 years and  3
         months. The respondent certified the protection claims pursuant  to
         section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on
         the basis the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
         serious crime and constituted a danger to the community.

The protection claim

      5. In a previous decision dated December 2003 it had been  found  that
         there was a reasonable chance the appellant was  from  Somalia  but
         that he had not proved he was a member of the Reer  Hamar  minority
         clan. Accordingly that appeal was dismissed.
      6. Judge Shanahan found the appellant is  unlikely  to  re-offend  and
         that he had rebutted the presumption that he is a danger to society
         [26].
      7. Judge Shanaham found there was no evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal of which clan, if any, the appellant may belong to. It was
         found the appellant has no family in  Mogadishu  and  no  means  of
         support. The appellants family in the UK are not in a  position  to
         send him money although the appellant did state that  a  friend  in
         Dubai will send him money.
      8. The Judge sums up the key findings in  the  asylum  claim  at  [37]
         where it is stated:

             "37. Having considered these sections from the CG  case  I  am
             satisfied that while the Appellant has been found  not  to  be
             from a minority clan he has  no  family  or  clan  connections
             there and is in all probability  in  a  situation  akin  to  a
             minority clan member where without support of a nuclear family
             or clan no access to funds  his  relocation  to  Mogadishu  is
             unlikely to be realistic.  In terms of finding work,  although
             he has worked in the UK and indeed before coming  here,  I  am
             satisfied that without the support networks referred to  above
             he will have no base  from  which  to  start  his  search  for
             employment and is likely to have to resort  to  the  makeshift
             accommodation again referred to in the CG decision.  Therefore
             taking all this into account he will be at real risk of having
             to  live  in  conditions  that  fall  below   the   acceptable
             humanitarian standards.  I am not satisfied that he would have
             a well founded fear of persecution but  I  am  satisfied  that
             having to resort to living in makeshift accommodation such  as
             the IDP  camps  would  amount  to  ill-treatment  such  as  to
             infringe rights protected by Article 3 of the ECHR."

      9. The Judge did not find there was sufficient evidence to depart from
         the previous rejection of the appellants asylum  claim  decided  in
         December 2003. The lack of evidence of a credible well founded real
         risk of persecution is also noted.
     10. The appellant challenges this decision under two heads being (a)  a
         failure of the Judge to consider why the appellant will not  be  at
         risk on return  for  a  refugee  convention  reasons  and  as  such
         entitled to refugee status and failed to adequately assess  whether
         ill treatment that the appellant will encounter will be as a result
         of either his  ethnicity  or  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group.
     11. Clan identity is fundamental to the functioning of Somali  society.
         The respondent's  guidance  on  clan  system,  clans  and  minority
         groups, published March 2015 and in the public domain, at paragraph
         2.1.1 states:

             "The European Asylum Support Office (EASO) Country  of  Origin
             Information report, South and Central Somalia Country,  August
             2014, (EASO report August 2014), described the clan system and
             majority clans:


             According to a renowned expert on  Somalia  and  professor  of
             anthropology:   "The  clan  system  is  the   most   important
             constituent  social  factor  among  the  nomadic   pastoralist
             Somalis".


             The clans function as subethnicities  of  the  Somali  nation.
             Clan affiliation is the main identity providing factor  within
             the Somali nation. The clan system matters for  all  functions
             of society, even for the structure of the government.


             Somalis usually know their  exact  position  within  the  clan
             system, including in urban Mogadishu."

     12. The finding by the Judge  that  as  it  had  not  been  proved  the
         appellant was from the minority clan he alleged, he must  be  in  a
         situation akin to a minority claim member is not a finding  reached
         by any reference to the importance of the Somali clan structure. It
         is an  arguable  legal  error  to  assert  that  as  minority  clan
         membership had not been establish, as alleged by the appellant,  it
         had to be assumed his status was as found. The burden of  proof  in
         these cases falls upon the appellant who is making the  allegation.
         The appellant claimed he is from the Reer Hamar  a  minority  clan.
         This was not proved. If he is not from a minority clan it is likely
         he is from a majority or dominant clan as the evidence did not show
         he was from no clan. The appellant was clearly aware  of  the  clan
         structure in Somalia as he makes reference to it in his claim.  The
         identity of the clan cannot be found as the  Judge  recognises  but
         the claim to be at risk as a result of claimed clan membership  was
         not proved.
     13. The finding that the appellant should be  compared  to  a  minority
         clan member is arguably infected by legal error although it may not
         be material to the decision in relation to the asylum claim.
     14. It is accepted that the original grounds of appeal pleaded  a  real
         risk on the basis of ethnicity. The appellant was born  in  Somalia
         of Somali and Yemeni parentage but it was not made  out  that  such
         ethnicity will crate a real risk in the country  material  provided
         and relied upon  by  the  appellant.  Somalia  has  also  over  the
         centuries seen successive waves of immigration from Yemen who  have
         integrated into the country and intermarried. It has not been shown
         those of a mixed ethnic group are excluded  from  clan  membership.
         The appellant was born in  Mogadishu  which  is  the  part  of  the
         country where many Yemeni migrants chose to settle.
     15. In the above mentioned report it is stated that:

             "1.3.7


             In the country guidance case of MOJ and others [2014], the  UT
             held 'There  are  no  clan  militias  in  Mogadishu,  no  clan
             violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment, even for
             minority clan members.' (para 407g).  The UT  also  held  that
             'Perhaps a good indication of the very real  change  that  has
             taken place  in  Mogadishu  is  that  some  commentators  when
             referring to a "minority clan" now base that not on  ethnicity
             but the fact of the clan being in a numerical  minority  in  a
             particular area, despite its status as a majority  clan  on  a
             national  basis.  It  is  clear  that  there  have  been  very
             significant  population  movements  in  Mogadishu  in   recent
             years.' (Paragraph 77). It further held 'It  will,  therefore,
             only be those with no clan or family support who will  not  be
             in receipt of remittances from abroad and  who  have  no  real
             prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return who will
             face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
             that which is acceptable in humanitarian  protection  terms'."
             (para 408).

     16. In FE (Risk-Minority group - Yemeni  background)  Somalia  2003  CG
         UKIAT 00115 the Tribunal (Latter) said that there was  no  evidence
         that  the  claimants  from  the  Ridaci  clan  (or  Yemeni  Somalis
         generally) were at particular risk.
     17. The appellants claim is not based upon an assertion he  is  from  a
         minority clan as that terms is identified in the above passage.  It
         has not been made out that the appellant was able  to  satisfy  the
         test for refugee status or that he was accordingly entitled  to  be
         recognised as such.     No arguable legal  error  material  to  the
         decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal   on   this   ground   is   made
         out.
     18. The  appellant  also  claims  the  Judge  erred  in  assessing  his
         entitlement to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection.  The  Judge
         dismissed this element of the appeal.
     19. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states:

             "A person will  be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
             United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


             (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at  a  port  of
             entry in the United Kingdom;


             (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
             2 of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;


             (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that
             the person concerned, if returned to the  country  of  return,
             would face a real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and  is
             unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself  of
             the protection of that country; and


             (iv)  he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of   humanitarian
             protection.


             Serious harm consists of:


             (i) the death penalty or execution;


             (ii) unlawful killing;


             (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment
             of a person in the country of return; or


             (iv) serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."

     20. The appellant can only be considered for a  grant  of  humanitarian
         protection if he is not entitled to be  recognised  as  a  refugee.
         This is what the Judge found. The appellant must be in  the  United
         Kingdom, which he is, and condition (iii) must be shown to be met.
     21. The appellants grounds assert that as the appellant  will  have  to
         resort to living in makeshift accommodation such as that in the IDP
         camps he will face ill treatment that will violate his rights under
         Article 3 which it is claimed will amount to "inhuman and degrading
         treatment.
     22. The respondent challenges this element  of  the  decision.  In  the
         country guidance case of MOJ and  Others  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT
         00442 it was said at headnote (xi) "It  will,  therefore,  only  be
         those with no clan or family support who will not be in receipt  of
         remittances from abroad and who have no real prospect  of  securing
         access to a livelihood on return who  will  face  the  prospect  of
         living in circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  in
         humanitarian protection terms". It was also found:

             "420. Whilst it is likely that those who  do  find  themselves
             living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in  an  IDP  camp
             will be experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to
             engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR, we do not  see
             that it gives rise to an enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since
             there  is  an  insufficient  nexus  with  the   indiscriminate
             violence which, in any event, we have found to be not at  such
             a high level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm. Nor does the evidence  support  the  claim  that
             there is an enhanced risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
             for those in the IDP camps or  that  such  a  person  is  more
             likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack...


             421. Other than for those with no  alternative  to  living  in
             makeshift accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp,  the  humanitarian
             position in Mogadishu  has  continued  to  improve  since  the
             country guidance in AMM was published. The famine is  confined
             to  history  ...  The  "economic  boom"  has  generated   more
             opportunity for employment and ... self-employment.  For  many
             returnees remittances will be important. ...


             422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to
             civilians or returnees in Mogadishu  does  not  mean  that  no
             Somali national can  succeed  in  a  refugee  or  humanitarian
             protection or article 3 claim.  Each  case  will  fall  to  be
             decided on its own facts. As we have observed, there will need
             to be a careful assessment  of  all  the  circumstances  of  a
             particular individual."

     23. The appellants own evidence was that  his  family  will  offer  him
         assistance by way of remittances,  including  from  his  friend  in
         Dubai. The Judges rejection of this evidence on the basis  of  lack
         of evidence of the same is  arguably  irrational  when  it  is  the
         appellant himself who claims that such support is available to him.
         It was not shown that such support will be insufficient  to  enable
         the appellant to support his integration into life in Mogadishu. It
         is also the case that the appellants claim to be  from  a  minority
         clan was rejected and I have set out above the legal error  in  the
         conclusions that as the clan had not been identified the  appellant
         must be treated as if from a minority clan. This is contrary to the
         country material and irrational. If the appellant  is  not  from  a
         minority clan it is more likely he is from a majority clan and will
         be able to avail himself of the assistance offered within the  clan
         structure. The respondent also makes the point in the grounds  that
         as the appellant has worked in  the  UK  he  is  able  to  work  in
         Mogadishu  and  earn  an  income  from  which  to  supplement   his
         remittances or support himself.
     24. The finding the appellant will end up in an IDP camp  is  therefore
         arguably infected by legal error as it is a finding that  fails  to
         consider the evidence adequately and is  based  upon  an  erroneous
         assumption, arguably not available to the Judge in relation to clan
         membership.
     25. The conclusion that if the appellant was to end up in an  IDP  camp
         Article 3 will be  breached  is  also  inadequately  reasoned.   As
         stated by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442:

             "31. I entirely accept that some of the observations  made  in
             the course of the discussion of IDP  camps  may  be  taken  to
             suggest that if a returning Somali national can show  that  he
             is likely to end up having to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP
             camp, that would be sufficient to  engage  the  protection  of
             article 3. Yet such a stark proposition of  cause  and  effect
             would be inconsistent with the article 3 jurisprudence of  the
             Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic courts.
             In my judgment the position is accurately stated in para  422.
             That  draws  a   proper   distinction   between   humanitarian
             protection and article 3 and recognises  that  the  individual
             circumstances of the person concerned must be  considered.  An
             appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
             would face impoverished conditions of  living  on  removal  to
             Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and
             Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N
             case. Impoverished conditions which were the direct result  of
             violent activities may be viewed differently  as  would  cases
             where the risk suggested is of direct violence itself."

     26. In N(Burundi) 2003 UKIAT 00065 (5 Sept  2003),  the  Tribunal  said
         that, where the humanitarian situation is poor in  the  country  to
         which a failed asylum seeker is to be returned that in itself  will
         not generally reach the high threshold needed for a breach  of  Art
         3. The Tribunal was guided by the approach in SK(2002) UKIAT  05613
         Starred and IAS Vol 6 No  1  (Collins  J)  in  which  the  Tribunal
         acknowledged that an individual's personal circumstances  could  be
         relevant (eg if he  had  a  physical  or  mental  disability)  but,
         nonetheless, "there  must  be  a  threshold  which  is  of  general
         application. Croatia has suffered  the  ravages  of  a  fierce  and
         bitter civil war. Thus the mere fact that there will be a return to
         hardship resulting from that  cannot  produce  a  breach  of  human
         rights. The general situation must be taken into  account  as  must
         what is generally accepted in the society in question."
     27.  In MB, YT, GA and TK v SSHD [2013] EWHC 123 it was held that  case
         law establish that Article 3 impose  no  general  obligation  on  a
         contracting state to refrain from  removing  a  person  to  another
         state or territory in which he would be destitute. It was  not  the
         function of Article 3  to  impose  a  minimum  standard  of  social
         support for those in need. A breach of Article 3 only occurred when
         deliberate state  action  was  taken  to  prohibit  a  person  from
         sustaining himself by work and when accommodation and the barest of
         necessities were removed.
     28. In GS(India) and Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  Lord  Justice  Laws
         identified a line of cases such as MSS v Belgium and Greece 2011 54
         EHRR 2 where States had taken  on  certain  obligations  to  asylum
         seekers  under  EU  Directives.   In  MSS  v  Belgium  and   Greece
         (Application No. 30696/09) ECtHR (Grand Chamber) a case in which an
         Afghan applicant was returned to  Greece  from  Belgium  under  the
         Dublin Convention, the ECtHR noted  that  the  applicant  had  been
         living in the street on return to Greece,  with  no  resources  and
         without any means of providing for his essential needs. Such living
         conditions, prolonged uncertainty and a lack  of  prospect  of  the
         situation improving had attained the level of severity required  to
         fall within the scope of Article 3 (para 249 - 263).  There  was  a
         violation of Article 3 by Belgium for  exposing  the  Applicant  to
         detention and living conditions contrary to the ECHR. Interestingly
         note also VM and Others v Belgium App No 60125/11 in which  it  was
         held that there was a breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  in  respect  of
         reception conditions for a  family  of  Serbian  nationals  seeking
         asylum in Belgium. Following an order  to  leave  the  country  and
         despite their appeals against the measure, the Applicants were left
         without basic means of subsistence and were obliged  to  return  to
         their country of origin, where their severely disabled child  died.
         The Court found in particular that the Belgian authorities had  not
         given due consideration to the vulnerability of the Applicants.
     29. In Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 the  Upper  Tribunal  had  allowed  the
         Somali Claimant's appeal against deportation following  a  sentence
         of five years for  rape  under  Article  3  finding  that  for  the
         purposes of MOJ he was vulnerable, had PTSD, and would be  at  risk
         of destitution and thus likely to end up in an IDP camp. The  Court
         of Appeal held that to succeed in resisting removal  on  Article  3
         grounds on the basis of suggested  poverty/deprivation,  which  was
         not the responsibility of the receiving country, whether or not the
         feared deprivation was contributed to by a medical  condition,  the
         person liable to deportation was  required  to  show  circumstances
         which brought him within the approach in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR  423
         and N 47 EHRR 885. Reduced circumstances or life expectancy did not
         of itself give rise to a breach of Article 3.
     30. It is not made out on the available  evidence  that  the  appellant
         will be destitute or without clan or family support. This is not  a
         case in which the appellant has a disability or there  is  anything
         of this nature that brings the appellant within the approach of N.
     31. The conclusions in relation to the need for the appellant  to  have
         to seek a life in an IDP camp or the assessment of  the  engagement
         of Article 3 ECHR on the basis of the conditions the appellant  may
         face on return have been shown to be  infected  by  arguable  legal
         error and must be set aside. In remaking the decision I find it has
         not been made out by the appellant that he will be  without  family
         remittances, clan support, or  the  ability  to  work  and  earn  a
         living. I do not find he has established that he will be forced  to
         live in conditions that breach the high threshold of Article 3 ECHR
         or that entitle him to a grant of humanitarian protection.

Article 8 EHCR

     32. In relation to this element of the appeal the Judge refers  to  the
         correct legal provisions and dynamics of the family unit.  This  is
         an automatic deportation as a result of the period of  imprisonment
         to which paragraph 398(b) of the Rules is applicable. Section  117B
         and C apply, the latter as the appellant is a foreign criminal.
     33. The Judge rejected the respondents suggestion that  the  appellants
         partner and children could relocate within Mogadishu [46]. This  is
         a finding reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.  The  Judge
         noted that the issue was, therefore, whether  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for them to remain the United Kingdom when the appellant  was
         deported. The Judges reasoning for allowing the appeal is  set  out
         at [54] in the following terms:

             "I have however come to the conclusion that the deportation of
             the Appellants from his family would result  in  unduly  harsh
             consequences for them.  The  children  would  be  deprived  of
             their father who has clearly  played  a  significant  role  in
             their lives.  His partner would be deprived of the  person  on
             whom she relies for physical and  emotional  support.   It  is
             argued by the Respondent that the family were able  to  manage
             whilst the Appellant was in prison but that was for a  limited
             period with the Appellant  in  the  UK  whereas  what  is  now
             proposed is his removal from their lives for a minimum  period
             of 10 years.  It is also suggested that they  can  meet  in  a
             third country for visits but  that  relies  upon  the  parties
             being able to afford such visits.  The partner is on  benefits
             with two children to support. The Appellant's circumstances in
             Mogadish at best will be difficult  without  family  and  clan
             support. The possibility of visits must be  very  limited  and
             infrequent.

     34. The Judge in this finding refers  to  the  obvious  consequence  of
         deportation which is that the family will  be  separated.  What  is
         missing is an analysis of the consequences of  such  separation  in
         sufficient detail other than by reference to the fact future visits
         will be unlikely. There is no explanation  for  why  the  fact  the
         appellant will be prevented from re-entering  makes  the  fact  the
         children's mother, who  was able to  cope  with  the  care  of  the
         children in the past with the assistance of her sister will not  be
         able to do so again.  It is accepted  there  is  reference  to  the
         emotional effect of the appellants removal and  the  loss  of  some
         assistance from the appellant, but arguably  insufficient  evidence
         to show that the consequences for the children or their mother  are
         the determinative factor.
     35. In AZ (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 it was found at paragraph 17:

             "These cases show that it will be rare for the best  interests
             of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
             deporting foreign criminals. Something  more  than  a  lengthy
             separation  from  a  parent  is  required,  even  though  such
             separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.  That
             is commonplace and not a compelling circumstance.  Neither  is
             it looking at the concept of exceptional circumstances through
             the lens of the Immigration  Rules.  It  would  undermine  the
             specific exceptions in the  Rules  if  the  interests  of  the
             children in maintaining a  close  and  immediate  relationship
             with the deported parent were as a matter of course  to  trump
             the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule   399(a)
             identifies the particular circumstances where it  is  accepted
             that the interests of  the  child  will  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation. The conditions are onerous  and  will
             only rarely arise. They include the requirement that it  would
             not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK  and  that  no
             other family member is able to look after the child in the UK.
             In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this   exception   is
             potentially engaged there will be the normal  relationship  of
             love  and  affection  between  parent  and  child  and  it  is
             virtually always in the best interests of the child  for  that
             relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
             deportation a disproportionate interference with family  life,
             it would drain the rule  of  any  practical  significance.  It
             would   mean   that    deportation    would    constitute    a
             disproportionate  interference  with  private  life   in   the
             ordinary run of cases where children  are  adversely  affected
             and the carefully framed conditions in rule  399(a)  would  be
             largely otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very  compelling
             justification  overriding  the   high   public   interest   in
             deportation, there must be some additional feature or features
             affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take
             the case out of the ordinary."

     36. A conviction for the supply of class A drugs is a  serious  matter.
         The public interest requires the appellants  deportation  from  the
         United Kingdom. It was not established on the evidence  that  there
         is anything in the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
         partner and children that takes the case out of the  ordinary.  The
         children have grown up with their father and do not want him to  be
         deported as they state in their letters.   That  is  understandable
         but normal within a family in which  the  parents  have  cared  for
         their children  together.  Similarly  the  appellants  partner  not
         wanting the person she loves to be lost to her  is  understandable,
         but that is the impact of deportation.
     37. I find the Judges analysis of the article 8  issues  is  flawed  by
         legal error. The Judge failed to make reference to or  analyse  the
         merits of the case by reference to  relevant  and  important  cases
         such as LC (China) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, Secretary of State for the Hone Department  v
         CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488, and NA (Pakistan) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  662  which  are  the
         cases referred to in paragraph 17 of Said.
     38. I find such legal error material  to  the  decision  to  allow  the
         appeal under Article 8. I set this element of  the  decision  aside
         and remake the decision dismissing the appeal on Article 8  grounds
         as on the evidence it had not been made out that it would be unduly
         harsh for the appellants partner and  children  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom were the appellant to be deported.

Decision

     39. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law  as  set  out
         above. I set aside the parts of the decision of the original  Judge
         in relation to which legal error has been found to have been  made.
         I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity.

     40. The First-tier Tribunal made contradictory statements  in  relation
         to the making of an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the  Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 November 2016


