
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00155/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th August 2018 and 1st April 2019   |On 24th April 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    j k s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan of Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer on
                    20th August 2018, Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting
                    Officer on 1st April 2019

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Smith made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 6th February 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1992.
    She arrived clandestinely in the UK on 17th July  2014  accompanied  by
    her husband who claimed asylum. She was his dependant.  The appellant's
    husband's asylum claim was refused, his subsequent appeal was dismissed
    and he became appeal rights  exhausted  on  15th  July  2016.   Further
    submissions were refused on 10th May 2017 and on  11th  July  2017  the
    appellant made her own asylum claim.

 3. The appellant claimed that in February or March 2013 three or four  men
    attempted to kidnap her and  she  believed  that  they  were  from  the
    Taliban.

 4. The judge did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  the  attempted
    kidnap.  He dismissed the appeal on that basis.

 5. He also stated that the mere fact that he had found the  appellant  not
    to be credible did not necessarily mean that she was  not  at  risk  on
    return.  He addressed the  country  guidance  case  of  TG  and  Others
    (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00595.   He
    recognised that a consideration of whether an individual member of  the
    Sikh community is at real risk of persecution upon Afghanistan is fact-
    sensitive and financial circumstances and the ability to  access  basic
    accommodation must be considered, bearing  in  mind  that  Muslims  are
    unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh community.  He  said  that  the
    central issue was that of financial support and the ability to  earn  a
    living.

 6. The judge concluded  that  the  appellant's  husband  could  return  to
    Afghanistan and resume working in his father's shop.  He noted that  it
    was claimed that the appellant's father-in-law was now in  the  UK  but
    because there was no record of his being  here  he  believed  that  the
    father-in-law remained in Afghanistan. The appellant had not  satisfied
    him to the lower standard that there was not a source of  income  there
    for her husband.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had made a material error of fact relating to whether  the  appellant's
    father-in-law had made a protection claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro on 3rd April 2018.

 9. At the hearing Ms Khan said that the father-in-law as not only  in  the
    UK but had won his  asylum  appeal,  although  that  decision  was  the
    subject of challenge by the Secretary of  State.   Mrs  Pettersen  said
    that permission to appeal the decision had been granted but the  appeal
    had not yet been listed for hearing.  She submitted that in  any  event
    any error in relation to the father-in-law was not material because the
    primary findings of fact in relation to the appellant's alleged  kidnap
    were not challenged and the judge had  found  that  in  any  event  the
    couple could obtain shelter in gurdwaras and would have  the  advantage
    of a resettlement grant.

Consideration as to Whether there is Material Error of Law

10. I am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  mistake  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's father-in-law was still in Afghanistan and had the  ability
    to support the appellant on return is material.

11. The appellant's financial circumstances on return are clearly not going
    to be those as found by the judge. He dismissed the appeal on the basis
    that there was no need for the appellant and her husband to  set  up  a
    new business because there was already one  in  existence  which  would
    provide a living for them.

12. The circumstances which she would in fact face on return  needs  to  be
    reassessed.

13. After some discussion it was agreed that the sensible  way  forward  is
    for this matter to be listed after the appeal of the father in law  has
    been heard in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in  law.   He  made  a  relevant  mistake  of  fact
capable of altering the decision. His decision is set aside.

Resumed Hearing

14. At the resumed hearing the appellant produced two  further  bundles  of
    documents, including supplementary statements from  the  appellant  and
    from her father-in-law, grants of  status  for  the  father-in-law  and
    sister-in-law and copies of the determination in the Upper Tribunal.

15. Mr Diwnycz said that he did  not  wish  to  cross-examine  any  of  the
    witnesses.  Until he had seen the paperwork confirming  the  father-in-
    law's status he was obliged to pursue his opposition to the appellant's
    case, but having seen it, he had no further submissions to make.

16. Ms Khan submitted that the  appellant's  father-in-law  was  not  in  a
    position to offer any financial support at all to  the  appellant  upon
    return to Afghanistan.   She  and  her  husband  would  be  in  a  very
    precarious situation without access to any support there or the ability
    to earn their living.  Accordingly, in line with the decision in TG and
    Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT  00595  the
    appeal ought to be allowed.

Findings and Conclusions

17. Judge Smith stated at paragraph 47 of his determination that  the  mere
    fact that he had found  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible  did  not
    necessarily mean that she would not be at  risk  on  return.   He  then
    considered the principles which could be drawn from the case of TG  and
    said that in his judgment the  central  issue  was  that  of  financial
    support and the appellant's ability to  earn  a  living.   He  accepted
    that,  traditionally,  Sikhs  were  self-employed,  running  their  own
    businesses and there were virtually no employment opportunities in  the
    Muslim community.  Existing Sikh families  were  likely  to  prioritise
    their own relatives when job opportunities  occurred.   Unless  capital
    existed to purchase a property, renting was likely to be  difficult  as
    the landlord would almost invariably be a Muslim who could  come  under
    pressure from religious zealots to end the agreement.

18. Determining whether the appellant and her husband had capital  depended
    upon his findings as to whether the appellant's father-in-law  remained
    in Kabul in active business and trading.  The judge concluded that  the
    appellant's father-in-law remained in Afghanistan and on that basis  he
    found that there would be  a  source  of  income  for  the  appellant's
    husband.

19. In fact the judge was wrong about that. Designated Judge  Murray  heard
    the appellant's father and sister-in-law's appeals.  Her  decision  was
    subsequently upheld by Upper Tribunal Judge  Macleman.  She  noted  the
    evidence that all of his assets had been handed over to the agents  who
    arranged for his departure from Afghanistan his two shops.  Whilst  she
    recorded that she  had  minor  doubts  about  the  credilibity  of  the
    accounts, she was prepared to accept that they  would  be  at  risk  on
    return on the basis of their religion.

20. The alternative source of support for this appellant could possibly  be
    the gurdwaras.  The gurdwaras themselves are now struggling financially
    and now only two remain functioning in Kabul.   At  her  interview  the
    appellant said that she had been living there for  a  time  before  she
    came to the UK, but it is clear that although  the  gurdwaras  provided
    some free food even there, there  were  expenses  which  the  appellant
    could now not meet. Her father-in-law is on NASS support with no  spare
    funds to send her.

21. According to the now unchallenged evidence, the family have  no  assets
    either in Afghanistan or in the UK.

22. The appellant's father in law has been granted refugee status.  It  was
    accepted in his appeal that he was a member  of  a  minority  religious
    group perceived as contravening Sharia law.  The appellant in this case
    is in exactly the same position. It was also accepted in his case  that
    those without access to independent income were unlikely to be able  to
    relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.  Again,  the  same  is
    true for this appellant. Mr Diwnycz did not seek  to  argue  that  this
    appeal ought not to be allowed.

Decision

23. The original judge erred in law and his decision has  been  set  aside.
    It is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]


Signed                              Date 19 April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

