
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00711/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2020                            |On 21 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     E R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Ward of James & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a remaking of the asylum and human rights appeal of ER, brought
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 11 January 2019.

    Background

 2. ER is a national of Iran, born in 1985.   He  came  to  the  UK  on  27
    October 2015 and claimed  asylum  on  arrival.   After  his  claim  was
    refused on 11 January 2019 he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson on 12 July  2019
    but was  dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  4  October  2019.
    Permission to appeal against that decision was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10 December 2019.  The error of law hearing was held in the
    Upper Tribunal on 20 January 2020.  In a decision issued on 28 February
    2020 the Upper Tribunal found an error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, set it aside and directed this re-making.

 3. It is undisputed that the appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and grew up
    in the Kurdish area of Bana on the border with Iraq. He maintains  that
    from the age of 18 to 20 he avoided military  service  by  leaving  the
    village when the authorities came.  He then moved to Seyagoz, over  the
    border in Iraq, at the age of 20, in order to continue to avoid serving
    in the Iranian army.  In Seyagoz  he found work as a security guard  at
    a storage unit on the Iran/Iraq border.  He lived with the  owner,  SA,
    an Iraqi national.  SA  was  also  involved  in  smuggling  across  the
    Iran/Iraq border. In order to facilitate the illegal passage  of  goods
    over the border, SA would bribe the border guards.  In 2015,  after  SA
    arranged for thirty villagers to transport  goods  across  the  border,
    Iranian officers arrived unexpectedly and two of the villagers carrying
    goods were shot dead.  The families of those who had been  killed  were
    told that SA and the appellant had not paid money to secure the  route.
    The men who died in the incident were members of the Younsi Mala tribe,
    dominant in the area and with links to the  Iranian  authorities.   The
    families of those who had been  killed  indicated  to  the  appellant's
    family that they wanted revenge, had declared a blood feud and intended
    to kill the appellant. On learning from his brothers what had happened,
    the appellant fled to the home of a family friend who arranged for  him
    to travel to Europe.  The  appellant  travelled  through  a  number  of
    European countries and arrived in the UK on 27 October 2015 and claimed
    asylum.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not find the appellant to  be  credible  as
    regards his claim to be at risk from the  Iranian  authorities  or  the
    Younsi Mala tribe concerning the smuggling incident.  The Tribunal also
    concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on return as  a  Kurd
    who had avoided military service or left Iran illegally.

 5. The error of law decision issued on 28 February 2020 set out  that  the
    Upper Tribunal accepted only that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  as
    regards the assessment of the claim to be at risk on return as  a  Kurd
    who had avoided military service for an extended period of  time.   The
    Tribunal's reasons for finding an error of law on that  basis  are  set
    out in paragraphs 8 to 12 of the decision.  The reasons for finding  no
    further error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal are set out in
    paragraphs 13 to 23.  The Upper Tribunal confirmed in paragraph  24  of
    the error of law decision  that  the  re-making  of  the  appeal  would
    concern only the assessment of whether a real risk of  mistreatment  on
    return arose from the appellant's profile as a  Kurd  who  had  avoided
    military service for many years and  that  this  re-making  would  take
    place in the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The appeal then  became  caught  up  in  the  COVID-19  pandemic  which
    required many cases to be  adjourned  and  consideration  given  as  to
    whether they could be litigated on the papers, via  remote  hearing  or
    face to face.  In the event, this appeal was listed for a  remote  oral
    hearing on 19 November 2020.

 7. In support of the remaking, the appellant served a  further  bundle  of
    materials on 4 June 2020.   These  included  written  submissions  and
    materials going to the issue of whether the appellant faced a  risk  on
    return as a Kurd who had avoided military service.  The appellant  also
    served 14  pages of printouts of sections of the  appellant's  Facebook
    posts and photos  of  him  attending  demonstrations  in  the  UK.  The
    appellant provided a further statement dated 25  May  2020  maintaining
    that he had posted opposition material on a  Facebook  page  from  2015
    onwards, the first post being a picture of the flag of  Kurdistan.  His
    statement also maintained that he had attended  demonstrations  towards
    the end of December 2019 (i.e. after the negative  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision) and further demonstrations on 5 January 2020, 2 February 2020
    and 1 March 2020.  The new materials included a  supplementary  report
    from Dr S Laizer dated 3 June 2020.

 8. The respondent did not object to the new materials being admitted  and,
    in all the  circumstances,  where  the  protection  claim  fell  to  be
    assessed as of the date of  hearing,  the  Tribunal  admitted  the  new
    materials for consideration.

 9. In this re-making, it is undisputed that the appellant  is  an  Iranian
    national of Kurdish ethnicity who avoided  military  service  until  he
    left Iran at the age of 30. It was accepted that he had  lived  for  an
    extended period in the Kurdish Region of Iraq (the KRI).  It  was  also
    undisputed that he had left Iran illegally and did not have an identity
    document.

10. The parties were also in agreement that the findings of fact as to  the
    appellant's profile had to be considered against the  country  guidance
    in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).  The  head  note  of  HB
    states:
         "(1)     SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
         [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance  in  terms  of
         the country guidance offered in the headnote. For the avoidance  of
         doubt, that decision  is  not  authority  for  any  proposition  in
         relation to the risk on return for refused  Kurdish  asylum-seekers
         on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.
         (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence  does
         not support a contention that such discrimination is,  in  general,
         at such a level as to amount  to  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
         treatment.
         (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities  have  become  increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity.  Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater  suspicion
         than  hitherto  and  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.
         (4)  However,  the  mere  fact  of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and  even  if  combined
         with illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article
         3 ill-treatment.
         (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk  factor  which,  when
         combined with other factors, may create a real risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being  a  risk  factor  it  means  that
         Kurdish ethnicity is  a  factor  of  particular  significance  when
         assessing risk. Those "other  factors"  will  include  the  matters
         identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.
         (6)  A period of residence in the KRI  by  a  Kurdish  returnee  is
         reasonably likely  to  result  in  additional  questioning  by  the
         authorities on return. However, this  is  a  factor  that  will  be
         highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence
         will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such  as  the
         length of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing
         there and why they left.
         (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are  at
         risk of arrest, prolonged  detention  and  physical  abuse  by  the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or  who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.
         (8)  Activities that can  be  perceived  to  be  political  by  the
         Iranian  authorities  include   social   welfare   and   charitable
         activities  on  behalf  of  Kurds.  Indeed,  involvement  with  any
         organised activity on behalf of or  in  support  of  Kurds  can  be
         perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse attention
         by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.
         (9)  Even 'low-level'  political  activity,  or  activity  that  is
         perceived to be political, such as, by way of  example  only,  mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish  rights,  if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case however, depends  on  its  own  facts  and  an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature  of  the  material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.
         (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as
         a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to  be
         involved in Kurdish political activities  or  support  for  Kurdish
         rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
         is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely  to
         be extreme."

11. The appellant maintains that his profile as a Kurd who avoided military
    service, who lived in  Iraq  for  a  number  of  years  and  left  Iran
    illegally is sufficient to meet the low  threshold  for  suspicion  and
    adverse treatment identified in HB. He submits that on that basis alone
    his claim should succeed. Further,  he  maintained  that  his  Facebook
    posts and attendance at demonstrations in the  UK  further  raised  his
    profile and showed that he would  be  at  additional  risk  of  adverse
    treatment on return to Iraq.

12. The respondent does not accept that the appellant has  shown  that  his
    residence in Iraq will lead to significant adverse  interest  where  HB
    identifies that this is "a factor that will be  highly-fact  specific".
    The respondent also maintains that HB does not identify  being  a  Kurd
    who has avoided military service as a potential risk  factor.  Further,
    the appellant had failed to show that he could not be expected  to  buy
    an exemption from military service or obtain an exemption on the  basis
    of his ill-health. The appellant's Facebook postings were opportunistic
    and he could be expected to delete them prior to returning to  Iran  so
    they were not capable of leading to adverse interest. His attendance at
    demonstrations was also opportunistic and  very  limited  and  did  not
    assist his claim.

    Discussion

13. The case of HB identifies a raised sensitivity in Iran  towards  anyone
    of Kurdish ethnicity. That factor, even  combined  with  illegal  exit,
    however, was not found to be  sufficient  to  create  a  real  risk  of
    mistreatment on return.  Other  risk  factors  may  combine  with  that
    profile, however, to meet the  required  standard  for  persecution  or
    Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment on return. Paragraphs 6 to 9 of  the  head
    note to HB set out an inexhaustive  list  of  factors  that  may  raise
    someone's risk profile sufficiently so as to show that they are in need
    of international protection.

14. Amongst the additional risk factors set out in  HB,  as  summarised  in
    paragraph 6 of the head note, is that of a period of residence  in  the
    KRI. This is stated to a factor which is "reasonably likely  to  result
    in additional questioning by the authorities on return."

15. The Tribunal in HB reached this finding after  considering  the  expert
    evidence in paragraphs 85 and 86 in which it is recorded  that  one  of
    the expert witnesses gave the following evidence to the Tribunal:

         "He said that if the appellant said that he  came  from  Iraq,  the
         first thing is that it would mean he had left Iran illegally.   The
         second question would be as to why he went to Iraq.   It  would  be
         presupposed  that  he  would  be  connected  with  the   opposition
         movements which are all centred in Iraq."

16. The Tribunal in HB clarify, however, that this is a  risk  factor  that
    "will be highly fact-specific", so an assessment must be made  in  each
    case in order to establish the degree of adverse  interest  that  could
    arise. The Tribunal set out that length of residence in the  KRI,  what
    the person was doing there and why  they  left  the  KRI  are  relevant
    factors to be taken into account.

17. When assessing the importance of this factor in this appeal, it must be
    held in mind that ER has not  been  found  to  be  a  reliable  witness
    regarding what he was doing in the KRI. His account of assisting people
    to smuggle goods over the border was not  found  credible.  It  follows
    that  his  account  of  leaving  Iran  because  of  threats  from   the
    authorities and a local tribe arising from his smuggling  work  is  not
    credible. As before, however, his residence in the  KRI  is  undisputed
    and it is extensive, the accepted account being that he was there  from
    2005 to 2015. The evidence does not show any involvement in pro-Kurdish
    or illegal activities by the appellant whilst he was in the KRI. In the
    context of  the  low  threshold  for  suspicion  of  Kurds  in  general
    identified in HB, however, and the indication that an ethnic Kurd being
    resident in the KRI raises an additional suspicion of therefore being a
    connection with the opposition groups based  there,  my  conclusion  is
    that the extent of this particular appellant's residence in the KRI  is
    sufficient to make it reasonably likely that he  will  face  additional
    questioning on return and that  this  is  likely  to  lead  to  adverse
    treatment meeting the required level of persecution and Article 3  ECHR
    ill-treatment for his protection claim to succeed.

18. Even were that additional risk factor not sufficient to show  that  the
    appellant is in need of  protection,  however,  there  is  the  further
    undisputed factor of his having avoided military service from  the  age
    of 20 to 30 whilst in Iran/Iraq. The respondent's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (CPIN) entitled "Iran: military service"  dated  April
    2020 indicates in paragraph 2.4.15 that:

         "A June 2016 report suggested that due  to  increasing  numbers  of
         draft evaders the process of tracking them  down  had  intensified.
         However, it  is  not  known  how  active  the  Iranian  Authorities
         currently are in pursuing and prosecuting draft evaders".

19. The report also indicates in section 5 that there are  exemptions  from
    military service  and  that  this  can  be  on  the  basis  of  medical
    exemptions; see section 5.2.  The report indicates in  paragraph  5.2.1
    that where an individual has a certain illness and is "thus  not  in  a
    complete state of health" they may still be assessed as being  "capable
    of carrying  out  noncombat/military  related  services  in  offices.".
    There are further exemptions for those of more  serious  health  issues
    who can be exempted more extensively.

20. In  section  6  the  report  considers  further  the  position  of  the
    authorities towards draft evaders and desertion.   In  paragraph  6.1.1
    the report quotes from an Australian Government Department  of  Foreign
    Affairs and Trade (DFAT) dated June 2018 which stated as follows:

         "Draft evaders are liable for prosecution.  A  person  who  deserts
         from the military must complete his service  on  return  if  he  is
         under the age of 40.  Evading military service for  up  to  a  year
         during peacetime or  two  months  during  war  can  result  in  the
         addition of between three and six months to the total length of the
         required service.   More  than  one  year's  draft  evasion  during
         peacetime or two or more months during war may result  in  criminal
         prosecution.  Draft evaders may  lose  social  benefits  and  civic
         rights, including access to Government jobs or higher education, or
         the right to set up a business.  The Government may also refuse  to
         grant draft evaders driver's licences, revoke  their  passports  or
         prohibit them from leaving the country without special  permission.
         Iranian Authorities periodically crack down on draft  evaders.   In
         June 2016, the chief conscription  officer  for  the  armed  forces
         announced  their  Authorities  would  intensify  the   process   of
         identifying and arresting those who had attempted  to  avoid  their
         military service.   DFAT  understands  that  the  desire  to  evade
         military service is a key motivating factor for the immigration  of
         middleclass families with teenage sons".

21. However, at page 30 of his supplementary bundle, the appellant provided
    a more recent version of the DFAT report which is dated 14 April  2020.
    Paragraph 3.162 of the DFAT 2020 report states:

         "Exemptions could be purchased legally in the past, through payment
         of an absence fine.   This  practice  was  common  among  wealthier
         Iranians.  According to local sources, the quantum is dependent  on
         one's educational attainment (those with a  higher  education  were
         liable for higher fines than those without).  Discounts  reportedly
         applied to married men and those with children.   According  to  EA
         World View, absence fines in 2015 range from  roughly  USD6,500  to
         more than USD13,000.  The policy was  scrapped  in  2019,  and  the
         payment of an absence fine in exchange for military exemption is no
         longer an option."

22. Paragraph 3.163 of the April 2020 DFAT Report confirms the comments  of
    the earlier report on how draft evaders are liable for prosecution  and
    so on.  Paragraph 3.164 of the DFAT 2020 Report states that:

         "Obtaining an exemption from  military  service  is  possible,  but
         depends heavily  on  individual  and  socioeconomic  circumstances.
         Religious minorities face a moderate  risk  of  harassment  on  the
         grounds of their religious faith while undergoing military service.
          Those seeking to avoid military service are likely to face  arrest
         and restricted access to a wide range of social benefits and  civic
         rights, which may impact their ability to leave the country."

23. In my judgment, again in the context of low threshold for suspicion  of
    Kurds in general identified in HB, the avoidance  of  military  service
    over a period of 12 years, particularly where 10 of  those  years  were
    spent in the KRI, is a further  factor  creating  a  profile  for  this
    appellant showing a real risk of mistreatment on return. The respondent
    maintains that the case of HB does not specify that  avoiding  military
    service is a potential risk factor. That is because the Tribunal in  HB
    was not asked to consider the issue of avoidance of military service at
    all. As before, the additional risk factors  for  Kurds  identified  in
    paragraphs 6 to 9 of the head note to HB is not exhaustive. The country
    evidence here, in particular the CPIN and the DFAT 2020  report,  shows
    an increasingly hostile approach towards those who have  avoided  being
    called up for military service.

24. The respondent maintains that the appellant would not face mistreatment
    on return as he could seek an exemption from military service either by
    buying himself out or on the  basis  of  his  health.  As  before,  the
    country evidence indicates that it is no longer possible or,  at  best,
    that it is unlikely that someone with the appellant's profile could pay
    an absence fine in order to avoid the draft.  The country evidence also
    does not suggest  that  this  appellant's  level  of  ill-health  would
    necessarily lead to an exemption where  he  experiences  only  sporadic
    episodes of pain and fever requiring hospital treatment. In any  event,
    it is not the appellant's case that he would be able to enter Iran and,
    having done so, negotiate either a payment for exemption  or  obtain  a
    medical exemption. The country evidence shows  that  draft  evasion  is
    becoming a more serious matter for the  Iranian  authorities  and  that
    evasion for  as  little  as  1  to  2  years  may  result  in  criminal
    prosecution. This appellant avoided military service for over 10  years
    and, by now, at least 15 years. It is reasonable to  assume  that  this
    will be an issue of interest to the authorities on  return,  therefore.
    That has to be considered in the context of the  authorities  regarding
    Kurds with "even greater suspicion than hitherto" and  subjecting  them
    to "heightened scrutiny on return". There is the additional risk factor
    already identified of the appellant residing for 10 years in  Iraq.  It
    is my conclusion that the appellant's  profile  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,
    extended residence in Iran and draft evasion creates  a  real  risk  of
    serious mistreatment on return.

25. The respondent objected to weight being placed on the expert reports of
    Dr Laizer dated  4  July  2019  and  3  June  2020  which  support  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk as a  Kurd  who  had  avoided  military
    service and his  claim  on  the  basis  of  his  Facebook  entries  and
    demonstrations in the UK. The respondent maintained that  on  occasions
    Ms Laizer had been found by the Tribunal to  be  a  "partial"  witness,
    referring to SM and Others (Kurds - Protection - Relocation)  Iraq  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00111 at paragraphs 252 and 253.  It remains the case that
    Dr Laizer has been accepted as a reliable witness in a number of  other
    country guidance and other  Tribunal  cases,  for  example  SA  and  IA
    (Undocumented Kurds) Syria CG [2009] UKAIT 0006. In  the  reports  here
    she sets out her extensive qualifications, expertise and the wide range
    of forums in which she has  acted  as  an  expert  witness.   She  also
    confirms her understanding of her duty to the court, her  awareness  of
    the Ikarian Reefer tests.  She  remains  an  expert  witness  to  whose
    opinion at least some weight can given, therefore. The respondent  also
    maintained that much of what was set out in Dr  Laizer's  supplementary
    report was unsourced and maintained that little weight could attract to
    it where that was so.  Were Dr  Laizer's  report  the  main  source  of
    country evidence before me, that might be material issue. In the event,
    her comments on draft evasion and time spent in Iraq are in  line  with
    the material in the respondent's CPIN, the DFAT report or HB. It is  my
    conclusion, in any event, that even without the support of Dr  Laizer's
    reports, the country evidence and country guidance case of HB show that
    the appellant makes out his case on the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity,
    residence in Iraq and avoidance of military service.

26. The appellant also maintains that he will be at risk  because  of  some
    entries from 2015 onwards on his Facebook page which would be taken  as
    showing support for  Kurdish  opposition  to  the  Iranian  regime  and
    because of attending demonstrations in the UK. As before, the appellant
    has not been found to be credible concerning  his  original  claim  for
    protection and being at specific risk  from  the  authorities  and  the
    Younsi Mala tribe because of his  work  as  a  smuggler.  His  Facebook
    entries are in  a  different  name.  Also,  it  is  of  note  that  his
    attendance at demonstrations began only after his appeal was refused by
    the First-tier Tribunal. In that context,  it  is  my  conclusion  that
    these activities did not arise as  a  result  of  a  genuine  political
    motivation but, rather, were conducted in order to bolster  his  claim.
    There  is  evidence  that  the  Iranian  authorities  monitor  Facebook
    accounts and activities of the Iranian diaspora  but  this  appellant's
    profile in that regard on Facebook and at demonstrations  is  very  low
    and, as before, he is lacking  in  genuine  political  motivation.  The
    country evidence on surveillance by the authorities of Iranians  abroad
    does not show that the limited activity he has engaged in thus  far  in
    the UK would be already known to the authorities.  He can  be  expected
    to delete his Facebook entries before return given they are not genuine
    expressions of a political belief. This aspect of the appellant's claim
    is therefore not found to show a well-founded fear of  mistreatment  on
    return.

27. It remains my conclusion, however, this appellant has demonstrated that
    he faces a real risk of mistreatment when interviewed on return to Iran
    as a result of his profile as a Kurd who left illegally and  who  lived
    in Iraq and avoided military service for an extended  period  of  time.
    This is sufficient to activate the "hair trigger" adverse  reaction  of
    the Iranian state against him immediately upon arrival.   The  risk  of
    mistreatment  of  those  detained  for  further  questioning  in  those
    circumstances on is not in dispute. I therefore allow the appeal  under
    the Refugee Convention and the Article 3 of the ECHR.



Decision

The appeal is allowed on refugee and Article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed: S Pitt    Date: 10 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
