
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00050/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC (via Microsoft      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|teams)                                      |                               |
|On 2 August 2021                            |On 12 August 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MGA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Howorth ('the Judge') promulgated on 6  April  2020,
         in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
      2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  2  March  2003,
         whose immigration history is noted by the Judge.




Background

      3. The Judge had the benefit, in addition to the documentary evidence,
         to seeing and hearing the appellant give oral evidence. Having done
         so, findings of fact are set out from [18] of  the  decision  under
         challenge in which the Judge takes as the starting point an earlier
         decision  of  FTTJ  Gribble  in  accordance  with  the   Devaseelan
         principles.
      4. At [19] the Judge writes:

         19.  I do not find good reason to depart from the findings of  FTTJ
             Gribble.  The  Appellant's  representative   relies   on   the
             Appellant now being older and able to  give  better  evidence,
             however  FTTJ  Gribble  placed  appropriate  weight   on   the
             Appellant's ability to give evidence as a minor. I  find  that
             the passage  of  time  has  slightly  reduce  the  Appellant's
             ability to give evidence, not enhanced it.

      5. The Judge noted the appellant's representative relied upon a  claim
         the appellant was a member of a Particular Social Group (PSG) as  a
         child in Afghanistan perceived to be westernised and also a  member
         of a PSG defined as 'boys and men of fighting age at risk of forced
         recruitment' but did not find that the  appellant  had  established
         that any greater risk arose sufficient to  meet  the  threshold  of
         persecution. The Judge did not find sufficient evidence to show the
         appellant will be at risk of forced recruitment from any group [24]
         and discounted the argument of risk based upon the appellant's  age
         by reference the country guidance case  of  AS  (safety  of  Kabul)
         [2018] UKUT  118.
      6. The Judge did not accept the appellant had established  a  risk  in
         his home area and noted that his account of attempts to recruit him
         being made by the Taliban was found to lack credibility [26].
      7. The Judge did  not  accept  that  the  grounds  relied  on  by  the
         appellant amounted to Convention  reasons  and  did  not  find  any
         entitlement to international protection.
      8. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
         another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, the operative part of the
         grant being in the following terms:

         2.    The  appellant  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against   this
             determination on the grounds  that  the  judge  made  arguable
             errors of law. Firstly, in failing to  give  adequate  reasons
             for the findings made and  considering  the  further  evidence
             provided by the  appellant  in  support  of  his  appeal,  and
             secondly failing to take account of the Presidential  Guidance
             in relation to children.


         3.   It  is  alleged  that  at  paragraphs  17  to  25,  the  judge
             misdirected herself when she stated that in  submissions  made
             on behalf of the appellant it was said that he  did  not  know
             where he  came  from.  This  was  a  misunderstanding  of  the
             submissions made which were to the effect that  the  appellant
             had more information now, than which had not been  before  the
             first judge.


         4.   This is what is recorded by the judge  at  paragraph  17,  but
             subsequently at paragraph 25  the  judge  notes  that  in  the
             previous reasons for refusal letter dated 8  January  2016  in
             paragraph 4  it was noted  that  the  appellant  was  born  in
             Barake Barak district of Loghar Province in Afghanistan.  This
             was therefore a misunderstanding of the submission being  made
             and  therefore  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
             understanding of the submissions made. The judge misunderstood
             that what was being  claimed  was  that  there  was  now  more
             information about that region than that which had been  before
             the previous judge. Her failure to take account  of  this  new
             information is an arguable error of law.


         5.   The grounds  further  allege  that  at  paragraph  26  of  the
             judgement in finding that there was no particular social group
             that are being of an age which would mean  forced  recruitment
             or being considered westernised, the judge failed to take into
             account  evidence  produced  at  Annex  A8  to  A  11  of  the
             appellant's bundle or the and the decided authorities she  was
             referred to and noted at paragraph 20.


         6.   It is arguable that in adequately looking at the evidence that
             was before her and in her findings at paragraphs 23 and 24 the
             judge has failed to give adequate adequately reasons. This  is
             an arguable error of law.


         7.   The other examples given,  showing  that  the  judge  has  not
             reasoned decision adequately raise arguable errors of law.

      9. Mrs Aboni provided a copy of the Secretary of States Rule 24 Reply,
         the operative part of which reads:

         4.   The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal and invites the  Tribunal  to  remit  the
             appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for them  to  determine  the
             appeal de novo.

     10. In light of the Secretary of State's view,  the  grounds  on  which
         permission to appeal is sought, and  the  grant  of  permission  to
         appeal, I find it is appropriate in all the circumstances to make a
         finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in  law  in  a
         manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal, to set  that
         decision aside with there being no preserved findings, and to remit
         the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham  to  be
         heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Howorth.

Decision

     11. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
         appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than judge Howorth.

    Anonymity.

     12. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 5 August 2021

