
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00197/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2017                          |On 09 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                  Mr j k l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the
    original Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1996.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom as a dependant of a  student  (his  wife)  on  27
    August 2011.  He was served with form ISI51A on 28 February 2013 on the
    basis that he had overstayed his leave to remain.  He claimed asylum on
    the same day.  The respondent refused the appellant's  application  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection on 22 December 2016.  The  appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on  15  February  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Anstis dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal
    found that the appellant would not be at risk of persecution on  return
    to Sri Lanka.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision. On 7 June 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers
    refused permission to appeal.  The appellant  renewed  his  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on  1  August  2017,
    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred by  failing  to  make
    any clear credibility findings in relation to:

      a) the appellant's familiarity with the character and behaviour of the
         STF and its officers,

      b) information received from his friend and colleague S,

      c) encounters after he was suspended from duty in 2010 and

      d) evidence from his wife that threats are still  being  made  against
         him in Sri Lanka.

    It submitted that S's evidence in his witness statement  was  that  the
    appellant was at risk and that  there  were  plots  against  him.   The
    credibility of S's account is material both to the  overall  assessment
    of risk on return, the assessment  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  the
    nature of the three encounters he describes after he was suspended  and
    his wife's evidence that the threats continue.

 6. The appellant describes three encounters, 27  June  2010  when  he  was
    followed but managed to give his pursuers the slip, on 2 December  2010
    when two policemen in civilian clothes  came  to  his  family  home  in
    search of him, and on 22 June 2011 when a van  attempted  to  intercept
    him.  The judge makes no specific finding on the credibility  of  these
    encounters beyond the  remark  that  'whatever  these  incidents  might
    amount to they do not appear to be a serious and sustained  attempt  by
    his enemies to harm him'.  It is unclear  whether  the  judge  accepted
    that the events occurred or not. If they did  occur  it  was  incumbent
    upon the judge to assess this evidence and to do so  in  light  of  the
    rest of the evidence.  The judge failed in both these respects.

 7. The judge did not accurately summarise the  appellant's  evidence.   In
    his witness statement, at paragraph 22, the appellant said that  a  van
    attempted to intercept him  but  he  managed  to  get  away.   On  both
    occasions his pursuers were unable to confront him because  he  managed
    to give them the slip.  The appellant's use of the  word  intercept  in
    describing the second occasion taken with his comment "after that I got
    really scared and thought I  cannot  stay  in  Sri  Lanka  any  longer"
    demonstrates that he was not merely being followed.  In  light  of  the
    judge's failure to make any specific finding  on  this  it  is  unclear
    whether he was aware  that  the  appellant  was  describing  a  serious
    escalation in adverse attention.

 8. With regard to the appellant's  wife's  evidence  the  judge  makes  no
    specific finding.  He merely states that the appellant relies  in  part
    on his wife's statement in support of there being ongoing  threats  but
    his wife's statement contains the same suggestion that  he  was  wanted
    for passing on information to the LTTE.  Not only did the judge fail to
    make a finding on a  material  matter,  i.e.  the  credibility  of  her
    account of receiving threats, he also took  account  of  an  irrelevant
    matter when considering this  aspect  of  the  account.   Although  the
    appellant's wife appears to have been believed he was dismissed because
    his colleagues thought he had been passing information to the LTTE, she
    did not say that those responsible for the ongoing  threats  gave  this
    reason for their threats and therefore the  issue  of  whether  she  is
    right or wrong  about  her  husband's  colleagues'  suspicions  is  not
    relevant to the issue of whether she received threats  about  him  more
    recently.

 9. The appellant's case is that he  left  Sri  Lanka  because  there  were
    threats against  him  from  members  of  the  STF  who  saw  him  as  a
    troublemaker as pro LTTE because he refused to torture prisoners and so
    a potential threat because of the risk  that  he  could  give  evidence
    against them.  The issues are whether that account was credible in  the
    first place about which the judge made no clear credibility finding and
    whether if so it is reasonably likely that adverse  interest  will  re-
    materialise in light of his wife's evidence of continuing threats about
    which again the judge has made no credibility finding.

10. In oral submissions Mr Spurling submitted that the appellant is able to
    give evidence against the authorities  with  regard  to  torture.   The
    issue is whether the account of the threats was  credible.   The  judge
    has made no clear credibility findings on that issue.   The  judge  has
    not considered whether adverse interest will  resurface.   He  has  not
    made any  clear  findings  on  the  appellant's  wife's  evidence.   He
    submitted that there is a misapprehension of the evidence and  that  it
    has not been properly dealt with by the judge.  The  appellant  is  not
    just a troublemaker he was complaining about  senior  officers  and  he
    also refused to abuse prisoners.   This  has  led  to  a  suspicion  of
    potential links to the LTTE.  The charge sheet was a  cover  story  the
    real issue was whether the STF were threatening the appellant.

11.  At  paragraph  54  the  judge  mis-characterises  the  evidence.   The
    appellant said on the second occasion he was followed  by  a  van  that
    attempted to intercept him.  He submitted this  suggests  that  if  the
    appellant is right the authorities were doing more than just keeping an
    eye on him.  In his witness statement the appellant says, at  paragraph
    31, that he managed to lose his pursuers - they might have been willing
    to do more than just follow him had they managed to intercept him.  The
    appellant had started to sleep at his sister's house - why  else  would
    he be hiding if he did not think that he  was  in  danger?   The  judge
    accepts that people were following him and visiting his home  but  just
    notes these  aspects  of  the  evidence  and  then  at  the  end  seems
    effectively to throw his hands up and says  there  are  just  too  many
    problems.  This is inappropriate and the judge should have engaged  and
    made findings on the evidence.

12. With regard to the priest's evidence, at paragraph 30 and paragraph 34,
    there is no  indication  that  the  appellant  seemed  to  reject  that
    evidence such to lead to the definitive rejection set out by the  judge
    in paragraph 56.  He submitted this was entirely inadequately reasoned.
    S gave clear evidence of the nature of the threats before 2010.   There
    was strong evidence  that  there  were  real  risks  at  the  time  the
    appellant left Sri  Lanka.   He  submitted  that  if  S's  evidence  is
    credible, and the judge does not find that  it  is  not  credible,  the
    evidence the appellant's wife gives regarding the threats is consistent
    with S's evidence.

13. Mr Tufan submitted that the fundamental issue in this claim is that the
    appellant has not provided  credible  evidence.   The  judge  correctly
    interpreted the appellant's evidence.  At paragraph 34 he sets out what
    the appellant's wife says in her evidence and it is  correct  that  the
    judge arrived at the conclusion that the appellant did indeed deny that
    he had assisted the LTTE.  He submitted that there is no reason why the
    organisation would have interest in a  low  ranking  officer  who  last
    worked for them some years ago.  At paragraph 54 the  judge  refers  to
    the incidents and at paragraph 56 the judge says the appellant  himself
    rejected the supposed risk as set  out  in  his  wife's  evidence.   He
    submitted that the appellant does not come within the  risk  categories
    in the case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

14. In reply Mr Spurling submitted that at paragraph 34 the judge has  only
    set out the first half of the wife's sentence it  has  to  be  read  in
    light of the full sentence and there is no  discrepancy  when  read  in
    full.  The appellant's wife's view was that it was  the  incorrect  and
    wrong attitudes of the authority that led to  them  suspecting  him  of
    LTTE activity.  He submitted  that  the  appellant  is  still  at  risk
    because he still can give  evidence  about  the  abuses  that  the  STF
    committed.  Mr Spurling accepted that a risk arising from a  view  that
    the appellant was maybe connected with the LTTE has  now  fallen  away.
    The judge was required to make credibility findings and decide if  they
    are adverse are they warranted by the evidence.  In this case the judge
    has asked a number of questions and then  just  given  up.   The  judge
    records correctly his submission that the appellant does not fit within
    the categories of risk of GJ but that a country guidance case cannot be
    fully dispositive of all risks.  This appellant is at risk  from  rogue
    members of the STF because he can  give  evidence  about  human  rights
    abuses.  He referred to the case of NP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  829  at  paragraph  50,  Lord
    Justice Underhill if the evidence shows someone is at risk you need  to
    follow the evidence.  The appellant's case is that its members  of  the
    Special Task Force were threatening him not the Sri  Lankan  government
    pursuing action.

Discussion

15. Mr Spurling accepted that a risk arising from a view that the appellant
    was connected with the LTTE has now fallen away. The issue  is  whether
    or not the appellant is at risk of persecution on the basis that he may
    be able to give evidence against the authorities  with  regard  to  the
    torture of prisoners. The risk in this case is said to arise from rogue
    officers threatening the appellant rather than these individuals acting
    on behalf of the State. The judge proceeded on this  basis.  The  judge
    set out:

         "48. ... In principle I can accept Mr  Spurling's  suggestion  that
             objecting to torture may in some circles  be  seen  as  siding
             with the enemy, but, as I  suggested  to  the  appellant,  any
             suspicion that a police officer was in league  with  the  LTTE
             would have been a matter of the utmost seriousness.  If  there
             was any suspicion of this, I do  not  see  how  the  appellant
             could have remained working undisturbed  from  2005  to  2010,
             with his enemies getting their revenge in  2010.   If  it  had
             genuinely been thought that he was in league with the LTTE  he
             would have faced charges (or possibly abduction  and  torture)
             much earlier.  As it  is,  aside  from  the  incident  with  a
             weapons store in 2010 he was essentially  undisturbed  in  Sri
             Lanka through to 2010 and beyond.

         49.  It therefore appears to me that if the appellant is at risk in
             Sri Lanka, it can only be because he was a witness to  torture
             carried out by the STF - and that was how he put his  case  to
             me in the evidence.

16. The grounds of appeal and oral submissions challenge a lack of findings
    on, and a misinterpretation of, the evidence. I have broken  this  down
    into 4 parts - misinterpretation of the evidence, no  findings  on  the
    evidence  regarding  the  'encounters',  the  evidence  of  S  and  the
    appellant's wife's evidence.

17. It was accepted by the judge that the appellant was  a  police  officer
    and a member of STF. The judge found:

         50.  It is not in dispute that the appellant was a  police  officer
             and a member of the STF.  The refusal  letter  only  addresses
             the question of his dismissal in the context  of  his  alleged
             support for the LTTE.   I  am  prepared  to  accept  what  the
             appellant says about his dismissal from the police force.   He
             provided the letter of interdiction to the respondent with his
             original asylum claim, and  his  account  is  consistent  with
             this.   I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  was
             dismissed for the reasons which appear on his charge sheet and
             letter of interdiction.  However, the charge is one of neglect
             of duty (and related offences) not anything to  do  with  LTTE
             collaboration.  The documents would appear, on the face of it,
             to be a straightforward matter of police discipline.

18. That was the starting point. With regard to  misinterpretation  of  the
    evidence it is asserted that the judge did not accurately summarise the
    appellant's evidence - the appellant  said  that  a  van  attempted  to
    intercept him but he managed to get away which, taken with his  comment
    "after that I got really scared and thought I cannot stay in Sri  Lanka
    any longer", demonstrates that he was not merely  being  followed.  The
    judge at paragraph 54:

         The appellant says that his enemies continued to harass him through
         2010 and 2011 with three particular  incidents  described.   It  is
         notable that this comprises of two incidents being  followed  (with
         the people following him never confronting him) and one incident of
         two men calling at his home, then apparently leaving and not making
         any attempts to return.  Whatever these incidents might amount  to,
         they do not appear to be a sustained and  serious  attempt  by  his
         enemies to harm him.  Indeed, the appellant himself does  not  seem
         to have seen it that way (at least not until  the  final  incident)
         since he remained in Sri Lanka for around eight  months  after  his
         wife went to the  United  Kingdom,  when  he  would  have  had  the
         opportunity to try to join her at any time in this period.

19. The judge had set out at paragraph 26 the appellant's evidence that 'on
    22 June I was followed by a van, which attempted to intercept me, but I
    managed to get away...After that I got really  scared  and  thought,  I
    can't stay in Sri Lanka any longer, so I applied for a dependent's visa
    and came to the UK on 27 August 2011'. Clearly the judge was  aware  of
    the appellant's evidence and was summarising it at  paragraph  54.  The
    judge's summary at paragraph 54  is  not  a  misinterpretation  of  the
    evidence. The incidents were of being followed and  the  appellant  was
    not confronted, even if that was because he 'got away', as he  was  not
    pursued further e.g. they did not go to his home. I do not accept  that
    what has  been  described  by  the  appellant  amounts  to  a  'serious
    escalation in adverse  attention'.  However,  even  if  the  judge  had
    misinterpreted the evidence, taking the evidence  at  its  highest  the
    judge was entitled to conclude 'Whatever these incidents  might  amount
    to, they do not appear to be a sustained and  serious  attempt  by  his
    enemies to harm him'. I accept that the judge  has  not  made  specific
    findings as to whether he accepted these events occurred or not but  it
    is implicit from his overall  conclusion  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account at paragraph 59 (as set out below) that he did  not
    accept any of the appellant's account with regard to  being  threatened
    as credible.

20. With regard to the appellant's wife's evidence, whilst  I  accept  that
    the judge has not specifically said  whether  or  not  he  accepts  her
    evidence, it is implicit from the judge's summary and conclusions  that
    he rejects the evidence that there were  continuing  threats  over  the
    seven years following his dismissal in 2010. The judge set out:

         56.  The appellant relies in part on his wife's  witness  statement
             in support of there being  ongoing  threats,  but  his  wife's
             statement contains the same suggestion that he was wanted  for
             passing on information to the LTTE which he  himself  rejected
             in  his  evidence.   Supposedly  the  best  informed  of   the
             appellant's witnesses is his friend S, but he says nothing  of
             any threat beyond the appellant's dismissal in 2010.

21. The judge had set out in some detail, at paragraphs  21,  22,  27,  the
    appellant's account of his wife's and S's evidence  and  at  paragraphs
    34, and 37 a summary of their evidence. The judge  has  considered  the
    evidence in the round and the above paragraph   must  be  read  in  the
    context of the preceding paragraphs and the paragraphs that follow:

         51.  The appellant says that there is more to this than  meets  the
             eye.  He says  that  he  acquired  a  reputation  as  being  a
             troublemaker by speaking out in the STF camp  -  although  his
             public outspokenness was restricted to "abuse  of  power"  and
             not the mistreatment  of  prisoners.   Any  awareness  of  his
             objections  to  mistreatment  of  prisoners  would   be,   the
             appellant said, judged on the basis of  his  behaviour  rather
             than anything he said.  Indeed, while being willing  to  speak
             out on other matters he was careful not to do so  in  relation
             to the treatment of prisoners.

         52.  The appellant's case is that he was removed from interrogation
             duties in 2005 and told of threats to his life  in  2005/2006,
             yet he was apparently able to continue to  work  in  the  camp
             without difficulty until 2010 when his enemies  took  his  new
             responsibility for the weapons store as their  excuse  to  get
             him dismissed from the STF.

         53.  This seems unlikely.  It raises the question of why, if he was
             receiving death threats in 2005/2006, his enemies  would  wait
             until 2010 before seizing on a pretext to secure his dismissal
             from the STF.  That is a very long time for them to wait  when
             there would surely have been many other opportunities to cause
             him harm in the environment of the camp.

         54.  The appellant says that his enemies continued  to  harass  him
             through  2010  and  2011  with  three   particular   incidents
             described.  It is notable that this comprises of two incidents
             being  followed  (with  the   people   following   him   never
             confronting him) and one incident of two men  calling  at  his
             home, then apparently leaving and not making any  attempts  to
             return.  Whatever these incidents might amount to, they do not
             appear to be a sustained and serious attempt by his enemies to
             harm him.  Indeed, the appellant himself does not seem to have
             seen it that way (at least not until the final incident) since
             he remained in Sri Lanka for around  eight  months  after  his
             wife went to the United Kingdom, when he would  have  had  the
             opportunity to try to join her at any time in this period.

         55.  The appellant says that these threats continue  to  this  day,
             from former colleagues who are concerned that he may speak out
             about their human rights abuses.  However, he  did  not  speak
             out about them when he was in Sri Lanka, and continues not  to
             speak out about them while  in  the  relative  safety  of  the
             United Kingdom, where there are many organisations  who  would
             be interested in accounts of human rights abuses  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities (see GJ).

22. In the context of the above analysis of the  appellant's  evidence  and
    assessment of the credibility of the appellant's account the judge  set
    out the brief summary of S's and the appellant's wife's evidence in the
    paragraph I set out above. The judge does consider the  credibility  of
    S's account when assessing the appellant's evidence. S's  evidence  was
    that between 2005 and 2010 the appellant was under  threat.  The  judge
    found 'if he was to be persecuted by his enemies as a troublemaker  and
    potential informant of  human  rights  abuses  (as  he  describes)  his
    enemies would not have waited for  five  years  before  acting  against
    him'(paragraph 59). The appellant's evidence was  that  it  was  S  who
    informed him of the risk.  Clearly the judge has assessed S's  evidence
    and found  it  lacking  in  credibility  in  reaching  these  findings.
    Similarly  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  wife's   evidence   (that
    threatening phone calls were being  made)  the  judge  found  'it  very
    difficult to accept that they would try to make contact with  him  only
    three times in the year or so following his dismissal, then continue to
    seek him out for the next seven years,  having  known  he  was  in  the
    United Kingdom where he had a full opportunity  to  speak  of  what  he
    witnessed if he wanted to' (paragraph 59).



23. It was asserted that the judge erred at paragraph 56 in concluding 'his
    wife's statement contains the same suggestion that he  was  wanted  for
    passing on information to the LTTE which he  himself  rejected  in  his
    evidence'. This was not a factor that the judge appears to  have  taken
    into consideration when rejecting the evidence of continuing threats.

24. What the judge undertook was an overall assessment of  the  appellant's
    case (as set out in the preceding paragraphs above)  and  then  reached
    the following findings:

         57.  There are too many difficulties in the appellant's case for me
             to accept that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for a
             Convention reason on a return to Sri Lanka.

         58.  If he was suspected of being an LTTE  sympathiser,  earlier  a
             more substantial action would have been taken against him.

         59.  If he was to be persecuted by his enemies  as  a  troublemaker
             and  potential  informant  of  human  rights  abuses  (as   he
             describes) his enemies would not have waited  for  five  years
             before acting against him.  They would not then have left  him
             in  relative  peace  after  his  dismissal  (with  only  three
             ineffective attempts to make contact with  him).   I  find  it
             very difficult to accept that they would try to  make  contact
             with him only three times in the  year  or  so  following  his
             dismissal, then continue to seek him out for  the  next  seven
             years, having known he was in the United Kingdom where he  had
             a full opportunity to speak of what he witnessed if he  wanted
             to.

25. On the evidence in this case the above findings were open to the judge.



26. For the reasons set out above there were no material errors of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 6 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
