
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2016                            |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     RN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, RN, was born in 1983 and is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    3 March 2015 refusing him leave to  enter  and  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dearden)  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 3 September 2015  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside
    and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Dearden)
    to remake the decision.  I have reached that decision for the following
    reasons.

 3. The grounds criticise the judge's findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding an identification card [51].   I  am  not  persuaded
    that the grounds succeed in undermining the judge's  findings  in  this
    regard (that the card had been "easily  obtainable  and  issued  rather
    casually to a proxy of the appellant.") but, given that  I am  setting
    aside the decision as a whole, including the findings  of  fact,  these
    matters may be reconsidered by the new Tribunal.

 4. The major difficulty in the judge's decision appears in the findings he
    made in respect of paragraph 398 and 399 of HC 395  (as  amended),  and
    which are set out in particular at [59(14)].  The judge noted  that  he
    was "bound to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if  it
    does not the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by
    other factors where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described."  The judge observed that "if the appellant left
    [to live in Iraq] his wife and children would be very upset  but  their
    life would  continue,  especially  bearing  in  mind  the  age  of  the
    children."  Apparently, the judge concluded that it would be impossible
    to conclude that there were "very compelling circumstances" which would
    result in the appellant being deported.  Somewhat strangely, the  judge
    found that  it  was  clear  that  "the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  one  child   who   has   been
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  seven  years  but  two
    other children" who were too young to have crossed that threshold.   He
    went on to consider the question of "undue harshness"  for  the  oldest
    child if he were to be separated from the appellant by  reason  of  the
    deportation of his father.   The  judge  found  that,  "as  life  would
    continue for the eldest child it is impossible for me to conclude  that
    it would be unduly harsh for that child."

 5. The difficulty here is that the children are all British citizens.   In
    those circumstances, it was necessary for the  judge  to  consider  the
    effect of deportation upon all of the children, not  simply  the  child
    who had been living in the United Kingdom for more  than  seven  years.
    He has clearly failed to do so.  Equally problematic is  the  reasoning
    upon which the judge has concluded that  the  eldest  child  would  not
    suffer  unduly  harsh  consequences  by  reason  of   the   appellant's
    deportation.  His only observation is that "life  would  continue",  an
    observation which he had set out earlier in the paragraph  when  noting
    that the appellant's wife and children would be "very upset  but  their
    life would continue ...".  Nobody is suggesting that the lives  of  the
    children would not "continue" if the appellant were deported.  However,
    that is not the test which the judge needs to apply; one's  life  might
    "continue" but in circumstances of undue harshness; the mere fact  that
    the children would carry on living with their mother, attending school,
    etc. and continuing to live in that quotidian sense  fails  to  address
    the question of undue harshness.  That failure  of  reasoning,  coupled
    with the fact that the judge appears to have ignored the fact that  all
    the children were British citizens, has  led  the  judge  into  serious
    legal error.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  3
    September 2015 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.
     The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Dearden)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

