
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00949/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th October 2016                  |On 22nd November 2016                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                    [M Y]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akindale
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 28th November 1987 is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.
    The Appellant had come to the UK on a Tier 4 (General) Student visa  on
    10th January 2010 and finally claimed asylum on 12th August 2015.   The
    Respondent had refused  the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  and
    thereafter the Appellant had appealed that decision.   His  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble  sitting  at  Birmingham  on
    13th July 2016.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  all
    grounds.

 2. Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made and
    that application was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 16th
    August 2016.

 3. The application was renewed and permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 12th September 2016.  Whilst  stating
    there were limitations within the Grounds of Appeal it was said that it
    was arguable that the judge had erred in law in  consideration  of  the
    question of whether  the  Appellant  would  be  someone  whose  imputed
    political opinion may put him at risk.  However it was said  that  that
    issue  depended  on  upon  whether  the   credibility   findings   were
    sustainable.

 4. The matter comes before me in accordance with directions made that  the
    Upper Tribunal should firstly consider whether or not an error  of  law
    was made in this case.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Mr Akindale essentially submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  note
    that the Appellant may be perceived by the authorities in Sri Lanka  as
    an LTTE activist although the Appellant himself had  accepted  that  he
    had never been a member of the LTTE.  It  was  said  that  it  was  the
    potential perception the authorities would have of the  Appellant  that
    placed  him  at  risk.   It  was  further  said  that  the  credibility
    assessment was therefore wrong.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. Mr Walker indicated that the judge had given a clear and  reasoned  set
    of findings in respect of credibility and the Appellant could  not  fit
    within any of the risk categories outlined in the country guidance case
    of GJ.  It was further said the judge in any event had looked at up-to-
    date information and had addressed the issue of perception.

 7. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    the evidence and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  had  properly  identified  that  the
    application for permission to appeal amounted in reality  to  simply  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge and had  correctly  refused
    permission to appeal.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek had granted permission on the basis that
    it was arguable  the  judge  had  erred  in  consideration  of  imputed
    political  opinion  but  found  that  issue   depended   upon   whether
    credibility findings were sustainable.   However  nowhere  within  that
    permission  was  it  found  that  the  credibility  findings  were  not
    sustainable, neither had Judge Pedro before her made any such findings.
     The permission appears somewhat misconceived.

10. The judge in this case had set out the evidence and  submissions  fully
    and further had considered the documentary  evidence  including  recent
    country material.  He  had  proceeded  to  make  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to the evidence.  He had set out those findings in clear terms
    at paragraphs 32 to 38.  He had concluded the Appellant's account to be
    vague, lacking in credibility and inconsistent.   At  paragraph  33  he
    provided examples to back up that conclusion.  Those examples alone may
    well have been enough  to  allow  the  judge  to  conclude  a  lack  of
    credibility.  However, whilst in submissions Mr  Akindale  focussed  on
    those features, in reality the judge had provided  further  reasons  in
    support of his findings at paragraphs  34  to  38.   He  had  found  no
    medical evidence or supporting evidence from the Appellant's father and
    correctly dealt with the issue of supportive or corroborative evidence.
     He found photographs taken on a demonstration in 2014 in an attempt to
    bolster a claim, a finding that in the circumstances was entirely  open
    to him.  He further found the Appellant delayed making  any  claim  for
    asylum for five years.  He properly found that whilst not determinative
    that damaged his credibility.  It also had the  practical  result  that
    whatever the Appellant's position when he left Sri Lanka that  was  now
    some five years ago and the Appellant had not  adversely  come  to  the
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities in that intervening period.

11. Further the judge had noted that the Appellant conceded  he  had  never
    been a member of the LTTE and furthermore when he left Sri Lanka he was
    able to do so without difficulty on his own passport and with a student
    visa.

12. The totality of the judge's findings on fact therefore provided a clear
    and proper basis for his adverse credibility  findings  and  there  has
    never been any basis for claiming he either erred in law in that regard
    or the findings were unsustainable.

13. Having made those findings the judge considered  the  country  guidance
    case of GJ setting out the risk categories fully at paragraph  38.   He
    had further at paragraph 39 considered updated material from  May  2016
    that postdated GJ.  In respect of the central submission raised  by  Mr
    Akindale, that the judge had not considered the Sri Lankan  authorities
    would "perceive" the Appellant to be a threat, and Upper Tribunal Judge
    Kopieczek's finding that the Appellant's imputed political opinion  may
    arguably have not been considered, a proper  reading  of  paragraph  39
    reveals the judge stating:

         "I need to consider whether the Appellant, as someone  who  on  his
         own evidence is not and has never been involved with  the  LTTE  in
         Sri Lanka and on his own evidence has  attended  one  demonstration
         two years ago, would be perceived  to  be  involved  and  having  a
         significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatism."

14. The judge had therefore  considered  whether  the  Appellant  would  be
    perceived to be involved contrary to assertions made by Mr Akindale.

15. Further at paragraph 43 having considered with care the risk categories
    in GJ and making clear findings on  fact  and  credibility,  the  judge
    stated: "accordingly I find there is no risk that he would be  detained
    and would  suffer  persecution  for  his  imputed  political  opinion".
    Again, contrary to assertions made in  the  grant  of  permission,  the
    judge had specifically addressed this matter.

16. In summary the judge had found the Appellant on his own  admission  had
    never  been  a  member  of  the  LTTE.   He  had  found  the  Appellant
    inconsistent and lacking in credibility in all key parts of  his  case.
    There was clearly therefore no basis for any perception  the  Appellant
    would be a threat to the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  not  at
    risk on return.  It is difficult to see how the judge could  have  made
    matters clearer.

Notice of Decision

17. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

