
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00399/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on: |
|by Skype for Business                         |On 23 March 2020             |
|On 11 March 2021                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              J A (Bangladesh)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Jay Gajjar, Counsel instructed by Thamina
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of J A who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission from the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   3 January 2020 to refuse him refugee status under  the  1951  Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

Background

2. The appellant was born in a town  in  Sylhet  District  in  north-eastern
   Bangladesh, in 1990 and has a sister and a brother.  His father  died  in
   2009 and the appellant then lived with his mother, in a nearby village in
   Sylhet. He had a brother and a sister: his sister married and  now  lives
   in the United Kingdom.  His brother is said to have disappeared when  the
   appellant was 'younger' and gone to Dhaka.

3. The appellant was educated up to the end of high school and then  set  up
   his own grocery business, a substantial business with a manager and three
   other employees.  He also had a sand  and  stone  business,  and  another
   business in car sales.   The  appellant  was  clearly  a  successful  and
   prosperous businessman.

4. The appellant's problems are said to have begun with demands  from  money
   by a man called Jamal, who was a local leader of the Awami League,  which
   has been in power in Bangladesh since winning  an  election  in  December
   2008. Jamal was personally known to the appellant, but he also sent  four
   or five of his people to the shop, to threaten the appellant's employees.
    They took the money in the till and  told  the  employees  to  tell  the
   appellant to pay up.

5. The appellant called a meeting of the local  Shopkeepers'  Council,  some
   of whom suggested calling the police immediately, while  others  said  to
   wait and see.  More  threats  followed.    The  appellant  consulted  the
   Shopkeepers' Council again, and this time they suggested he went  to  the
   police.  Finally, about two months later,  Jamal's  people  beat  up  the
   appellant and took his watch, mobile phone and bracelet.  Bystanders took
   him to hospital.  The police said they could do nothing as Jamal  was  'a
   big politician' and they would lose their jobs if they  filed  a  report.
   There were a number of newspaper reports of the attack on the appellant.

6. In November 2016, the appellant's mother received a  further  threatening
   letter, saying that if the appellant did not  pay  up,  'she  knows  what
   would happen'.  The appellant consulted a  friend,  who  took  him  to  a
   suburb of Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, over 6 hours drive  from  his
   home in north-eastern Bangladesh.  The friend introduced the appellant to
   an agent.  Another friend in Sylhet put the appellant up while he waited:
   the agent offered an emergency passage to India  (just  over  the  border
   from the appellant's home in Sylhet) or to Japan, but the appellant  said
   that he preferred to travel to an European country.

7. The appellant arranged his finances, making sure his mother would be  all
   right.  He went back to the shop and the bank, and arranged to  sell  the
   shop and for the proceeds to go to his mother.  He  obtained  a  passport
   and left for Europe on 25 January 2017.

8. The appellant's journey took a circuitous route: his  first  flight  took
   him to Turkey via Dubai.  He then flew to  Libya,  and  took  a  boat  to
   Tunisia and then Malta. From Malta, he travelled on to  Italy,  where  he
   was fingerprinted.  He took a train from Italy  to  France,  arriving  on
   foot  on  1  March  2017  and  managing  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom,
   clandestinely in the back of a lorry, on 16 May 2017.

9. The appellant claimed asylum at the Asylum Screening Unit in  Croydon  on
   14 June 2017.   A Eurodac search turned up his having been  fingerprinted
   in Italy, and on 12 October 2017, Italy agreed to accept his return under
   the Dublin III Convention.  On 19 January  2018,  the  asylum  claim  was
   refused and certified on third country grounds.  The  appellant  was  not
   removed.

10. On 3 September 2019, further representations  were  received  and  on  3
   January 2020, the respondent issued a fresh refusal letter which gave the
   appellant an in-country right of appeal.

11. In the United Kingdom, he has been living with his married  sister.   He
   is still single, with no  children.   He  remains  in  contact  with  his
   mother, and with his best friend, and continues to fear Jamal and his men
   who he says will kill him on return.

12. The appellant told the respondent he had sever headaches, for  which  he
   took over the counter medication (paracetamol) and prescription  medicine
   (Gabapentin).  Both are available in Bangladesh.

13. The respondent considered that the core account lacked  credibility  and
   that there were no Article 8 ECHR or health reasons why leave  to  remain
   should be granted, within or outwith the Rules.

14. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

15. The First-tier Judge accepted a narrow Chiver core  of  credible  facts,
   but rejected the rest of the appellant's account.  He accepted  that  the
   appellant was a Bangladeshi man  from  north-eastern  Bangladesh  (Sylhet
   Province) and that he had been  attacked  in  October  2016.   The  judge
   rejected the appellant's account that he was attacked  by  a  government-
   based group  (in  context,  the  Awami  League).   The  First-tier  Judge
   considered that police protection would be sufficient from any continuing
   threat: the appellant in his interview said that the police  had  offered
   to help him.

16. The First-tier Judge also considered that the appellant had an  internal
   relocation option and that the risk, if it existed, was  limited  to  his
   former home area in north-eastern  Bangladesh.    He  gave  some  limited
   negative weight to the appellant's failure to claim asylum in Italy  when
   he was fingerprinted there, with reference to section 8 of the Asylum and
   Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and JT  (Cameroon)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878.

17. The First-tier Judge did  not  find  it  credible  that  there  was  any
   ongoing threat from Jamil or his men.   He  gave  little  weight  to  the
   appellant's private life,  which  has  all  accrued  while  he  was  here
   unlawfully.  There was no question of family life.

18. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal, and  the  appellant  appealed
   to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

19. Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley granted permission to appeal  because  she
   considered that the First-tier Judge's decision was  arguably  irrational
   in relation to the following findings of fact and credibility:

    a) At 35(ii),  that  the  appellant  was  not  attacked  for  political
       reasons, given the acceptance that the attack took  place,  and  the
       press articles produced, sourced to  'local  residents'  which  said
       that it was a political attack by the Awami League;

    b) That the appellant had probably fed the account of his attack to the
       press to support a future asylum claim, given that the press reports
       were all published in October 2016, around the date of  the  attack,
       but that the asylum claim was not made until June 2017;

    c)  In  rejecting  the  assertion  that  pressure  was  placed  on  the
       appellant's mother (see [167] and [169] in the asylum interview);

    d) That the First-tier Judge's decision was contrary to  the  evidence:
       at [145] and [149] of his asylum interview, the appellant said  that
       the  police  had  refused  to  help,  due   to   Jamal's   political
       affiliations, such that even though he trusted them, they could  not
       protect him;

    e) That internal relocation was an option, given that the Awami  League
       was a national government organisation, and  having  regard  to  the
       CPIN and other country of  origin  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal; and that

    f) The judge's delay of 5 months in rendering his decision tainted  his
       assessment of credibility and his assessment of the appellant's oral
       evidence, of which  there  was  little  mention  in  the  First-tier
       Judge's decision.

20. Judge Lindsley also gave triage directions.

Rule 24 Reply

21. The Secretary of State filed a Rule 24 Reply.   She argued that

    a) the grounds of appeal were no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
       findings of fact and credibility by the First-tier Tribunal;

    b) the assessment of the 'local residents' reliability in  relation  to
       the press reports was open to him, and that it  was  for  the  fact-
       finding judge to evaluate the evidence before it;

    c) it was relevant and important  to  consider  what  had  happened  in
       Bangladesh  after  the  appellant  left,  and  whether  he  had  any
       difficulty in leaving Bangladesh openly, as he  claimed  to  fear  a
       national party;

    d) overall, the judge's consideration of the  evidence  was  sufficient
       and disclosed no material error of law;

    e) that issues  relating  to  his  mother  were  irrelevant  since  the
       targeting was not accepted; and that

    f) delay alone did not render the decision unsafe  and  in  this  case,
       there was no reason to think that delay had negatively affected  the
       decision.

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. For the respondent, Ms Everett said that she had some sympathy with  the
   grounds.  The First-tier Judge arguably had not dealt adequately with the
   newspaper articles or  considered  internal  relocation  properly.    She
   maintained her position on delay, with reference  to  SS  (Sri  Lanka)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1391 at  [28]-
   [29].

24. At question 144-145 of the interview, the  police  had  said  that  they
   would 'see  what  they  could  do',  on  the  appellant's  account.   The
   appellant's evidence was that he had sold the business and  that  it  had
   now closed down.  It was difficult to see on that  basis  why  the  Awami
   League would now seek to extort money from the appellant if he returned.

25. For the appellant, Mr Gajjar said that the Upper  Tribunal  should  take
   an holistic view of the credibility findings: the  First-tier  Judge  had
   accepted that the attack occurred in 2016 as stated.   The  Awami  League
   were not likely to take kindly to the things that  had  been  said  about
   them.  Two of the newspapers in question were Sylheti, but the third  was
   a national newspaper.

26. The appellant's account that there were 'photographs [of him]  in  every
   district' (see question 166), taken with the contents  of  the  newspaper
   reports, indicated a wider risk than that found by the First-tier  Judge.
   It was not safe to rely on the existence or otherwise of the photographs:
   the First-tier Judge, and the Upper Tribunal, were not Bangladeshi.

27. Mr Gajjar asked me to allow the appeal.

Analysis

28. Delay.  This decision was sent to  the  parties  on  1  July  2020,  the
   hearing having taken place on 18 February  2020,  just  as  the  Covid-19
   pandemic broke out.  That is a long delay,  but  given  the  difficulties
   caused by the pandemic, that is not as surprising as it  might  otherwise
   have been.  The approach to delay was considered in principle in SS  (Sri
   Lanka) at [22]-[29], concluding at [28]-[29]:

         "28. There is no justification for applying a different or  special
         approach on appeals to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) from the approach which is generally applicable  in  cases
         of delay  in  giving  a  decision.  Nor  does  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's credibility was in issue justify applying  a  different
         test - though it may of course, depending on the circumstances,  be
         an important factor in applying the test. There is no  good  reason
         to remit a case for rehearing just because it turned on  assessment
         of the appellant's credibility if the appellate court  or  tribunal
         can be confident that the assessment has not been affected  by  the
         delay. In each case, the question that needs to be asked is whether
         the delay in preparation of the decision has caused the decision to
         be unsafe.

         29.  It can therefore be confirmed that the approach to  the  issue
         of delay adopted by the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  Arusha  and
         Demushi, applying the decision of this court in RK (Algeria), which
         requires a nexus to be shown between the delay and  the  safety  of
         the decision, is the correct approach. The only significance of the
         fact that delay between hearing and  decision  has  exceeded  three
         months is that on an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  this  period
         remains an appropriate marker of when delay is of such length  that
         it requires the FTT judge's findings of fact to be scrutinised with
         particular care to ensure that  the  delay  has  not  infected  the
         determination."

29. At [33]-[43] in  SS  (Sri  Lanka),  the  Court  expressly  rejected  the
   question that demeanour could be determinative, and gave guidance on  the
   proper approach at [42]-[43]:

         "42. ... the way in which the appellant answered questions did  not
         create a favourable impression. Quite  rightly,  however,  the  FTT
         judge did not attach weight to that  impression  in  assessing  the
         credibility of the appellant's account.  Instead,  he  focussed  on
         whether  the  facts  alleged  by  the  appellant  were   plausible,
         consistent with objectively verifiable information  and  consistent
         with what the appellant had said on other occasions (in particular,
         at his asylum interview  and  in  recounting  his  history  to  the
         medical experts). Applying those standards,  the  FTT  judge  found
         numerous significant inconsistencies and improbable features in the
         appellant's  account  which  he  set   out   in   detail   in   the
         determination. As the FTT judge explained, it was  "the  cumulative
         effect of the implausible and inconsistent evidence" given  by  the
         appellant  which  led  him  to  conclude  that  the  core  of   the
         appellant's account was not credible.

         43.  Accordingly, even if the appellant had through  his  demeanour
         when answering questions given the FTT judge the impression that he
         looked and sounded believable, the suggestion that  the  FTT  judge
         should have given significant weight to that impression, let  alone
         that he could properly have treated it as compensating for the many
         inconsistencies  and  improbabilities  in  the   content   of   the
         appellant's account, cannot be accepted."

30.  In this case, the file contains a  full  contemporaneous  note  of  the
   evidence given in the First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing  in  the  grounds  of
   appeal or in the argument today satisfies me that the delay  has  tainted
   the judge's reasoning on credibility. The First-tier Judge considered the
   evidence before him and its inconsistencies and improbabilities.  I  have
   reviewed (see below) the three press reports to which he is said to  have
   given insufficient attention.

31. Irrationality.  I begin by reminding myself of the narrow  circumstances
   in which it is appropriate to interfere with a finding of fact by a First-
   tier Judge who has heard the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria)
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at [41]
   in the judgment of Lord Justice Popplewell, with whom Lord Justice  Baker
   and Lord Justice Moylan agreed:

         "41. ...This appears to me to be a case in which the Upper Tribunal
         has interfered  merely  on  the  grounds  that  its  members  would
         themselves  have  reached   a   different   conclusion.   That   is
         impermissible. ... However it is no part of such function  to  seek
         to restrict the range of reasonable views which may be  reached  by
         FTT Judges in the value judgments applied  to  the  many  different
         private and family life circumstances which make almost  all  cases
         in this area different from each other. It is emphatically not part
         of their function to seek  conformity  by  substituting  their  own
         views as to what the outcome should be for those of first  instance
         judges hearing the evidence."

32. Unless there is a factual error sufficiently serious  to  amount  to  an
   error of law, the Upper  Tribunal  has  no  power  to  interfere  in  the
   findings of fact and credibility made by  the  First-tier  Judge:  see  R
   (Iran) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 at [90.2]-[90.4] in the judgment of  Lord  Justice  Brooke,  with
   whom Lord Justice Chadwick and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed:

         "...2.   A finding might only be set aside for error of law on  the
         grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in  the
         Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.
         3.   A decision should not be set aside for inadequacy  of  reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and  record  the  matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues,  in  such  a
         way that the IAT was unable  to  understand  why  he  reached  that
         decision.
         4.   A failure without good reason  to  apply  a  relevant  country
         guidance decision might constitute an error of law."

33. I  accept,  as  I  must,  that  the  appellant,  who  was  a  prosperous
   businessman in a town in Sylhet, did suffer a serious  attack  which  was
   reported in the newspapers.   There  are  photographs  showing  a  person
   bleeding heavily, and a head wound being stitched.

34. The first press report in the appellant's bundles is  dated  16  October
   2016, the day of the attack, and comes  from  Protom  Sokol,  a  national
   newspaper in Bangladesh.  It says this:

         "A businessman in [town and name] has been seriously injured  by  a
         terrorist attack.  ...Attackers seized [his] mobile phone and  cash
         money during the time of attack.

         The incident took place at half  past  eleven  in  the  morning  on
         Sunday 16th October near the [local] High School.  Local  residents
         informed  that  [the  appellant]  was  heading  to   his   business
         establishment by motorcycle.  When he arrived near [the school],  a
         group of 10/12 terrorists blocked the way of [the appellant].

         At that time, the terrorists demanded a large amount  of  extortion
         money from [the appellant].  When [he] refused to pay the extortion
         money, terrorists attacked him with hockey  sticks  and  home  made
         arms.

         Terrorists fled the scene, leaving him seriously  injured.   Later,
         local residents took [the injured  man]  to  [the  local  hospital]
         where he is undergoing medical treatment.  Police visited the scene
         after they were informed about the incident,  however,  nobody  was
         arrested in connection to this incident.

         It has been reported that a government party backed terrorist group
         often demanded extortion payment from [the appellant] and  used  to
         cause different sorts of intimidation and threat.

         It was known from a family  source  of  [the  appellant]  that  the
         reason for the attack was for not paying the extortion money.  When
         contacted, the officer in charge of [the local police station],  he
         accepted the authenticity of the incident and  informed  that  they
         were   going   to   take   action   against   the   attackers.    "
         [Emphasis added]

   I note that none of the press reports mentions the Awami  League.   Jamal
   is not mentioned.  I note also that, contrary to what the appellant  said
   in  his  asylum  interview,  in  the  press  reports  there  were   10-12
   assailants, not 5-6 as he later said.

35. The second press account, also dated 16 October 2016, is from Sylhet  er
   Songbad and is headed Sylhet News.  It is in identical  language.   There
   is also a report from Dainik Sylhet Dot  Com  dated  the  day  after  the
   attack, 17 October 2016, again in  near-identical  terms,  save  for  the
   addition of a final sentence:

         "Members  of  [the  appellant's]  family  informed  that  they  are
         suffering from insecurity for not having the criminals under police
         custody."

36. It is clear that the three newspaper accounts are from the same  source:
   that is not surprising.  It is possible that one  of  the  three  is  the
   source, and the other two simply picked up the  story,  as  happens  with
   press reports.  The description  of  the  attackers  as  'terrorists'  is
   difficult but perhaps that is an interpretation issue.

37. None of the reports names the Awami League as the  aggressors,  just  'a
   government party backed terrorist group' and all make it quite clear that
   the reason for the attack, and the attackers' interest in the  appellant,
   a prosperous local businessman, was said to be his refusal to pay a large
   sum of money demanded by way of  extortion,  rather  than  any  political
   issue. On his own  account,  the  appellant  is  apolitical  and  has  no
   involvement with Bangladeshi politics.

38. The First-tier Judge recorded  the  appellant's  evidence  at  [26]:  he
   agreed that he had never been involved in politics and had  no  political
   views, and had been attacked because the aggressors wanted money from his
   business.  He had spoken to journalists 'because they wanted to  ask  him
   questions'.  The appellant admitted having answered  questions  from  the
   journalists, so at least part of the press accounts comes from him.

39. At [36(ii)] the First-tier Judge found that the appellant's  explanation
   for the attack lacked credibility.  There had been  no  hounding  of  his
   mother after he left, and the  appellant  had  been  able  to  remain  in
   Bangladesh, elsewhere in Sylhet, for three months after the attack.   The
   judge continued:

         "36(ii)  ...If the group were  as  organised  and  informed  as  he
         claims, they would have been able to find him during this time,  or
         during his exit from Bangladesh.  If this was a government group, I
         find that they would not [have] allowed the appellant to leave,  or
         be at large for three months after the incident.  I find the  claim
         that each district has a photograph of the appellant is clearly not
         credible, as the appellant would have been detained, threatened  or
         attacked after the October [2016] attack, if  this  was  the  case.
         Furthermore, the lack of  effort  to  stop  him  to  leave  clearly
         contradicts the point put forward in submissions that  this  was  a
         police or government terrorist group. ...though the journalist  has
         reported this, it is  my  finding  that  they  have  received  this
         information from the appellant or another source which has not been
         verified. ... "

   The  judge  observed  that  the  country  evidence  'clearly  shows  that
   political violence is limited to high profile figures', referring to  the
   January 2018 CPIN Bangladesh - opposition to the government.

40. It was open to the First-tier Judge to find  that  'Jamal'  (whose  full
   name has never  been  given  in  these  proceedings,  nor  in  the  press
   accounts) did not have an extensive area  of  influence.   In  fact,  his
   reach did not extend even across Sylhet,  since  the  appellant  spent  a
   further three months there,  waiting  for  a  European  flight  route  as
   opposed to India or Japan.  If  the  Jamal  group  were  as  powerful  as
   claimed, and wanted to find him, they could easily  have  done  so.   The
   finding that the appellant had an internal relocation  option,  which  in
   fact he had exercised, was open to the judge.

41. On the basis of the oral and written evidence before him, including  the
   three press reports, it was unarguably open to the  First-tier  Judge  to
   conclude as he  did  that  the  attack  was  unconnected  either  to  the
   appellant's business or to any political  party.    Another  judge  might
   have reached another conclusion, but that is not a matter for  me  unless
   the finding made was clearly not open to this judge on the evidence.

42. Even had the judge taken the account at its highest, the most  that  the
   press reports supported was that this  attack  was  for  the  purpose  of
   extortion of a local businessman by a local  group  of  'terrorists'  and
   that he was beaten up when he refused to  pay.  The  appellant  sold  his
   shop: his mother received that money but has not been troubled for it  by
   the gang.  There is no money left for them to extort now,  even  if  they
   wished to do so, and if (which the judge did not  accept)  that  was  the
   purpose of the attack.

43. The appellant left Bangladesh openly on a  new  passport,  obtained  for
   the purpose, and was not stopped.  That seems to be most unlikely to have
   occurred if,  as  he  claimed  in  his  asylum  interview,  there  was  a
   photograph of him in 'every district' of Bangladesh.  The  appellant  has
   not explained what the relevance of such a photograph would be.  He  does
   not say that there is any criminal case against him.

44. The First-tier Judge was entitled to  conclude,  as  he  did,  that  the
   question of there  being  photographs  in  'all  the  districts'  was  an
   embellishment of the appellant's account and  lacked  credibility.   Even
   allowing for the differences between policing in Bangladesh and  policing
   in the United Kingdom, that conclusion by the judge is  neither  perverse
   nor Wednesbury unreasonable  and  I  have  no  power  or  inclination  to
   interfere with it.

45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld  and  I  dismiss  this
   appeal.

DECISION

46. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     15 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



