
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00995/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On December 11, 2017                   |On December 15, 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MS WEYNESHET GUBENA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant claimed  to  be  an  Eritrean  national.   The  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom on November 7, 2015 and  claimed  asylum  on
    November 8, 2015.  The  respondent  refused  her  protection  claim  on
    January 20, 2017 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  January  30,  2017  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Smith  MBE  TD
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on March 2, 2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on April 7, 2017  the  Judge  refused  her  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on April 21,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on only the first ground by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Holmes on August 16, 2017. Permission was refused on the other
    grounds  raised.  The  respondent  lodged  a  Rule  24  response  dated
    September 20, 2017 in which she argues there was no error in law.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Schwenk relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  as  drafted  by  "trial"
    counsel.  He  submitted  there  were  five  areas  that  he   submitted
    highlighted an error in law although he conceded some of those  grounds
    on their own may not be an error on their own. He submitted  the  Judge
    had erred as follows:

      a) He referred to her language as Aramaic when in fact it was Amharic.
         There were also other grammatical errors which made any reading  of
         the decision difficult and the appellant was entitled to understand
         why she lost her appeal.

      b) The Judge attached no weight to an expert report contained at pages
         59-59 of the appellant's bundle (non-objective bundle). The  expert
         stated that following a conversation with  the  appellant  she  was
         satisfied the appellant did speak Tigrinyan. Whilst he accepted the
         appellant had stated in her interview that she could not speak  the
         language she had stated in her statement that she could. The  Judge
         should have addressed this issue.

      c) The Amnesty International Report 2005 referred  to  there  being  a
         crackdown on Pentecostal churches in May 2002 and arrests were made
         in early 2003. However, the Judge overlooked the  fact  the  report
         referred to there being many more cases that had not been reported.
         The Judge also did not have regard to the fact  the  appellant  was
         only 13/14  years  of  age  when  these  events  happened  and  her
         recollection may not be perfect.

      d) The Judge wrongly attached weight to the fact she had not contacted
         the Red Cross and attached no weight to her age.

      e) The Judge wrongly applied  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrea-nationality-return)
         Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252 and placed too high  a  burden  on  the
         appellant by requiring her to produce evidence of her schooling  to
         support an application for Ethiopian nationality.

      f) The Judge attached no weight to the witness statement of Miss  Tiku
         and wrongly referred to her as an asylum-seeker rather  than  as  a
         person who had been recognised as an Eritrean refugee. His concerns
         about her evidence were never put to her.

      g) The Judge should not have made an adverse finding under  section  8
         of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act
         2004. Problems in Italy were well documented.

 7. Mr McVeety relied on the Rule 24 statement and  submitted  the  grounds
    had no merit and there were no  errors  in  law.  In  response  to  the
    grounds argued by Mr Schwenk he submitted:

      a) The mistake over Aramaic and Amharic was a typographical error  and
         the Judge was aware of the correct language as demonstrated in [12]
         and [18] of his decision.

      b) In her interview  she  stated  she  did  not  speak  Tigrinyan  but
         understood it. The fact she later altered her  evidence  and  there
         was a statement from a witness saying she  now  spoke  it  did  not
         detract from her original claim she did not speak the language.

      c) Mr Schwenk had mistakenly misrepresented the Amnesty  International
         Report. The report made it clear that churches had to be registered
         from May 2002 and it was only in early 2003 that arrests were made.
         The article referred to arrests between 2003 and 2005 and there was
         no objective evidence to support a  submission  that  arrests  took
         place in 2002. As for the Judge not having regard  to  her  age  Mr
         McVeety submitted it had never been the appellant's case  that  she
         had made a mistake about the date of her father's arrest.

      d) The Judge had correctly followed both ST and MW (Nationality; Art 4
         QD; duty to substantiate) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00453 (IAC).  MW  had
         extended the test in ST to place a requirement on an  appellant  to
         provide documentation which was  not  in  the  appellant's  present
         possession but was within her power to reasonably obtain.  She  had
         taken no steps to obtain school records and she had not even sent a
         letter to  the  Embassy,  as  required  in  ST,  setting  out  what
         information she had to enable the Ethiopian authorities to consider
         her application.

      e) With regard to the witness he submitted that there was no  material
         error in saying she was  an  asylum-seeker.  The  Judge  had  given
         reasons for rejecting her claim to have known her in Eritrea.

      f) As regards section 8 the Judge made it clear it  was  a  factor  to
         consider and the appellant had not claimed in France  anyway  which
         would also have engaged section 8.

 8. Mr McVeety invited me to reject all grounds of appeal

 9. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. The Judge heard in detail the appellant's appeal. A number  of  grounds
    were raised in the grounds of appeal.  Mr  Schwenk  acknowledged  there
    were some difficulties with aspects of the evidence  and  it  is  these
    difficulties that Mr McVeety  argued  undermined  her  credibility  and
    provided substance to the Judge's decision.

11. Turning to the specific grounds I have  considered  the  decision,  the
    grounds of appeal, objective evidence and the representation made to me
    and for the reasons hereinafter given I do not find an error in law:

      a) Grammatical errors are obviously best avoided  but  sometimes  they
         still occur. I am satisfied that the errors over the  language  and
         some other minor mistakes would not have led anyone to  be  in  any
         doubt about the Judge's findings. On their own such errors are  not
         material.

      b) In her asylum interview she made  it  clear  she  could  not  speak
         Tigrinyan but could understand it. She was interviewed  on  January
         16, 2017 and at Q34 she stated "when my  parents  spoke  to  me  in
         Tigrinya I used to respond in Amharic" and at  Q45  she  was  asked
         "Can you speak  Tigrinya"  and  she  replied  "I  cannot  speak,  I
         understand a little". In her statement of February 20, 2017 she did
         not say the answer recorded was wrong but simply claimed she  could
         speak some Tigrinya. The language expert evidence failed to address
         this issue and the Judge was entitled to ignore the  report  as  it
         clearly conflicted with the appellant's own evidence.  On  the  one
         hand she claimed she could not speak the language and on the  other
         she claimed she could speak some. In assessing her  credibility  on
         this issue the Judge's finding was clearly open to him.

      c) The Amnesty International Report made it clear that churches became
         illegal, unless registered, in May  2002.  Arrests  did  not  start
         until early 2003. The report that Mr Schwenk referred me to did not
         suggest that arrests began in 2002. The appellant had been specific
         about when her father was arrested and this was wholly inconsistent
         with the country evidence.  Although  she  was  a  minor  when  the
         incident occurred it had never been the appellant's case  that  the
         error was due to her age.  Even  the  grounds  of  appeal  did  not
         suggest this. Paragraph 3 of the grounds challenged the fairness of
         introducing the report but this was not an argument pursued  by  Mr
         Schwenk.

      d) The point raised about the failure to engage the Red Cross was  not
         material to the overall credibility.

      e) In submissions Mr Schwenk argued on ST because this  was  what  was
         contained in the grounds. The grounds failed to  engage  with  what
         the more recent decision of MW had to say.  The  Tribunal  made  it
         clear in MW that the appellant had a duty to submit  evidence  that
         was reasonably obtainable. The Judge's finding was in line with  MW
         and was open to him.

      f) The Judge's section 8 finding was a factor in the Judge's decision.
         He made it clear at [42] it was just one feature of the case and he
         must take care not too attach much weight to  any  adverse  finding
         under section 8.

12. In short, this was a  well  drafted  and  considered  decision  and  no
    material  error  either  individually   or   collectively,   has   been
    identified.

    DECISION

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     11.12.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     11.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





