
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00092/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                           |On 23 October 2018            |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                gauthier [l]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masih of Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 9 October 2017 in which he allowed the appeal of
    Mr [L] on protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated
    21 December 2016 refusing asylum in the UK.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Mr [L] is the respondent, for the sake of consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the Secretary of State as the Respondent and  Mr  [L]  as  the
    Appellant.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo born  on
    17 October 1961.  On 4 February 2016 an  application  was  made  for  a
    business visit visa which was granted effective from 19  February  2016
    until 19 August 2016.  On 3 March 2016 the Appellant arrived in the  UK
    and entered pursuant to his  visa.   On  24  June  2016  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum.  A screening interview was conducted on 1 July 2016 and
    a substantive asylum interview was conducted on 5 December  2016.   The
    Respondent refused the Appellant's application for asylum  for  reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL')  dated  21  December
    2016.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and Article 3 grounds for reasons set out in  his  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 9 October 2017.


6.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    which, in the first instance, was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer on 6 November 2017.  However, permission to appeal  was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? on  18  December  2017.   So  far  as  is
    material the grant of permission is in these terms:-

     "It is arguable for the reasons set out in the grounds that  the  Judge
         failed to consider all the evidence, failed to make findings on all
         material matters and did not  give  any  or  adequate  reasons  for
         accepting the expert report given that it was based on  an  opinion
         and conflicted with country guidance".


7.   The nature of the Appellant's claim for asylum changed over the  course
    of time.  Indeed, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  identified  what  he
    characterised as the "Initial fear of  persecution"  -  which  he  then
    addressed and rejected at paragraphs 6-15 of the Decision.


8.   The 'initial fear' was rooted in the Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    involved in events on 30 December 2013 culminating in his arrest during
    a  protest  march  against  President  Kabila  and  in  support  of  an
    opposition leader, Joseph Mukungbila.  The Appellant  claimed  to  have
    been  detained  and  tortured,  and  to  have  suffered   injuries   in
    consequence of  the  torture.   Although  these  events  occurred  some
    considerable time before his departure for the UK with  no  intervening
    adverse events, the Appellant made his claim  for  asylum  following  a
    further incident in the UK. He claimed to have stumbled across an anti-
    Kabila demonstration outside the DRC Embassy  in  London  on  18  March
    2016, and although not a participant (see interview at question 73) was
    concerned that he had been perceived to be a participant by  reason  of
    his inadvertent presence; he claimed that this had led to a reawakening
    of suspicion rooted in  the  earlier  events  of  December  2013.   The
    Appellant claimed that in consequence arrest  summonses,  or  warrants,
    had been issued and attempts made to execute them; he also claimed that
    in the course of an attempt to execute a  warrant  his  wife  had  been
    raped and later died of injuries sustained.


9.   As noted above, the First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the entirety  of
    this account over the course of paragraphs 6-15.  He referred to a lack
    of plausibility and mentioned "a few matters to give a flavour  of  the
    implausibility of the account" (paragraph 8).


10.  The Appellant's case, however, was reformulated during the  proceedings
    to include a claim that he was at risk because of a failure  to  return
    home as a member of a mission or delegation that had visited the UK  in
    an official capacity - he would thereby be perceived as  a  traitor  to
    the regime.


11.  It was the Appellant's claim that he had come to the United Kingdom  as
    a member of a mission.  He produced a document  in  this  regard  which
    appears in the Respondent's bundle at Annex C  -  and  accordingly  was
    before the Respondent's  decision  maker  (albeit  in  an  untranslated
    version).  A copy of this document and a  translation  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the Appellant's  bundle  (pages  45-  48).   The
    document is described as a 'Mission Order' and names four individuals -
    one of whom is the Appellant - who were said to be "designated to carry
    out an official mission in London".   The  purpose  of  the  visit  was
    stated in the Mission  Order  to  be  to  take  part  in  a  media  and
    entertainment forum in London running for ten days from 22 February  to
    8 March 2016, with a departure planned  for  22  February  2016  and  a
    return date of 8 March 2016.


12.  It is to be recalled that it was in fact not until 3  March  2016  that
    the Appellant arrived in the UK.


13.  The Mission Order appears on the letterhead of the People's  Party  for
    Reconstruction and Democracy which is the  ruling  party  of  President
    Kabila.  The Appellant's function is described as "Official, Provincial
    Communicator".


14.  The Appellant necessarily says that he did not return  with  the  other
    members of the mission but remained in the United  Kingdom:  he  claims
    that this was in effect, or would be perceived as, an act of disloyalty
    or treachery, such that he might be accused of treason.


15   The Appellant's representatives put this issue  to  an  expert  witness
    for consideration.  Mr Alex M Ntung was instructed to prepare a report,
    and, inter alia, the following question was raised for comment:

     "If it is accepted that  Mr  [L]  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         representative of his government department and subsequently failed
         to return to the DRC on the  appointed  date,  does  that  fact  in
         itself put him at risk on return?" (report at paragraph 19).


16.  The expert offered an opinion on this issue in these terms:

         "41. Firstly it  is  important  to  note  that  being  at  risk  of
             persecution does not necessarily require a potential victim to
             be a. issued a Summons b. of a  high  'political  profile'  c.
             affiliated directly to a political  party,  or  d.  associated
             with a previous anti-government  group.  On  the  contrary,  a
             perceived political activist with a  non-political  background
             can be persecuted for other reasons.


         42.  If it is accepted that Mr [L] was a government employee and  a
             representative to a conference in London, he could be  accused
             of treason or  anti-patriotic  behaviour  with  intentions  to
             betray government services: a former government  employee  who
             had left the country and  return  in  the  country  as  failed
             asylum seekers could be also viewed as traitor or  it  may  be
             assumed that they have 'damaged' the organisation's reputation
             during the process of an asylum claim.


         43.  A former government employee who has had access to  government
             information or involved in secret operations, he is likely  to
             be questioned and persecuted on return.  Depending on previous
             role with government departments, some former employees can be
             kidnapped  and  assassinated  or  arrested  in  secret  cells.
             Treatment of returnees' asylum seekers is still unknown  since
             UN troops or human rights organisations  have  not  access  to
             most of ANR secret detentions.


         44.  The question is not whether it is  believed  that  Mr  [L]  is
             likely to be persecuted as  former  government  employee,  but
             whether a. he was indeed a civil servant b. he is returned  as
             failed asylum seeker. If this is the case he would  be  viewed
             as a traitor on return to DRC.


         45.  DRC views the mere application for asylum in another state  as
             an act of treason: those who have left the country are  forced
             to admit they  have  committed  treason  by  falsely  claiming
             persecution in asylum applications or are accused of betraying
             their country through an 'act of  terrorism'.   Failed  asylum
             seekers are reported and handed over to the security  services
             in Ndjili International Airport in Kinshasa".


17.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave  consideration  to  the  expert
    evidence of Mr Ntung.  The Judge noted the credentials set out  in  the
    expert report and that such credentials were not challenged  (paragraph
    16).  The Judge concluded that he  was  satisfied  that  Mr  Ntung  was
    indeed an expert witness on the DRC.  At paragraph 17  the  Judge  sets
    out  something  of  the  considerations  within  the  report,  both  to
    summonses and arrest warrants produced by the Appellant, and  also  the
    significance of the Appellant's role as a government employee.


18.  The Judge also  directed  his  mind  to  the  case  of  BM  and  others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC).  The
    Judge observed that it was held therein:-

         "that a national of the  DRC  whose  attempts  to  acquire  refugee
         status in the United Kingdom have been unsuccessful is not, without
         more, exposed to a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or
         proscribed treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  in  the  event  of
         enforced return to DRC" (paragraph 18).


19.  However, the Judge went on to consider, with  reference  to  the  words
    "without more", whether there was something  more  to  the  Appellant's
    case. In this regard the  Judge  was  very  clearly  persuaded  by  the
    opinion expressed by Mr Ntung:

         "20. Mr Ntung opines that failed asylum seekers  will  be  reported
             and handed over  to  the  security  services  at  the  airport
             suggesting that  they  will  be  subject  to  article  3  ECHR
             mistreatment.


         21.  I  regard  being  accused  and  tried  for  treason  to  be  a
             disproportionate response to a failure to return as  a  member
             of a government department or having claimed asylum such as to
             amount to persecution on the basis of political opinion.   For
             this to be the case, the key question to answer is whether the
             Appellant was a government employee?"


20.  The Judge then considered  the  Appellant's  employment  situation  and
    concluded that the Appellant was indeed a government employee  who  had
    come to the UK "as part of a delegation to attend a conference led by a
    Chef de Mission" (paragraphs 22- 26).


21.  I am grateful to both representatives for  the  helpful  discussion  it
    was  possible  to  have  in  respect  of  the  issues  raised  by   the
    Respondent's grounds of challenge.  In  light  of  the  discussion  and
    consideration of aspects of the expert report, it seems to me that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into error in accepting uncritically the
    opinion evidence of Mr Ntung on the key point as regards  the  risk  on
    return to the Appellant as a failed asylum seeker who had been part  of
    a mission and as a government employee.


22.  In particular, in my judgement there is  a  difficulty  in  reconciling
    aspects of Mr Ntung's opinion with the country guidance in BM & others.


23.  Whilst I entirely accept that it  is  open  to  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to depart from country guidance, in order to do so there must  be
    cogent evidence justifying the departure.  I also note and  acknowledge
    that ultimately the Judge was focused on  matters  that  were  said  to
    distinguish the Appellant from a mere failed asylum  seeker.   However,
    it  seems  to  me  that  material  error  arises   in   the   following
    circumstances for the following reasons.


24.   Irrespective  of  the  supposed  distinction  on  the  facts  of   the
    Appellant's case, Mr Ntung expressed an opinion at paragraph 45 of  his
    report as to the generality of the situation  facing  returning  failed
    asylum seekers.  It is stated that the DRC "views the mere  application
    for asylum in another state as an act of treason", and it is also  said
    that "Failed asylum  seekers  are  reported  and  handed  over  to  the
    security services".  These assertions are contrary to the findings  and
    conclusions in BM & others: see paragraph 2 of the headnote,  and  more
    particularly the exploration of the supporting evidence leading to  the
    conclusion at paragraph 77 - especially paragraphs 37, 43, and 76.


25.  The essence of the findings in BM  &  others  is  that  the  making  of
    asylum claims abroad does not in and of  itself  lead  to  difficulties
    upon return.  Whilst there may be  some  stopping  at  the  airport  in
    relation to immigration concerns by the DGN (see for example  paragraph
    42 of BM), the Upper Tribunal rejected the notion that there was a risk
    of any further issues - far less that people were handed  over  to  the
    security services.  As such, paragraph 45 of the expert report  is  not
    reconcilable with the country guidance case.


26.  That does not mean to say that paragraph 45 is in error: but  in  order
    to justify departure from country guidance it would be  incumbent  upon
    the expert to fully explain the basis upon which  the  observations  at
    paragraph 45 are founded, and to provide source materials and  examples
    and so on to support the opinions expressed - or for such  evidence  to
    be otherwise available  to  the  Judge.   It  would  only  be  in  such
    circumstances that departure from country guidance would be  warranted.
    Necessarily the Judge would then need to set out in the  Decision  such
    evidence, the findings made, the reasons  for  the  findings,  and  the
    reasons why such findings justified departure from country guidance.


27.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph  20  records  what
    the expert has said  in  this  regard  entirely  uncritically,  and  in
    repeating that "failed asylum seekers will be reported and handed  over
    to the  security  services  at  the  airport"  fails  to  identify  the
    significant departure from the country guidance.


28.  This should have alerted the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  a  potential
    flaw in the opinion of Mr Ntung,  or  at  least  the  existence  of  an
    opinion that was at variance with country guidance without there having
    been anything advanced in the report to justify the departure from  the
    general country guidance.  This in turn should have led the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to view more critically other opinions in the  report  -
    including the opinion that was ultimately relied upon in  allowing  the
    appeal.


29.  Indeed, in my judgement, the opinion with  regard  to  the  risk  to  a
    government employee appears to be expressed on the basis of theoretical
    conjecture rather than by reference to any  source  materials  such  as
    examples  or  events  where  there  have  been  difficulties  for  such
    individuals.


30.  Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I  conclude  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was in error simply to accept the expert's  opinion
    without further reasoning and explanation.  This error is  key  to  the
    outcome and as such sufficiently material to justify setting aside  the
    Decision.


31.  Moreover, even if there was some justification  for  accepting  aspects
    of the opinion evidence, it is to be noted that  paragraph  43  of  the
    expert report incorporates a  contingent  condition  upon  which  there
    might be risk.  It is suggested that the employee would need  to  be  a
    person who "had access to government information or involved in  secret
    operations", and it is said that the risk is dependent on the "previous
    role with government departments".


32.  This in itself is perhaps at variance with the conclusion at  paragraph
    44 which seems to depart from the contingent approach at paragraph  43,
    to express matters in more general terms - it seems to indicate that it
    is simply enough to be a government employee such as a  civil  servant.
    This variance should  also  have  been  the  subject  of  some  further
    consideration by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


33.  More particularly though, given that  there  was  a  qualification,  or
    contingency, identified at  paragraph  43,  the  Judge  seems  to  have
    essayed nothing by way of  analysing  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed employment by the government as claimed as to whether  -  role,
    access to information and secrets.


34.  In my judgement this reveals a further issue of concern.  It is  to  be
    recalled  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rejected  significant
    aspects of the Appellant's narrative,  and  in  particular  essentially
    concluded that a substantial aspect of the claim as originally advanced
    was nothing more than a fabrication.  In the circumstances it seems  to
    me that the Judge should have been more critical in  his  consideration
    of the evidence relating to the Appellant's past employment.   Even  in
    this context it is to be noted that the Judge observed that there  were
    some concerns about the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  employment
    history (e.g. paragraphs 11 and 22), and the nature and conduct of  the
    'mission' (paragraph 24), but ultimately reached the conclusion that he
    was satisfied with regard to employment because of a visa  fee  waiver.
    At paragraph 25 the Judge notes that the Visa Application  Form  (which
    was produced before the First-tier Tribunal) indicated that  there  had
    indeed been a fee waiver, and that  according  to  the  form  such  fee
    waivers were  only  applicable  where  applicants  held  a  diplomatic,
    special service, or official passport.  The Judge in essence takes  the
    fact of entry clearance having been granted in circumstances of  a  fee
    waiver to reinforce the notion that the Appellant was indeed  a  member
    of an official mission, which in turn reinforced the  notion  that  his
    employment was as stated on the mission document.


35.  The concern that I have in this regard is that it is apparent from  the
    Visa Application Form that the Entry Clearance Officer was never at any
    point able adequately to verify the nature of  the  application.   That
    may be seen from the notes that appear in the various  entries  of  the
    chronology  of  the  application.   It  follows   that   although   the
    application may appear to have come from an official source, there  was
    no verification that the Appellant was genuinely a member of a mission,
    or indeed it seems to me any verification that the mission itself was a
    genuine enterprise.  In this regard it is to be recalled - as the Judge
    indeed observed - that  the  mission  arrived  almost  at  the  end  of
    conference it was to attend.  It is again also to be recalled that  the
    Appellant has given an inconsistent account of the nature  and  history
    of his employment.


36.   Against  this  background  I  accept  that  the  other  focus  of  the
    Respondent's challenge - that the Judge failed to  make  a  finding  in
    respect of the warrants produced by the Appellant - is germane.


37.  I entirely understand the Appellant's position that it  was  not  vital
    to make such a finding if there was a risk to the Appellant  by  reason
    of his treachery.  It is the Appellant's argument that irrespective  of
    whether those documents are genuine, if there is a risk  by  reason  of
    perceived treachery, then there is  a  risk,  and  that  is  enough  to
    establish an entitlement to protection.  On that basis, at  worst,  the
    documents might be an embellishment on an otherwise genuine claim.


38.  Whilst I understand the logic  of  that  approach,  a  finding  on  the
    documentation would be relevant to a consideration of other aspects  of
    the claim  -  including  whether  the  basis  of  the  entry  clearance
    application  was  genuine,  i.e.  based  on  the   Appellant's   actual
    employment as a government employee and his attachment to a mission  in
    consequence.  The Judge's  failure  to  make  findings  on  the  arrest
    warrant, it seems to me, impacts upon his evaluation of the  nature  of
    the visa application. In this  regard  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    validity of the 'mission' was raised in the RFRL at paragraphs  33  and
    34.


39.  Accordingly I find a further material error of law. Moreover I  do  not
    consider that any of the First-tier Tribunal's favourable findings  may
    be safely preserved. In consequence I consider  that  remaking  of  the
    decision in the appeal is appropriately to be done  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


40.  In this regard, if it is not already clear from what I have  said,  the
    Appellant is now on notice that there is  likely  to  be  an  issue  in
    respect of his employment insofar as he wishes to continue to rely upon
    the notion that being a government employee who fails to return to  the
    DRC, and/or being a government employee who travels abroad as part of a
    mission but fails to return to the DRC, are significant  risk  factors.
    Further bearing in mind the observations above about the cogency of the
    expert report, the Appellant may wish to consider filing further expert
    evidence.


41.  However, I make no specific directions in respect of evidence.   It  is
    incumbent upon the Appellant to obtain and file any other  evidence  he
    thinks appropriate and in that regard standard directions will suffice.
     I do note however that Ms Masih indicated that if expert evidence  was
    going to be filed there may be some delay in obtaining it, and in those
    circumstances I will direct that this appeal not be relisted before the
    First-tier Tribunal prior to 21 January 2019.   It  is  also  necessary
    that there be an interpreter in  Lingala  available  for  the  hearing.
    Otherwise, standard directions will suffice.


Notice of Decision

42.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


43.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain with
    all issues at large.


44.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

