
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00292/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 3 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                   mR M C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Montague
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Haria in which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Turkey, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum  and
    issue removal directions.

 3. The application under appeal  was  refused  on  5  December  2018.  The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The
    appeal came before Judge Haria on 19 March 2019 and was dismissed.  The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 23  April
    2019 in the following terms

         "The first ground, as it appears to be, is that  the  reasoning  of
         the judge was woeful and there was no attempt to explain such stark
         findings in light of that which was found to be  proven.  Secondly,
         ground 2 appears to be that the judge has categorically  failed  to
         engage with the relevant case law and has not, at  all,  considered
         any of the risk factors.

         Grounds one and two are clearly  arguable.  I  accept  that  it  is
         difficult  to  see  whether  findings  are  in  relation   to   the
         Appellant's claims. It is arguable that there is no  assessment  of
         the facts, no findings in terms of reasoning for  refusal  and  the
         paragraph 69 and 70 seemingly appear out of nowhere.

         Ground two is arguable as there is no mention at all by  the  judge
         as to the guideline authority nor any assessment at all of risk."

Background

 4. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Turkey born on 21 August 1992.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 21 June 2018 and he claimed asylum  on  the  same  day.  The
    basis of his claim was that he was of Kurdish ethnicity and  an  active
    member of the HDP and had been persecuted as a result. The  persecution
    included detention and torture and a demand to work  as  an  informant.
    Having been forced to sign a blank piece of  paper  and  then  released
    with a reporting condition the Appellant fled  the  country  and  fears
    persecution if returned.

 5. The Respondent refused the application accepting that the Appellant was
    a national  of  Turkey  but  not  accepting  that  he  was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, a member of the HDP or that he had been  detained  and  ill-
    treated. In dismissing his appeal, the Judge found that  the  Appellant
    was Kurdish as claimed, that he was a member of the HDP  and  also  the
    Kurdish People's Democratic Assembly in Britain. The Judge  also  found
    that it was conceivable that even as an ordinary member of the HDP  the
    Appellant was targeted and arrested at his home however the Judge found
    the Appellant's claim to have been required to report to the police  on
    release not to be credible and concluded (at  paragraph  70)  that  the
    core of the Appellant's account of persecution lacked credibility.

Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Ms Panagiotopoulou said  that  she  agreed  with  the
    points made in the grant of permission to appeal.  The  Judge  accepted
    certain aspects of the case, that  the  Appellant  was  Kurdish  and  a
    member of the HDP having seen photographs and a letter from the Kurdish
    People's Democratic Assembly. Paragraph 61  seems  to  infer  that  the
    Judge accepts the Appellant's account of his first two detentions.  The
    challenge to the Appellant's credibility seems to be on  the  basis  of
    the failure of the police to check the Appellant's home when he  failed
    to report and the failure of the police to take no further action after
    initially threatening his father.  This  does  not  seem  to  take  any
    account of the fact that the Appellant had  left  the  country.  Having
    found that the Appellant was a member of the HDP of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    who had been active in the United Kingdom the Judge takes no account of
    the authority of IK when considering risk on return  despite  the  fact
    that the Appellant falls into a number of risk categories.

 7. For the Respondent Mr Avery said that the way that the  Judge  has  set
    things out is confusing and the Judge does  not  appear  to  have  made
    specific findings on each aspect however paragraph 70  shows  that  the
    Judge considered the evidence in the round before finding that the core
    of the Appellant's account lacked credibility and at paragraph  62  and
    elsewhere the Judge refers to a lack of supporting evidence.  Mr  Avery
    accepted that paragraphs 69 and 70 were hard  to  understand  but  said
    that the Judge had analysed the matter in detail and had given reasons.



 8. I gave an oral decision allowing the appeal and remitting to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh with no findings preserved. My reasons
    are given below.

Decision

 9. The Appellant is a Turkish national. The basis of his claim  to  asylum
    is that he is of Kurdish ethnicity, he is a member of HDP in Turkey and
    the Kurdish People's Democratic Assembly in the  UK  and  he  has  been
    persecuted in  Turkey  having  been  arrested  and  detained  on  three
    occasions and having suffered torture in  detention.  The  only  factor
    accepted by the Respondent was his nationality.

10. Having heard oral evidence from the Appellant the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge accepts that the Appellant is Kurdish (paragraph 46) and  accepts
    that the Appellant has produced sufficient evidence to show that he  is
    a member of the HDP in Turkey and a  member  of  the  Kurdish  People's
    Democratic Assembly in the United Kingdom (paragraph 58). It is  in  my
    judgement significant that before reaching each  of  these  conclusions
    the  Judge  painstakingly  analyses  the  evidence   upon   which   her
    conclusions in these respects are based. Indeed before concluding  that
    the Appellant was a member of  the  HDP  the  Judge  goes  through  his
    answers to questions, photographs that  were  submitted  and  a  letter
    ostensibly from the HDP. In respect of this letter the judge has doubts
    about its authenticity because, although it bears a HDP  stamp,  it  is
    not written on HDP letterhead. As a  result,  the  Judge  gives  little
    weight to this letter (paragraph 55) but nevertheless goes on  to  find
    that the Appellant was  a  member  of  both  organisations.  These  are
    positive credibility findings made after weighing the evidence and ones
    that of themselves would cause the Appellant on return  to  potentially
    fall within some of the  risk  categories  identified  in  the  country
    guidance decision of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00312. I will return to this below.

11. Having made these findings, and in doing so having found  at  paragraph
    43 that the Appellant answered all questions put to him  and  that  his
    answers "were mostly consistent with the account he had  given  in  his
    screening and asylum interviews" the Judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's account of his arrests and detention. The Judge notes  that
    his account in this respect was compatible with the objective  evidence
    and finds that it is "conceivable that even as an  ordinary  member  of
    the HDP the Appellant was targeted and arrested at his home". The Judge
    does not appear to make any specific findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
    first two arrests but in respect of his third detention concludes  that
    his account of release on reporting conditions is not  credible.  There
    seem to be two reasons for this. Firstly that  the  police  would  have
    immediately checked the Appellant's home when he failed  to  report  on
    the first occasion and secondly that having  come  to  the  Appellant's
    house and threatened  his  father  on  one  occasion  they  would  have
    returned and done so again. I should add that there is also a reference
    (at paragraph 59) to the fact that the  Appellant's  brother's  witness
    statement did not provide support for his account of arrest.

12. Dealing simply with the Judge's credibility assessment so  far  as  the
    arrests and detentions are concerned the findings are in  my  judgement
    inadequate. Firstly, there is no specific finding either way so far  as
    the first two arrests are concerned.  Secondly  as  far  as  the  third
    arrest  is  concerned  the  findings  are  either  inadequate  or  even
    perverse. There is no reason why it should be expected that the  police
    would immediately check the Appellant's home if he  failed  to  report.
    This would probably  not  happen  in  this  country  and  there  is  no
    objective evidence to suggest that the police take such swift action in
    Turkey. As for the failure of the police to continue  their  harassment
    of his father the Judge does not appear to take into account  the  fact
    that the Appellant  had  left  the  country.  The  adverse  credibility
    finding in this respect is unsafe.

13. However, and in any event, even given the Judge's finding in respect of
    the third detention the conclusion then drawn at paragraph  70  "having
    considered the whole of the evidence in the round I find that the  core
    of the Appellant's account of persecution lacks credibility  and  is  a
    fabrication designed to enable the Appellant to gain access to the  UK"
    comes from nowhere. The Judge appears to have found the majority of the
    Appellant's account credible and then having had reservations about one
    aspect has apparently reversed the positive finding to make a wholesale
    negative finding. In my judgement this can only be perverse.

14. Finally returning to  risk  on  return  and  taking  into  account  the
    positive findings there is no examination of risk. It may be  that  the
    Judge felt that paragraph 70, as quoted  above,  overrode  the  earlier
    positive findings and that examination of risk on return was  therefore
    not necessary. Whether or not this is the case it is my judgement  that
    the failure to consider risk on return against the established  country
    guidance case amounted to an error of law in its own right

15. The contradictory nature of this decision leads me  to  the  conclusion
    that the only proper way to deal with matters is  to  start  again.  To
    cherry pick the positive findings given the  confusing  nature  of  the
    findings as a whole would  be  wrong.  In  such  circumstances  and  in
    accordance with the president's guidance this matter should be remitted
    to the First-tier tribunal for hearing de novo.



Summary of Decision

16. Appeal allowed.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the matter is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Signed                                  Date: 28 June 2019
[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
