
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00478/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th August 2019                      |On 10th September 2019             |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                    S I P
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Acharya, legal representative instructed by
                    Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran whose appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan in a  decision  promulgated  on  2nd  April
    2019.

 2. The judge set out the background to the Appellant's case in  paragraphs
    3 to 6 inclusive of her decision.  The judge noted that in  a  previous
    decision he had claimed to be involved with the KDPI  and  that  appeal
    had been heard by Judge Butler who had promulgated a decision  on  11th
    May 2017 and rejected the Appellant's claim saying that he did not find
    the Appellant's account to be credible and did not accept he  was  ever
    involved in smuggling either with his cousin or with the KDPI or both.

 3. The judge noted that on 1st August 2018 the Appellant  had  made  fresh
    submissions no longer seeking to rely on the matters  that  formed  the
    basis of his previous claim; rather his claim was that he had converted
    to Christianity.

 4. The judge went on to set  out  the  case  for  the  Appellant  and  the
    evidence given at the hearing  noting  the  submissions  made  by  both
    parties.

 5. In  paragraph  51  of  the  decision  the  judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account that he was a Christian convert.  He  set  out  his
    reasons for reaching that conclusion.  These findings are not a  matter
    of challenge and so I do not set them out here.  What  is  relevant  to
    say is that the judge found that the Appellant's  activities  had  been
    fairly low level but  he  accepted  that  he  had  posted  material  on
    Facebook (paragraph 69) and he noted the authorities do monitor  online
    activity and they may have become  aware  of  the  Facebook  post.   On
    balance he considered this a possibility which he  could  not  sensibly
    ignore and although the matter  was  unclear  he  considered  what  the
    position would be  if  those  activities  were  known  to  the  Iranian
    authorities.  He found that the opportunistic nature of the Appellant's
    activities would be apparent in Iran and it followed that the Appellant
    had no profile there and was not known as a  member  of  the  Christian
    community.  His activity in this country had been  recent  and  limited
    and amounted to no more than what was done to  bolster  a  claim.   The
    judge acknowledged  (paragraph  71(x))  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    demonstrate what could be described as a  "hair  trigger"  approach  to
    those suspected of or perceived to be  involved  in  Kurdish  political
    activities or support for Kurdish rights.  By "hair trigger"  it  means
    that the threshold for suspicion  was  low  and  the  reaction  of  the
    authorities was reasonably likely  to  be  extreme.   He  applied  that
    guidance to the facts of this  case  and  did  not  consider  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return by virtue of his Kurdish ethnicity
    or for any reason.  In paragraph 73 he said that having considered  all
    the matters he was not satisfied that the Appellant had discharged  the
    burden of proving he faced a substantial risk of serious  harm  in  his
    home country.

 6. Grounds of application were lodged and the Appellant relied upon  Upper
    Tribunal country guidance on the risks faced by Kurdish asylum  seekers
    returning to Iran in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  00430  (IAC).   It
    was said that the judge had failed to engage fully  with  the  guidance
    given therein and the correct approach would have been to consider  how
    the  religious  Facebook  posts  would  be  viewed   by   the   Iranian
    authorities.  Given the Appellant's status as a Kurdish refugee it  was
    said  that  the  judge  should  have  considered  whether  the  Iranian
    authorities would adopt a "hair trigger" approach to suspicion  of  the
    Appellant which would result in  him  being  further  interrogated  and
    persecuted for his Facebook postings. The  expert  evidence  quoted  at
    paragraph 114 of the decision stated that "It is part  of  the  routine
    process to look at an  internet  profile,  Facebook  and  emails  of  a
    returnee".

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Haria in a decision
    dated 26th April 2019 but was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith  in
    a decision  dated  17th  June  2019.   Judge  Smith  said  that  before
    addressing the two grounds it was important to appreciate two  matters.
    The first is that this is the  Appellant's  second  appeal,  the  first
    having been based on smuggling activities  on  behalf  of  KDPI.   That
    claim was found not credible.  The second is that  this  further  claim
    was based on the Appellant's conversion to Christianity which was  also
    found not to be credible.  There was no challenge to  the  findings  in
    that regard.  Instead the two grounds of challenge amalgamate the  risk
    to the Appellant  of  coming  under  heightened  scrutiny  due  to  his
    ethnicity which would then reveal his Facebook entries (if  those  were
    not already known) in challenging his claimed  Christian  belief.   For
    that reason, it was necessary to read together  the  paragraph  setting
    out the findings  based  on  the  authorities  becoming  aware  of  the
    Facebook posts and those related  to  the  risk  of  Kurds  on  return.
    Judge Smith considered  that  it  was  arguable  when  considering  the
    country guidance, the judge had failed to appreciate the fact that  the
    Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity following the guidance in  HB  would  put
    him at risk of heightened scrutiny and if that occurred the authorities
    were aware of the Facebook post that might lead to risk on return.

 8. Before me Mr Acharya relied on his grounds.  There  were  a  number  of
    Facebook posts including one which said, "Jesus  Christ  I  love  you";
    thus, the Appellant would come under heightened  scrutiny.   The  judge
    had not looked at the  position  properly.   Given  the  case  law  the
    decision of Judge O'Hagan should be set aside and I should  remake  the
    decision in favour of the  Appellant.   Paragraph  73  of  the  judge's
    decision did not say that the judge had considered the country guidance
    and that allied to the postings on Facebook this would demonstrate  the
    Appellant to be not at risk.

 9. For the Home Office it was said that the  judge  had  covered  all  the
    necessary  matters  including  the  issue  raised  by  the   Appellant.
    Paragraph 73 was important because the judge had set out the  posts  on
    Facebook and referred to HB and had then gone on to  say  that  he  had
    "considered all these matters."  I was asked to uphold the decision.

10. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

11. The Appellant's appeal is a  narrow  one.   As  Judge  Smith  said  his
    further claim based on his  apparent  conversion  to  Christianity  was
    found not to be credible and there was no challenge to the findings  in
    that regard.  The judge was clearly aware of recent case law and  noted
    at paragraph  71(x)  as  stated  above  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    demonstrated what could be described as a "hair  trigger"  approach  to
    those suspected or  perceived  to  be  involved  in  Kurdish  political
    activities or support for Kurdish rights.  It means that the  threshold
    for suspicion is low and the reaction of the authorities is  reasonably
    likely to be extreme.  The  judge  went  on  to  explain  in  the  next
    paragraph (paragraph 72) that he did not consider  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return by virtue of his Kurdish  ethnicity  or  for
    any other reason.  The judge went on in paragraph 73 to say that having
    considered all these matters he was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    had discharged the burden of proving that he faced a  substantial  risk
    of serious harm in his home country.  He had fabricated his claim.

12. The appeal point is that because the Appellant is of Kurdish origin and
    because there are clear  postings  on  Facebook  he  would  come  under
    heightened suspicion and this would lead inexorably to  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.

13. The judge, however, did set out very fully the reasons why he  was  not
    accepting that the Appellant had proved a real risk of  persecution  on
    return.  He acknowledged that the Appellant had made Facebook postings.
     The judge accepted that the authorities  might  become  aware  of  his
    Facebook posts and proceeded on the basis that the  position  would  be
    that those activities may well be known  to  the  Iranian  authorities.
    The judge accepted that the Appellant as a Kurd, would  be  scrutinised
    very  carefully  by  the  authorities.   He  concluded,  in   all   the
    circumstances, that he had not proved that he faced a substantial  risk
    of harm in his home country.

14. In my  view  there  is  nothing  perverse  or  irrational  about  these
    findings.  The judge was entitled to take the  view  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would interview the Appellant, would know of  his  Facebook
    settings and still conclude there was no real  risk  of  him  suffering
    serious harm at their hands -  no doubt because they are well  used  to
    dealing with failed asylum seekers who have made a false claim to  have
    converted to Christianity and who are  essentially  economic  migrants.
    The judge was not presented with any  compelling  evidence  before  him
    that someone of the Appellant's profile was likely to  be  targeted  by
    the authorities because of his Facebook postings.  The judge  carefully
    assessed all the evidence before him and was entitled to take the  view
    that in all the circumstances there was no real risk that  the  Iranian
    authorities would proceed to target him or harm him in any way.

15. It follows that there is therefore no error in law in his findings.  As
    such the decision must stand.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

I shall maintain the anonymity order.


Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3rd September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
