
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00018/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     d y
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Degirmenci, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     CONSENT ORDER PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The Appellant challenged the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Keeffe, promulgated on 25 June 2019, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 2. At the hearing, Mr Bramble accepted that, for reasons set  out  in  the
    grounds of appeal, the judge's decision contained  material  errors  of
    law, that it should be  set  aside,  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete  rehearing.  Ms
    Degirmenci was in agreement.

 3. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and  this  appeal  is
    remitted.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. This appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing, with  no  preserved
       findings of fact;

    2. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge O'Keeffe;

    3. A Turkish interpreter is required for the remitted hearing;

    4. There is a 4-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.



Directions to the parties

    1. The Appellant shall, no later than 15 October  2019,  file  with  the
       First-tier Tribunal and  serve  on  the  Respondent,  a  consolidated
       bundle containing all evidence  relied  upon  (including  any  expert
       report and materials relating to family members);

    2. The Appellant shall,  no  later  than  7  days  before  the  remitted
       hearing,  file  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  on   the
       Respondent a skeleton argument setting out the Appellant's  case  and
       providing references to the evidence relied upon in the  consolidated
       bundle;

    3. Any further evidence relied upon by the Respondent  shall,  no  later
       than 14 days before the remitted hearing.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
