
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00163/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a hearing at|Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Field House                               |On 12 November 2020              |
|On 3 November 2020                        |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                   M u M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  M  Paul  promulgated  on  26  February  2020,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 13
    November 2018 to refuse his application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He is of Tamil ethnicity  and
    a Muslim by faith.  He moved to Dubai in 2012 for work  and,  in  2017,
    received a phone call from his  mother  stating  that  the  police  had
    visited the house with an arrest warrant in his name.  His  father  had
    been arrested and would be released only if the  appellant  surrendered
    himself which he did, flying back to Sri Lanka on 2 October 2017;  and,
    after obtaining legal advice, went to  see  the  police  where  he  was
    arrested.  He was detained and questioned in respect of a friend, [SK],
    whom he had known since 2002 in Sri Lanka.  He was  tortured  and  held
    for a total of 45 days, being granted bail only when his paternal uncle
    paid a bribe.  He then left Sri Lanka with the assistance of an  agent,
    arriving on 25 December 2017.  He did not claim asylum  until  9  March
    2018.

 3. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account to  be  credible,
    noting a number of inconsistencies and the delay.

 4. On appeal, the judge heard evidence from the appellant.   He  also  had
    before him a bundle of evidence including, in an additional  bundle,  a
    psychiatric report prepared by Dr Dhumad in  which  the  doctor  opined
    that the appellant suffers from PTSD, has moderate depression  and  the
    most likely course of PTSD is the exposure to traumatic  experience  of
    torture in Sri Lanka.  The doctor was also of the opinion the appellant
    was fit to  attend  the  court  and  give  evidence  but  that  he  was
    depressed, hopeless and his concentration was poor.

 5. The judge considered that there were:

         "fundamental flaws" in the appellant's account  "due  to  internal
         inconsistencies, exacerbated by the fact he was unable  to  provide
         any sensible information as to why he had no supporting  documents.
         He claimed that there were criminal  procedure  documents;  letters
         and/or other  documents  prepared  by  his  lawyer  and  statements
         prepared by his parents.  However, none of those documents had been
         forwarded and no good reason in advance for that happening.  In  my
         view this was a clear example of the appellant seeking  to  bolster
         his account by providing a manifestly absurd explanation as to  the
         lack  of  corroborative  evidence.   In  my  view  the  appellant's
         evidence throughout suffers  from  the  fact  that  it  lacked  any
         sustained reliability."

         Dr Dhumad's report  has  nothing  because  it  is  based  on  self-
         reporting symptoms which must depend  on  the  credibility  of  the
         source.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds  that  Judge
    Paul had erred by: -

      i) Failing to explain or identify the internal inconsistencies  relied
         upon, the finding that the account  was  "barely  creditable"  were
         being unreasoned;

     ii) Failing to explain why the appellant's account was barely credible,
         speculating on the timing of the investigation into the appellant's
         close friend as being linked to the application for a British visa;

    iii) Failing to have regard to the medical evidence in  any  proper  way
         and failing to provide a rational reason for rejecting it.

 7.  On  18  May  2020,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale   granted
    permission on all grounds.

 8. On 20 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor issued directions  which
    provided that it was the Upper Tribunal's  preliminary  view  that  the
    issues of whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
    making of an error of law and if so, should  be  set  aside,  could  be
    determined without a hearing. The directions also provided a  timetable
    within which submissions and objections could be made.

 9. Neither party has responded to the directions.  The  Tribunal  has  the
    power to make the decision without a  hearing  under  Rule  34  of  the
    Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have regard to the views of
    the party.  Bearing in mind the  overriding  objective  in  Rule  2  to
    enable the Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly.   Neither
    party is subjected to doing so and I am  satisfied  in  the  particular
    circumstances the case should be correct to  make  a  decision  in  the
    absence of a hearing.

10. Although the paragraphs 20 to 23 are headed "conclusions and  reasons",
    no proper reasons are given as to why the judge considered  it  "barely
    credible"  that  the  authorities  have  waited  until  2017.   It   is
    inappropriate to make comments of the type made in the  final  sentence
    of paragraph  20.   The  judge  fails  to  explain  what  the  internal
    inconsistencies  he  identified  were  nor  does  he  explain  why  the
    explanation that documents had been provided was  "manifestly  absurd".
    Whilst it may be there are circumstances in which it is  reasonable  to
    expect corroborating documents, the judge fails to explain why that was
    so in this case nor does the judge explain why the appellant's evidence
    lacked "sustained reliability".

11. Further, the dismissal of Dr Dhumad's report is irrational.  The doctor
    had explained his reasoning with which the judge simply did not engage.

12. The reality is that the judge has provided no  proper  reasons  and  no
    reasons of substance for dismissing the appellant's account.

13. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  decision  did  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  There is simply no proper  explanation  for
    the conclusions let alone a structured approach  to  credibility  which
    the judge is bound to adopt.  Accordingly, the  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside.

14. Given that the entirety of the decision will have to be  remade,  I  am
    satisfied that it would be appropriate to remit  the  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  on  all  issues.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, none  of  the  findings  of  Judge  N  M  Paul  are
    preserved.

Notice of Decisions

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.  None of the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal are preserved.

2.   I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  decision
    on all issues by a judge other than Judge N M Paul.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 3 November 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

