
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00238/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2019                              |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a cross appeal. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and is
    born on 16 December 2001.  He claimed to have  left  Sri  Lanka  on  30
    December 2016 with the assistance of an agent.  He went  to  India  and
    travelled from there to Singapore, Malaysia and then France arriving in
    the United Kingdom on 31 March 2017.  He claimed asylum  shortly  after
    on 18 April 2017 on the basis  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution due to imputed political opinion.  He was at that time aged
    15.  His asylum application was refused in a decision dated 12 December
    2017 and the Appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson for  hearing  on  6  December
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  21  January  2019  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal, but allowed  his  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds, based on his private life.

 2. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in time, on the basis that the judge had materially erred  in
    allowing the appeal on the basis of the Appellant's  private  life,  in
    that he had failed to take into account the  statutory  provisions  set
    out in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and had further failed to give adequate reasons relating to the  second
    stage of the Razgar test nor to set out why the Appellant's case raised
    consequences of such gravity so as to engage Article 8.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Brien in a decision dated 8 February 2019 on the basis

         "3.  The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  health  grounds
             under Article 3 but allowed it under Article  8.   However  no
             reference was made by the judge to Part 5A of the 2002 Act and
             no mention of the weight to be attached to the public interest
             in removal save for a mere comment that the  judge  had  taken
             into account the Respondent's aim was to control  immigration.
             No finding was made as to why removal would be a  sufficiently
             grave interference to engage Article  8.   Indeed  it  is  not
             clear how the judge found the Appellant's case fell within the
             Article 8 paradigm having dismissed this under Article 3.  All
             the grounds are arguable."

 4. The  Appellant's  representatives  subsequently  sought  permission  to
    appeal, out of  time,  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    dismissing the Appellant's  asylum  appeal.   Three  grounds  were  put
    forward.  Firstly the judge had erroneously failed to  apply  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules, given his acceptance that the  Appellant
    had been detained prior to escaping from Sri  Lanka.   The  Appellant's
    claim was during that period of detention he had also been tortured and
    thus paragraph 339K was directly applicable.  This provides

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm or to direct threats of such persecution or such  harm
         will be regarded as a serious  indication  of  the  person's  well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious  harm
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

5.   Reliance was also placed on the recent judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in ME (Sri Lanka)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1486  at  [16]  where  the  court
    expressly found relating to that Appellant that given that his  arrests
    had taken place long after the cessation of the conflict in Sri  Lanka,
    that he was perceived at that time to have been of significant interest
    to the authorities  and  thus  fell  within  category  A  of  the  risk
    categories identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). The court held "it would have  needed
    an exceptionally strong case to persuade the FTT that he had now ceased
    to be at risk."

6.   The second ground of appeal asserted that the judge erroneously  failed
    to apply the relevant country guidance i.e. GJ (op cit) in relation  to
    the risk of detention on return in  light  of  the  Appellant's  family
    associations with the LTTE and the Respondent's current  CIG  regarding
    Tamil separatism dated June 2017 bearing in mind the Appellant had been
    smuggled out of Sri Lanka with the use of agents  having  escaped  from
    detention by payment of a bribe.

7.   The third ground of appeal asserted that the judge erred in failing  to
    consider the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  given  that  he  was
    involved with the TGTE and it was  known  that  the  Sri  Lankan  Tamil
    diaspora is heavily monitored as the government of Sri  Lanka  actively
    seek to identify those working against them.  It was  pointed  out  the
    TGTE remains a proscribed organisation and that there was a  real  risk
    the Appellant may have been identified by the GOSL due to his  diaspora
    activities.  Thus it was incumbent on the judge to give this aspect  of
    the Appellant's case anxious scrutiny.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum who  also
    extended time so as to admit the application in  time  on  21  February
    2019 finding "for the reasons succinctly and clearly  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's cross-appeal grounds at paragraphs 14 to 31 I find there is
    merit in the grounds of appeal."

    Hearing

9.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, in light  of  the  fact  that
    both parties raised arguable challenges to the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, I indicated my provisional view that that decision
    contained  material  errors  of  law  as  a  result  of  which  it  was
    unsustainable.  The parties essentially agreed with that position and I
    therefore decided to remake  the  decision  in  light  of  the  judge's
    findings of fact that had been not subject to challenge.   The  parties
    also agreed that, given the Appellant's age;  the  fact  he  remains  a
    minor and is vulnerable given it  was  accepted  he  was  a  victim  of
    torture, the appeal could be dealt with on  the  basis  of  submissions
    only.  I therefore set the matter  back  to  allow  Mr  Avery  time  to
    prepare his submissions.

10.  In his submissions, Mr Avery asserted that whether the Appellant is  at
    risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities  would  depend  on  their  likely
    perception of him. GJ (op cit) is quite clear that the approach of  the
    authorities is generally intelligence lead and  the  issue  is  whether
    somebody is trying to establish a threat to the integrity  of  the  Sri
    Lankan state. This Appellant had no direct involvement  with  the  LTTE
    but rather this was through his father.  Whilst it  is  not  surprising
    that the government of Sri Lanka took  an  interest  in  him  when  his
    father disappeared, it is the case that he has  now  been  out  of  the
    country for some  time  and  he  submitted  it  is  unlikely  that  the
    authorities would now be interested in pursuing him  as  his  knowledge
    would bevery limited.

11.  In respect  of  the  Appellant's  involvement  with  the  TGTE  in  the
    diaspora, Mr Avery submitted that the relevant question was whether the
    Appellant has a significant role in that organisation and  it  was  his
    position that the Appellant does not.   Therefore,  even  putting  both
    planks of the Appellant's claim considered together it  is  not  likely
    that the Appellant would be somebody on the radar of the government  of
    Sri Lanka as a person risking or threatening the integrity of  the  Sri
    Lankan state.  Applying GJ  appropriately,  he  submitted  that  it  is
    unlikely that the Sri Lankan authorities would be interested in him.

12.  In relation to Article 8, Mr Avery submitted that  this  did  not  take
    the Appellant much further  given  that  he  has  extant  leave  as  an
    unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  child.   In  relation  to  the  medical
    evidence Mr Avery's stated position was that there  was  no  reason  to
    believe that the Appellant would not have the support of his family  on
    removal and thus the medical experts have not properly  considered  the
    circumstances in which the Appellant would be living if returned to Sri
    Lanka.

13.  In her  submissions,  Ms  Benfield  sought  to  rely  on  her  skeleton
    argument dated  10  March  2019.   She  submitted  that,  applying  the
    requisite standard of proof, it was highly likely  that  the  Appellant
    does remain on the radar of the authorities and this is clear from  the
    fact that he was detained by them in 2016 and he would thus be at  risk
    of persecution on return in light of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in ME [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 at [16] per Lord Justice Lewison.

14.  She submitted it must be assumed that at the time he  was  detained  he
    did fall within the risk category set out in GJ particularly given  his
    father was involved in attempts to renew hostilities in Sri Lanka.   It
    is clear that the authorities thought the Appellant himself had a level
    of involvement in activity and a level of information about his  father
    and his father's colleagues, given that the Appellant's  father  was  a
    senior military commander of the LTTE who had joined in the  1990s  and
    had risen through the ranks.  He was one of many  people  who  did  not
    surrender to the authorities but was later identified at an  IDP  camp.
    Whilst the Appellant's father was rehabilitated when he was released in
    2011, reporting conditions were imposed and he is someone in  whom  the
    government of Sri Lanka have sufficient adverse  interest  to  maintain
    that level of monitoring.   Given  that  his  father  was  involved  in
    attempts to revive the LTTE and that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are
    particularly harsh in their treatment  of  suspected  insurgents  there
    would be a high level of interest in him as somebody who also  kept  in
    contact with other high-level members.

15.  However Ms Benfield submitted that the appellant would be at  risk  not
    just through association but as he sets out in his statement at page 15
    of the main bundle at [18] he was not only  asked  about  his  father's
    activities and training role but also as to who  he  had  met  and  the
    Appellant stated that his father had met individuals  involved  in  the
    resurgence of the LTTE and despite disallowing involvement himself,  he
    was asked about this.

16.  Ms Benfield  submitted  that  bearing  in  mind  that  the  Appellant's
    release was unofficial due to the payment of a bribe, the risk  to  him
    had not evaporated in his absence.  She further submitted that  it  was
    relevant that his mother is still under  reporting  conditions  and  is
    routinely questioned about the Appellant and his father.  She submitted
    when all these factors are considered it  is  clear  that  there  is  a
    serious risk the Appellant would be  persecuted  if  he  were  forcibly
    removed to Sri Lanka.  Ms Benfield further submitted that  as  part  of
    the emergency documentation process the Appellant would be required  to
    give family details and he would be asked about the LTTE sympathies  of
    any  family  members  and  his  own  diaspora  involvement,  thus   the
    government of Sri Lankan authorities would clearly be aware in  advance
    of the Appellant's particular circumstances and that  would  also  give
    rise to a risk of detention and being subjected to persecution or  ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

17.  Ms Benfield submitted that the Appellant does not claim to be  a  high-
    level member of the TGTE, but he does express views in accordance  with
    them.  If the Appellant were to disclose that he had been working  with
    the TGTE this would in itself give rise to a risk of detention and ill-
    treatment.  According to the statement from the  Appellant's  uncle  at
    [7] on page 3, his mother has been  shown  pictures  of  the  Appellant
    attending demonstrations in the UK by the Sri Lankan  authorities,  who
    are already therefore aware of  his  activities.   She  submitted  that
    applying the relevant standard of proof,  the  Appellant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.  Ms Benfield also sought to  rely  on  the
    Appellant's illegal exit, which according to GJ  would  result  in  his
    detention on return and conditions in detention do amount to  a  breach
    of Article 3.

18.  In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim,  Ms  Benfield
    submitted that the Appellant's mother lives in Jaffna.  What is said in
    GJ is that there is an absence of medical treatment in Jaffna and  that
    this would adversely impact on the Appellant if returned,  due  to  his
    mental health problems.  She submitted it would be disproportionate  in
    any event to return the Appellant as a young person under  18  who  has
    been subjected to torture and rape in detention and still suffers  from
    mental health problems and that this would amount to  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration either under paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Rules or Article 8 outside the Rules.

19.  In respect of the public interest considerations  pursuant  to  Section
    117B of the NIAA 2002, the Appellant has been attending school  in  the
    UK and speaks English, albeit he gave his evidence in Tamil before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He is not in receipt of public  funds.   He  paid
    privately for his asylum claim via his extended family and he continues
    to attend education, currently an A level course due to be completed in
    the summer of 2019.  Ms Benfield submitted  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above that the Appellant's appeal should be allowed.

    Findings and reasons

20.  I deal first with the errors of law, permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal having been granted to both the Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Appellant. The Secretary of State's challenge was to  the  decision  by
    the First tier Tribunal Judge to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds,
    in that he had failed to take into account the statutory provisions set
    out in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and had further failed to give adequate reasons relating to the  second
    stage of the Razgar test nor to set out why the Appellant's case raised
    consequences of such gravity so as to engage Article 8.

21.  The Judge  considered  Article  8  succinctly  at  [48]-[51]  and  made
    reference to the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [50]. I  find
    that it is clear from [49] that the Judge considered that Article 8 was
    engaged due to the Appellant's mental health, considered as part of his
    private life. However, I find that in failing to set out and apply  the
    public interest considerations at section 117B of the  NIAA  2002  that
    the Judge materially erred in his assessment of the proportionality  of
    removal.

22.  In respect of the Appellant's challenge  to  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds, this is based
    on three grounds:

    (i)  the judge had erroneously failed to apply paragraph  339K  of  the
         Immigration Rules, given his acceptance that the Appellant had been
         detained prior to escaping from Sri Lanka;

    (ii) the  judge  erroneously  failed  to  apply  the  relevant  country
         guidance i.e. GJ (op cit) in relation to the risk of  detention  on
         return;

    (iii)    the judge erred in failing to  consider  the  Appellant's  sur
         place activities given that he was involved with the TGTE.

23.  I find that the first ground, which  is  fully  particularised  in  the
    grounds of appeal, is made out in light of the failure by the Judge  to
    apply paragraph 339K of the Rules, which when read  alongside  ME  (Sri
    Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 at [16] makes clear that  it  is  at  least
    arguable that the Appellant falls within the risk categories set out in
    GJ (op cit). It follows that the second ground of appeal is  also  made
    out, particularly when  considered  alongside  the  Appellant's  family
    connections, escape from detention with a bribe and illegal  exit  from
    Sri Lanka.

24.  In respect of the third  ground  of  appeal,  this  is  dealt  with  at
    [44](a) where the Judge held: "His involvement with diaspora activities
    is insignificant and he cannot be said to be (sic)  key  individual  in
    diaspora activities. He is still a child and his  main  involvement  in
    diaspora activities is playing sport, or helping out with minor  tasks.
    He is not an organiser or an  activist."  Ms  Benfield  submits  and  I
    accept that the Judge's consideration is somewhat simplistic  and  that
    he failed in so finding to take account of material considerations,  in
    particular the fact that the Appellant's diaspora  activities  are  for
    the TGTE, an organisation which is proscribed in  Sri  Lanka  and  also
    that  the  diaspora  is  heavily  monitored  because  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities actively seek to identify those  working  against  the  Sri
    Lankan government. Ms  Benfield  further  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    analysis was not grounded in the  country  guidance:  GJ  at  [336]  or
    relevant country material cf. the Respondent's policy guidance at  6.2.
    This is correct.

25.  I set aside the decision of First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidson  and
    proceed to re-make the decision.

26.  I turn first to the judge's preserved findings of fact and I set  these
    out as follows.

      1) The Appellant's father was involved with the LTTE  and  his  family
         were of interest to the authorities at that time (41).

      2) The Appellant had shown sufficient evidence of detention  prior  to
         his escape from Sri Lanka [41];

      3) There  are  no  significant  inconsistencies  and  his  account  is
         generally consistent with the objective evidence (41).

    (4)  The Appellant failed to show sufficient evidence that there is  an
         arrest warrant outstanding for him (42).

    (5)  The Appellant has mental health conditions based on the  diagnosis
         of medical experts.  The risk of suicide is currently moderate  but
         likely to increase if  removed  to  Sri  Lanka  and  the  Appellant
         suffers from PTSD [43].

27.  I have had regard to the substantial bundle of  evidence  submitted  by
    the Appellant's solicitors; to the skeleton  argument  by  Ms  Benfield
    dated 10 March 2019 and to the submissions of both parties.  I  proceed
    to determine the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellant  is  from  a
    family considered to be of interest to  the  authorities,  due  to  his
    father's senior role in the LTTE and in attempting to re-build the LTTE
    from 2015, as a result of which he was arrested in April 2016  and  has
    been missing since that time. The Appellant claims  and  the  Judge  at
    [41] accepted that he was arrested on 11 December 2016 and detained for
    2 weeks during which he was interrogate, beaten and sexually assaulted.
    His mother had arranged an agent to pay a bribe to  have  him  released
    from detention and thereafter to  flee  Sri  Lanka,  which  he  did  so
    illegally. Since his arrival in the UK,  he  has  been  diagnosed  with
    PTSD, for which he is receiving treatment and he has,  along  with  his
    uncle, attended weekly meetings and events in the UK, organised by  the
    TGTE. The Appellant is now 17 years of age and continues to  live  with
    his maternal aunt and uncle.

28.  I have concluded that the Appellant has  demonstrated  a  well  founded
    fear of persecution if he were to return to Sri Lanka. My  reasons  for
    so finding are as follows:

28.1.    He has been subjected to past persecution in Sri Lanka  during  his
    detention in December 2016. Applying paragraph 339K of  the  Rules  and
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in ME (Sri Lanka) [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    1486 at [16] I find that, given this detention was after the  cessation
    of the conflict in Sri Lanka, the Appellant would  at  that  time  have
    been perceived as being of significant interest to the authorities,  as
    his father's son and he thus falls within the risk category set out  at
    356 7(a) of GJ viz individuals who are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because  they
    are, or are perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora."  The  Court  of  Appeal
    considered that in  such  circumstances  "(I)t  would  have  needed  an
    exceptionally strong case to persuade the FTT that he had now ceased to
    be at risk."

28.2.    The Respondent's case is that, given that the  Appellant  was  only
    of interest because of his father and due to his absence from Sri Lanka
    and the  fact  that  the  approach  of  the  authorities  is  generally
    intelligence lead in respect of whether somebody is trying to establish
    a threat to the integrity of the Sri Lankan state, the Appellant  would
    no longer be of interest. I find that these  submissions,  though  well
    made by Mr Avery, are unsustainable in light of the judgment in ME  and
    do not constitute a sufficiently strong case to show that the Appellant
    would no longer be at risk on return.

28.3.    The Appellant has been involved with the TGTE in the  UK  since  23
    April 2017, when he attended a meeting in Wembley and became a  member.
    He has undertaken a number of activities, including a demonstration  at
    Downing St on 23 July 2017; helping at the annual sports meet in Morden
    on 30 July 2017; a demonstration at Downing St on 22 October  2017  and
    participating in an anniversary remembrance day in Surrey on 21 January
    2018. There are photographs of the  Appellant  participating  in  these
    activities at 32-59 of the supplementary bundle. He has  also  provided
    letters attesting as to his involvement and an identity card.

28.4.    Whilst there is no updating statement from the Appellant as to  his
    activities over the last year, I am prepared  to  accept  that  he  has
    continued with these activities given that this  was  his  unchallenged
    evidence before the First tier Tribunal on 6 December 2018 and the most
    recent letter from the TGTE attesting to his  activities  is  dated  29
    November 2018 [pages 30-31 of the  supplementary  bundle  refers].  The
    TGTE are a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka (although  not  in  the
    UK). The Appellant claimed  in  his  evidence  before  the  First  tier
    Tribunal that the Sri Lankan authorities have told his mother that they
    are aware that the attends meetings and events organised by the TGTE in
    London [6](h). The Judge made no finding on this evidence.  However,  I
    find it to be consistent with the background  evidence  e.g.  the  Home
    Office's CIG in respect of Tamil Separatism dated June 2017 and  GJ  at
    [324].

28.5. I find that there  is  a  serious  possibility  that  the  Appellant's
    activities for the TGTE have come to the attention of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and consequently, there is a real risk he would be detained
    on return to Sri Lanka on account of his diaspora activities: 356(7)(a)
    of GJ refers.

29.  I now turn to consider Article 8 of ECHR, no challenge to  the  Judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal in respect  of  Article  3  having  been
    brought. The Appellant does not qualify for leave to remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules; whilst the risk of arrest, detention and  consequent
    treatment  amounting  to  persecution  might  well   amount   to   very
    significant obstacles to his integration, the Appellant  is  under  the
    age of 18 and paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules makes clear that  it
    is only applicable to  those  aged  18  or  over.  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant has formed a family life with his maternal  aunt  and  uncle,
    with whom he lives, albeit is of only 2 years duration, because  it  is
    clear from the statements and Dr Dhumad's report that the Appellant  is
    dependent particularly on his uncle, thus I find that this  constitutes
    family life over and above normal emotional ties  cf.  Kugathas  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31, bearing in mind that the Appellant is a minor. Ms Benfield
    put the Appellant's case primarily on the basis that his removal  would
    be contrary to his physical and moral integrity, due to the  fact  that
    he has been diagnosed with PTSD after his experience of  detention  and
    ill-treatment in Sri Lanka.

30.  I find  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  remains  a  minor  is  a
    sufficiently compelling or exceptional reason to consider  his  private
    life outside the Rules. Applying the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL
    27, I find that the Appellant has established a private and family life
    in the UK and that his removal would constitute  an  interference  with
    that private life, but  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The
    question I am required to answer is whether it would be  proportionate.
    In making  that  decision,  I  take  account  of  the  public  interest
    considerations set out at section 117B of the  NIAA  2002.  Ms  Benwell
    submits and I accept that the Appellant speaks English: he is currently
    studying for A levels in the UK and he is  financially  independent  in
    that he is supported by his extended family without recourse to  public
    funds: section 117B(2) and (3) refer. However, section 117B(5) provides
    that: "Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious."

31.  Thus the Appellant's established private and family life in the UK  and
    the adverse impact on his mental health if removed to Sri Lanka,  based
    on the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad, has to be balanced against  the
    maintenance of immigration control and the  statutory  public  interest
    considerations. I find that the public interest considerations  dictate
    that removal of the Appellant would be  proportionate.  However,  as  I
    have found that the Appellant has a well founded fear of persecution on
    account of his perceived political opinion, arising from  his  father's
    senior role in the LTTE and his own activities with the TGTE in the UK,
    his removal  is  prohibited  as  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
    obligations in respect of the 1951 UN Refugee Convention and Article  3
    of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal contained material errors of law.  I
set that decision aside and re-make the decision,  allowing  the  appeal  on
asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
