
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00100/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 February 2016                      |On 4 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                    [T K]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on [ ] 1983.   He  arrived
    in the UK on 24 November 2001 with entry clearance as a  visitor.   His
    leave was further extended,  as  a  student,  until  31  January  2004.
    Thereafter,  he became an overstayer.

 2. By reason of  his  conviction  on  20  July  2006  for  an  offence  of
    conspiracy to defraud, and his sentence  of  four  and  a  half  years'
    imprisonment,  a  decision  was  made  on  30  April  2015  to  make  a
    deportation  order  against  him  under   the   automatic   deportation
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") where  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nicholls ("the FtJ").  In a decision promulgated on 9 November 2015 the
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal having been  granted  by  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appeal came before me.  The background to the appellant's
    claim is best illustrated with reference to the decision of the FtT.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal before the FtT  raised  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds,
    including in terms of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

 6. Judge Nicholls considered the certificate issued  pursuant  to  Section
    72(9)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act").  At [46] he concluded that the appellant had  not  rebutted  the
    statutory presumption that he had  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constituted a danger to the community of  the  United
    Kingdom (s.72(2)).

 7. With reference to the appellant's claim that he would  be  at  risk  of
    Article 3 ill-treatment from those associated with one  Frank  Buyanga,
    he concluded that there was no evidence to show  how  such  individuals
    might know of the appellant's return to Zimbabwe, and nothing  to  show
    that any association  between  Mr  Buyanga  and  Zimbabwean  government
    ministers could adversely affect the appellant.

 8. In terms of family and private life, it was noted by the FtJ  that  the
    respondent had accepted that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with his two children in the UK.  He  also  found
    that the appellant has a genuine relationship with [CW], that they have
    one child together and that there were  "powerful,  practical  reasons"
    why they do not live together.  Whether that was to be described  as  a
    family life or recognised as a significant  part  of  their  respective
    private lives he considered not to be important.   He  found  that  the
    relationship was formed, in reality, since the appellant  was  released
    from detention.

 9. The FtJ also accepted [CW]'s evidence that she would  not  go  to  live
    with the appellant in Zimbabwe.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would therefore, interfere with the private  lives  of  the
    appellant and [CW], even if their relationship may not amount to family
    life.

10. In relation to the best interests of the two children, the judge stated
    that he had no independent evidence about the appellant's 10  year  old
    son and his relationship with the appellant,  and  nor  was  there  any
    professional assessment of the potential impact on that  child  of  the
    appellant's deportation.  The child lives with his natural mother,  the
    primary carer.  The judge concluded that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would not affect that  relationship  (with  the  child's  mother).   He
    further concluded that the evidence did not show that  the  appellant's
    deportation would be adverse to the best interests of his son, T.

11. As regards the appellant's 3 year old daughter, whilst not doubting the
    evidence that the appellant is actively and  closely  involved  in  her
    care, the evidence  did  not  suggest  that  she  has  any  unusual  or
    particular needs that can only  be  fulfilled  by  the  appellant.   He
    concluded that the appellant's involvement in his daughter's upbringing
    is clearly more substantial  than  that  with  his  son,  although  his
    daughter's age inevitably means that she will be much more  focused  on
    her domestic life with her mother.  He concluded that the evidence  did
    not show that it  would  be  adverse  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's daughter for the appellant to be deported.

12. As regards the appellant's parents, his conclusion was that there  were
    insufficient  factors  to  show  the  very   compelling   circumstances
    necessary  to  outweigh  the  substantial  public   interest   in   the
    appellant's deportation, bearing in mind his  sentence.   Likewise,  in
    relation to the appellant's sisters.

13. In terms of the appellant's circumstances on return  to  Zimbabwe,  the
    judge noted that it was accepted by the appellant's  father  that  some
    form of financial support could be sent to the appellant from  the  UK,
    albeit that that  was  an  arrangement  which  the  appellant's  mother
    rejected.  His  conclusion  was  that  the  difficulties  in  providing
    financial support, whether by his own efforts  within  Zimbabwe  or  by
    financial contributions from outside the country,  did  not  amount  to
    very compelling circumstances which would outweigh "the requirements of
    the deportation of foreign criminals from the UK".

14. As regards the evidence of  family  members  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant's character had  changed  and  his  maturity  had  increased,
    whilst not doubting  the  genuineness  of  those  opinions,  the  judge
    concluded that they do not constitute "hard facts".  He found that  the
    inevitable increasing maturity of the appellant as he  gets  older  and
    the improving prospects that he would not reoffend, with  some  support
    from  the  probation  officer,  do  not  amount  to   very   compelling
    circumstances, either alone or  in  conjunction  with  the  other  more
    family orientated factors.

15. He concluded  therefore,  that  there  were  not  the  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A
    of the Immigration Rules sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in
    the appellant's deportation.  Thus, the appeal was dismissed under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

16. The grounds contend that the FtJ erred in his assessment of the risk of
    harm to  the  appellant  from  Mr  Buyanga,  described  as  a  powerful
    individual in  Zimbabwe  who  is  a  member  of  the  Zimbabwe  Central
    Intelligence Organisation ("CIO") and closely connected  with  powerful
    figures involved in crime and politics  there.   Mr  Buyanga  had  made
    threats against the appellant but the  FtJ  concluded  that  there  was
    nothing to show that the appellant would suffer Article 3 ill-treatment
    on that account.

17. It is argued in the grounds that the FtJ failed to mention and to  take
    into account the evidence that it was not simply the  appellant's  fear
    of being directly harmed by Mr Buyanga and his associates, but that  he
    also feared harm from  ZANU-PF  and  the  Zimbabwe  regime  because  Mr
    Buyanga had spread the false allegation in Zimbabwe that the  appellant
    was an active member of the MDC in the  UK,  and  working  against  the
    Zimbabwean government's interests here.

18. It is also  contended  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant had not rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to  the
    community, having  regard  to  a  letter  from  the  Probation  Service
    assessing him as a low risk of harm and that during the period  of  his
    licence there was  nothing  to  suggest  an  increased  risk  from  the
    appellant.  The FtJ accepted that there was no record of the  appellant
    having been convicted of any offence since 2006.  The judge  was  wrong
    to conclude that notwithstanding there not  being  any  record  of  any
    offence since 2006 there was the possibility that the  appellant  could
    have offended but not been detected in his true name.   In  any  event,
    the possibility that the appellant could have offended is not  a  basis
    for concluding that he had not rebutted  the  presumption  of  being  a
    danger to the community.

19. In submissions Mr Bandegani relied on the grounds  of  appeal.   I  was
    referred to the evidence in relation to the risk to the appellant  from
    Mr Buyanga.  It was submitted that that  was  a  central  part  of  the
    appellant's case.

20. Although it was  only  the  appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  Mr
    Buyanga's link to the Zimbabwe CIO, in that  there  is  no  independent
    evidence to support the claimed link, the judge  did  not  engage  with
    that evidence.   It  is  not  known  what  the  judge  thought  of  the
    appellant's evidence as to what  would  happen  to  him  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe.

21. I was referred to the decision  in  Farquharson  (removal  -  proof  of
    conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146 (IAC) in terms of matters that the appellant
    was not convicted of.  It was submitted that the FtJ had speculated  as
    to the reasons why no further action was taken in relation to the  2009
    arrest for theft.  Given that the police held the appellant's  DNA  and
    fingerprints, the use of aliases would not  indicate  that  there  were
    possibly further offences that had  not  been  detected.   It  was  not
    rational to conclude that he had offended but not been charged.

22. Mr Bandegani confirmed that there  was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    Article 8 conclusions.

23. Mr Walker submitted that even if the judge had impermissibly speculated
    about the appellant having committed other  offences,  that  is  not  a
    material error of law, having regard to the fact that he  was  arrested
    on suspicion of theft on 24 April 2009 and given that he was wanted for
    failing  to  surrender  to  custody  and  a  sentence  of  four  years'
    imprisonment was outstanding. The FtJ was entitled to conclude at  [42]
    that it was not surprising that the South Yorkshire Police should  have
    decided not to pursue an offence of theft from a shop.

24. So far as risk on return is concerned, I was referred to [39] - [44] of
    the FtJ's decision in terms  of  the  appellant's  involvement  in  the
    conspiracy to defraud offence.  At [40] the judge concluded that  there
    was no confirmation of  any  connection  between  Mr  Buyanga  and  the
    offence of conspiracy to defraud in respect of which the appellant  was
    convicted.  The judge also found at [43]  that  although  the  name  of
    Frank Buyanga appears in news articles, all of those articles  indicate
    that he operated an illegal loan business,  not  that  he  was  raising
    funds on a fraudulently  charitable  basis.   At  [39]  the  judge  had
    referred to the fact that the appellant "now"  maintains  that  he  was
    simply a minor player in the conspiracy, acting in the mistaken  belief
    that he was assisting Mr Buyanga  to  raise  funds  for  child  poverty
    relief in Africa.

25. The sentencing remarks had shown that the  appellant  was  the  central
    person in the conspiracy.  There was nothing to show a link between the
    appellant and Mr Buyanga.  It was accepted  that  it  would  have  been
    better therefore, for the FtJ to have expressly stated that  there  was
    no risk to the appellant in relation to any alleged rumours  spread  by
    Mr Buyanga and his apparent  connections  to  the  CIO,  but  there  is
    nevertheless no error of law in the judge's decision.

26. In reply, Mr Bandegani referred again to the appellant's evidence,  and
    the appellant's  account  as  set  out  in  the  FtJ's  decision.   His
    explanation for not having given information to  the  police  about  Mr
    Buyanga was that he was threatened by him.  In addition, at [21] it  is
    recorded that the appellant had told his mother of threats  being  made
    against him and that she said that he told her he was not going to tell
    the police because  their  lives  were  in  danger.   After  that,  the
    appellant suddenly disappeared.

    My assessment

27. The FtJ referred at [10] and onwards to the appellant's account of  his
    involvement with Mr Buyanga and the threats that are said to have  been
    made to the appellant about the consequences of his giving  information
    about Mr Buyanga's involvement in the conspiracy.  He said that he  was
    persuaded by Mr Buyanga not to attend court.  At [11]  it  is  recorded
    that the appellant decided he would hand himself in to the  police  and
    tell them about Mr Buyanga.  When he did hand himself  in,  the  police
    said that they would investigate him and that he was on their  "wanted"
    list but had fled the country.  The judge also  noted  the  appellant's
    claim that he was not a ringleader of the fraud offences  of  which  he
    was convicted, but a "minor  player"  and  that  he  had  been  wrongly
    portrayed during the criminal trial.

28. At [9] the appellant's account is also referred  to  in  terms  of  the
    claim that his involvement in the fraud offences was "minimal" and that
    he was very shocked when the police accused him of being  a  ringleader
    in a major fraud case which the appellant said had been  undertaken  by
    Mr  Buyanga  and  another  man  called  Canaan  Moyo.   That  paragraph
    describes in summary how the appellant became involved with Mr  Buyanga
    and what was said by Mr Buyanga to be a way of raising  money  to  help
    poor children in Africa through the use of  bank  accounts  to  deposit
    money.  The appellant's account was that he naively agreed to  help  as
    he thought this was being organised through  the  church  in  which  Mr
    Buyanga was an upstanding member.

29. At [12] there is reference to the appellant's claim that he believed Mr
    Buyanga to be a member of the CIO who had been planted  in  the  UK  by
    ZANU-PF to keep an eye on  political  dissidents  and  to  further  the
    financial and political influence of ZANU-PF.

30. It is the case that the FtJ did not refer to the appellant's claim that
    false rumours had been spread about him in terms  of  involvement  with
    the MDC in the UK, such that on return to Zimbabwe the appellant  would
    be at risk from the CIO, as much as from Mr Buyanga and his associates.



31. However, it is apparent from the judge's decision that he rejected  any
    contention that Mr Buyanga was involved in the conspiracy for which the
    appellant was convicted.  Thus, at [39] he stated  that  the  appellant
    "now maintains that he was simply a minor player in  this  conspiracy",
    acting in the mistaken belief that he was assisting  Frank  Buyanga  to
    raise funds for child poverty relief  in  Africa.   However,  at  [40],
    after referring to a document  from  Hertfordshire  Constabulary  which
    stated that a Tawanda Buyanga was wanted for failing to attend court on
    charges of conspiracy to defraud, he stated that there was  nothing  on
    the face of the document as to when the events occurred or  the  nature
    of the conspiracy.  He went on to state that there  was  no  individual
    confirmation from Hertfordshire Constabulary  that  the  appellant  had
    provided information to assist them in their enquiries "or  that  there
    is any connection between Buyanga and  the  offence  of  conspiracy  to
    defraud in respect of which the Appellant was convicted".

32. In addition, at [43] the judge  noted  that  although  the  name  Frank
    Buyanga appears in news articles, all of those articles  indicate  that
    he operated an illegal loan business, not that he was raising funds  on
    a fraudulently charitable basis.  He  referred  to  the  trial  judge's
    assessment of the seriousness of the appellant's actions which the  FtJ
    correctly concluded was to be the starting point for his  consideration
    of the s.72 certificate.  In the  same  paragraph  he  noted  that  the
    appellant had made a late  application  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  for
    permission to appeal against his conviction and/or sentence,  but  that
    no further details had been given.  Lastly, at [44]  he  expressed  his
    conclusion that the appellant had not shown that his involvement in the
    conspiracy to defraud was substantially less central than that recorded
    by the trial judge.

33. In summary, as Mr Walker submitted, on the judge's findings  there  was
    nothing to show any link between the appellant and Mr Buyanga.  I  also
    agree that it would have been preferable for the judge  to  have  dealt
    specifically with the issue of alleged rumours  spread  by  Mr  Buyanga
    about the appellant's involvement in anti-government activities in  the
    UK, but given that the judge concluded that there was  a  lack  of  any
    connection between the appellant and Mr Buyanga,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any error of law in this respect in the judge's decision.
     That  is  so,  notwithstanding  Mr  Bandegani's  contention  that  the
    appellant's own evidence before the FtT sought to explain  why  he  had
    not implicated Mr Buyanga  in  the  fraud,  i.e.  because  of  threats.
    Likewise in relation to the evidence from  the  appellant's  mother  in
    that respect.  The judge was plainly aware of this evidence, having set
    it out at [10] and  [21]  but  he  gave  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    conclusions  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  involvement   in   the
    conspiracy, the lack of involvement of Mr Buyanga in that offence,  and
    thus the lack of connection to the appellant.

34. I am similarly not satisfied that there is any  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's assessment that the appellant had not rebutted the  presumption
    that he represented a danger to the community, with  reference  to  the
    s.72 certificate.  I have already referred to what the FtJ  said  about
    the appellant's involvement in the offence of  conspiracy  to  defraud,
    for which he  received  a  sentence  of  four  years  and  six  months'
    imprisonment.  The FtJ's consideration of  the  certificate  starts  at
    [37] and takes into account the offence for  which  the  appellant  was
    convicted.  He  referred  to  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,  which
    included that the appellant was the central person in  the  conspiracy,
    the "brains behind it", and the person  with  the  ability  to  exploit
    young people.  He was convicted in his absence by the jury.  As already
    indicated, the FtJ rejected the appellant's contention now that he  was
    only a  minor  player  in  the  conspiracy,  contrary  to  the  judge's
    sentencing remarks.

35. At [41] the FtJ referred to evidence from the Probation  Service  which
    confirmed that the appellant had  completed  his  licence  without  any
    breach and that there was no police intelligence to show that there was
    any increase in risk from the appellant. He noted  that  the  appellant
    was assessed as being at "low risk of harm".  He did say however,  that
    whether that was in relation to reoffending or of harm to the public is
    not made clear.

36. Also at [41] he referred to the documentary evidence showing  that  the
    appellant had been arrested on suspicion of theft from  a  shop  on  24
    April 2009 but that no further action was taken.  The judge stated that
    he presumed that the appellant was not prosecuted.  He  noted  however,
    that the Crown Court records indicated that  he  was  sentenced  on  27
    April 2009, some three days later, when he  received  his  sentence  of
    four years and six months' imprisonment, with an additional 30 days  to
    run concurrently.  At [42] he said that although it was clear  that  no
    further action was taken in relation to the allegation of theft, it  is
    also clear that the appellant's claim to have handed himself  into  the
    police is at best overstated.  He referred to  the  records  indicating
    that the appellant came to notice when he was detained and  as  he  was
    then wanted for failing to surrender to custody and a sentence of  more
    than four years' imprisonment was outstanding, he concluded that it was
    not in the least surprising that the South Yorkshire Police should have
    decided not to pursue an offence of theft from a shop.

37. Again, at [44] the judge accepted  that  there  is  no  record  of  the
    appellant having been convicted of any  criminal  offence  since  2006,
    although he absconded in August 2006 and did not come to notice of  the
    police until April 2009, very nearly three years later.  He noted  that
    the appellant was  then  in  prison  and  immigration  detention  until
    released on temporary admission in 2014.   In  reality  therefore,  the
    judge concluded that it had only been since that release  on  temporary
    admission  that  the  appellant  had  had  any  opportunity  to  commit
    "detectable criminal offences", although the judge accepted  that  that
    was in fact the position, i.e. that he had not been  convicted  of  any
    offences.  The FtJ did however, also note that this was at a time  when
    the appellant was potentially facing deportation.

38. At [45] he said that he was "less persuaded" that the appellant did not
    commit any offences while he had absconded and was living in Sheffield.
     He said that that was "partly" because of the arrest on 24 April 2009,
    but also because of the number of aliases recorded in respect of him in
    the PNC record, one of which is from the South  Yorkshire  Police.   He
    noted that although a name given by an arrested person is not the  only
    means of identifying them, the use of  those  aliases  does  raise  the
    clear possibility that the appellant "could have offended" but not been
    detected in his true name.

39. Whilst, as Mr Walker accepted, it was to some extent speculation on the
    part of the FtJ to conclude that  it  was  not  surprising  that  South
    Yorkshire Police decided not to pursue an offence of theft from a  shop
    given what the appellant was  then  facing  (four  and  a  half  years'
    imprisonment), it seems to me that that was in any event  a  reasonable
    conclusion on the part of the FtJ.  It is also to  be  remembered  that
    for a person to be arrested for an offence  there  must  be  reasonable
    cause to suspect that person of having  committed  the  offence.   That
    must have applied in relation to the appellant's arrest in  April  2009
    for theft.

40. In any event, the judge did not rely solely on the arrest on  24  April
    2009 to justify the conclusion that the appellant had not rebutted  the
    presumption of being a danger to the community.  It  is  apparent  from
    his decision that there were other factors involved in that conclusion.
     As I have already indicated, the  judge's  assessment  of  this  issue
    started with his consideration of the seriousness  of  the  offence  of
    conspiracy to defraud, and in respect of which the appellant was before
    the FtJ attempting to minimise his involvement, contrary to  the  clear
    assessment of the level of his criminality  by  the  sentencing  judge.
    The judge noted that the appellant had  made  a  late  application  for
    permission to appeal against his conviction and/or sentence.  That  was
    so notwithstanding that he had absconded and was convicted by  a  jury.
    The fact that the appellant attempted to minimise  his  involvement  in
    the offence was a relevant factor for the judge to take  into  account.
    Likewise, his use of aliases to which the judge referred.

41. Even if it could be said  that  the  judge  indulged  in  impermissible
    speculation in relation to the arrest for an offence of theft in  April
    2009, I cannot see that that amounts to an error of law, still less one
    that requires the decision to be set aside.

42. In summary therefore, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law
    in the decision of the FtT in any respect.




    Decision

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            23/03/16
