
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00865/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2019                  |On 28 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     k a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Bonavero, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Albania  who  sought  international
    protection. Her application was refused and she appealed.  Following  a
    hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 23 August 2018, Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Gurung-Thapa dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  She
    found her not credible.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was initially refused but
    a subsequent application to the Upper Tribunal  was  successful.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted permission  in  3  December  2018.  His
    reasons for so doing were: -

         "1.  I think that the first challenge is properly arguable but I do
         not seek to limit the scope of the Upper  Tribunal's  consideration
         of the decision."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the hearing I asked both representatives to deal firstly with ground
    one  as  were  I  to  find  it  disclosed  a  material  error  of   law
    consideration of the other grounds would become a redundant exercise.

 5. Mr Bonavero referred me to expert evidence of Dr Korovilas. Within  his
    report he stated that  it  was  "entirely  plausibly  [sic]"  that  the
    Appellant would not know various details about her family's blood feud.
    That evidence has not been taken into account  by  the  Judge  who  has
    failed to engage with it when considering the issue of the  Appellant's
    credibility. Further the Judge had failed to  recognise  the  plausible
    explanation given by the Appellant for not  giving  the  names  of  the
    Selita family during her interview. Prior to  that  SEF  interview  the
    Appellant had the blood feud certificate naming the  Selita  family  in
    her possession. The Judge has failed to  address  how  the  Appellant's
    young age at  the  time  of  her  brother  being  killed  affected  the
    assessment  of  plausibility  of  her  account.  Some  of  the  Judge's
    conclusions are based on speculation. Finally, in failing  to  put  any
    weight  whatsoever  on  the  blood  feud  certificate  the  Judge   has
    incorrectly approached that document in the  context  of  the  guidance
    within Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439.

 6. Mr Bramble argued that at Paragraphs  27  to  29  the  Judge  had  made
    adverse credibility findings that she was entitled to on the  basis  of
    the evidence. The Judge has set the issue of the certificate  into  the
    context of the totality of the evidence and cannot be criticised for so
    doing.

 7. I am persuaded that the Judge has materially erred for all the  reasons
    set out in ground one. Her approach to the assessment of credibility is
    erroneous and she  has  at  times  speculated.  In  particular  it  was
    necessary to take into account and  engage  with  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Korovilas. This the Judge has failed to do.

 8. Given my findings in relation to the first ground consideration of  the
    others is a redundant exercise. This is an appeal which will have to be
    reheard de novo.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Gurung-Thapa.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                Date: 25 February
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
