
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00385/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2017                             |On 14 December 2017        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                               ARKAN ADNAN ALI
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Hussain, instructed by IAS (Manchester)
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Herwald  promulgated  18.2.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  28.12.16,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 13.2.17.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Peart  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.6.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor granted permission to appeal on
    26.7.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 14.12.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it
    to be set aside and remade, remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge O'Connor considered there to be
    'Robinson obvious' arguable grounds in failing  to  give  any,  or  any
    sufficient, reasons for concluding  that  returning  the  appellant  to
    Kirkuk would not lead to a breach of Article 15(c). "Alternatively, the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion in this regard is arguably irrational,
    given the terms of the country guidance in AA (Iraq) and the paucity of
    the evidence produced to the First-tier Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of
    State on this issue."

 7. "It is further arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to lawfully
    apply the guidance given in AA (Iraq), both prior,  and  subsequent  to
    the amendments made thereto in [2017] EWCA Civ 944 to  its  conclusions
    that the appellant could live in the IKR (which ought to have  includes
    a consideration of how the appellant would travel to,  and  gain  entry
    into, this region). As to the potential internal relocation alternative
    to Baghdad, once again  the  First-tier  Tribunal  arguably  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for its conclusions on this issue."

 8. Judge Herwald appears to have misunderstood the country guidance of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 by suggesting at [19] that  the
    country guidance provided that Kirkuk was no longer a  contested  area.
    That is not what the case held. Kirkuk was a contested  area  in  2015.
    Paragraph 1 of the country guidance in fact provides:

         "1.  There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive."

 9. That part of the Country Guidance remains unchanged following the Court
    of Appeal decision of 2017 amending other  parts  of  the  guidance  in
    relation to a CSID. I note in passing that that some  recent  decisions
    of the Secretary of State have suggested that with the  demise  of  IS,
    which is no longer in control of Kirkuk, it is no  longer  a  contested
    area.  However,  more  recent  country  information  suggests  that  an
    internal armed conflict  continues,  with  the  Iraqi  Army  in  battle
    against Kurdish Peshmerger forces, so that it remains a contested area.



10. Despite the Rule 24 response, dated 8.8.17, suggesting that the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  could  not  have  taken  into  account  case  law   not
    promulgated until some 5 months after the appeal was heard, Mr Harrison
    accepted that there was a clear error in regard to the judge's findings
    about Kirkuk. He also accepted the submission that the judge failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to how the appellant could reach the IKR.

11. I find that this part of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    made in error of law and, given the country guidance, is irrational.

12. Mr Hussain sought to make additional points not  within  the  grant  of
    permission, including that the appellant would face difficulty  gaining
    entry to the IKR. However, the country guidance on that  issue  remains
    unchanged, pointing out that a person not from the IKR will be able  to
    gain temporary admission and that no such persons have been required to
    leave the IKR. It is also known that there are regular multiple flights
    from Baghdad to Erbil on a daily basis and background information  from
    the IRC suggests that IDPs have been arriving regularly.

13. I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  devoid  of
    adequate reasoning as to whether the appellant, who is from Kirkuk  and
    not from the IKR, if he is  not  to  return  to  Kirkuk  or  settle  in
    Baghdad,  will  manage  to  access  the  IKR  from  Baghdad.   In   the
    circumstances, the decision cannot stand.

Remittal

14. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the findings are unclear on a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

15. The appellant was  until  recently  unrepresented  and  has  only  just
    obtained legal  representation.  His  solicitors  had  applied  for  an
    adjournment, but I saw no reason why the error of law appeal could  not
    proceed. However, it was clear that the case was  far  from  ready  for
    remaking of the decision and there was no interpreter present.

16. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated




Consequential Directions

18.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

19. The ELH is 3 hours;

20. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge  Herwald and Judge Peart;

21. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

22. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
