
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00887/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th March 2020                           |On 14th April 2020            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                Mr alket alia
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, Counsel instructed by Karis Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Colvin, promulgated  on  14th  October  2019,  dismissing  the
    appeal by the appellant against a decision refusing his protection  and
    human rights claim dated 28th November 2018.   This  decision  followed
    the making of  a  deportation  order  against  the  appellant  on  26th
    November 2018.

Background

2.   The appellant is a national of  Albania  who  was  born  in  1982.   He
    entered the United Kingdom illegally in January 2001. He made an asylum
    claim in May 2002. This asylum claim was refused by the respondent.  An
    appeal against this refusal was dismissed by Judge Gillespie on  asylum
    grounds but allowed under Article 2 of the ECHR.  I  briefly  summarise
    the basis of the appellant's protection claim. His cousin,  AD,  was  a
    notorious gangster who was involved in the killing of a large number of
    people in Albania in the 1990s.  The appellant  was  targeted  by  AD's
    victims pursuant to a blood feud. The appellant believes  that  AD  was
    killed in Greece in 1998.

3.   Judge Gillespie accepted the appellant's claim to be the subject  of  a
    blood feud and to have a real risk of serious ill-treatment if  removed
    to Albania. Following his successful human rights appeal the  appellant
    was granted Exceptional Leave to Remain and then  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain (ILR) in May 2007. On  16th  February  2018  the  appellant  was
    convicted of keeping a brothel for prostitution and received a  fifteen
    month prison sentence.

4.   Following the making of  the  deportation  order,  the  appellant  made
    representations.  He claimed that he would still be at risk of  serious
    ill-treatment if deported to Albania on account of the blood feud.   He
    had returned to Albania  on  six  occasions  since  first  leaving  the
    country but maintained that these were only for short visits, a week or
    under, in 2007, 2008, 2009, and on three occasions in 2017.  He did not
    believe that he would be at risk for the very short periods he  claimed
    to have returned to Albania. He stayed with  his  mother  in  different
    rented properties in different places in Tirana, the mother  frequently
    changing residence. He claimed that an aunt was harassed in 2014  after
    returning to Albania and obtaining a mobile phone. This was reported to
    the police but the police discontinued the investigation.

5.   In  her  refusal  letter  the  respondent  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellant would be at risk after sixteen years' absence  from  Albania.
    Central to the respondent's decision  was  the  appellant's  relatively
    regular return to Albania. The respondent  additionally  believed  that
    the appellant would now be able to obtain a sufficiency  of  protection
    from the Albanian authorities. The appellant appealed that decision  to
    refuse his protection and human rights claim pursuant to Section 82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The judge had  before  her  a  bundle  of  documents  prepared  by  the
    appellant's legal representatives that included a statement  from  him,
    reference to news videos relating to AD and other background  evidence.
    On the date of the hearing the appellant's  second  manuscript  witness
    statement was provided.

7.   The appellant gave oral evidence. During cross-examination it  was  put
    to the appellant that a stamp in his passport indicated that he had  in
    fact spent four months in Albania in October 2007 rather than one  week
    as he initially claimed. He had spent over a month in  Albania  between
    December 2008 and February 2009, he had spent  almost  four  months  in
    Albania from February 2009 to June 2009.  The appellant  again  claimed
    that he stayed with his mother in  rented  accommodation  in  different
    parts of Tirana. He also referred to staying in  France  and  Italy  in
    2015 when he travelled without travel documents.

8.   The judge's findings are contained under the heading 'findings of  fact
    and consideration'. The judge accurately directed herself with  respect
    to the relevant standard and burden of proof and the appropriate  legal
    tests for establishing an entitlement to refugee protection. The  judge
    was aware that being the subject of a blood  feud  based  on  how  many
    memberships was now a category recognised under the Refugee Convention.

9.   At paragraph 26 the judge considered that the central issue before  her
    was whether, some seventeen years after the appellant left Albania,  he
    remained at  real  risk  of  the  same  blood  feud.   The  judge  then
    considered the evidence relating to  the  appellant's  many  visits  to
    Albania since 2002. The judge considered the appellant's claim to  have
    only stayed for a week or less and his claim to have travelled  because
    his  mother  was  unwell  and  that  this  was  inconsistent  with  the
    documentary evidence relating to his travels. The judge made  reference
    to the appellant's three visits in 2017 but noted  that  there  was  no
    evidence as to the length of these  visits  from  any  travel  document
    available and the judge questioned the reliability of  the  appellant's
    evidence in this regard. I note that there has been no challenge to the
    accuracy of the judge's reference to the various dates and  periods  of
    visits.

10.  At paragraph 26 of her decision the judge stated,  "On  each  visit  to
    Albania he [the appellant] says he stayed with his mother in Tirana  in
    rented accommodation that she frequently changed although there was  no
    evidence before me corroborating this latter point."  Then at paragraph
    27 the judge contextualised the appellant's fear of the blood  feud  in
    Albania. The judge noted that  the  appellant  had  not  known  of  any
    further blood feud killings since 1998 following the death  of  AD  and
    dealt with the threat made to the appellant's aunt. There has  been  no
    challenge to the judge's assessment in relation to this aspect  of  her
    decision.

11.  At paragraph 28 the judge then indicated that she had taken account  of
    the background information set out in the respondent's  refusal  letter
    relating to the improving situation in Albania  of  blood  feuds.   She
    once again reminded herself of the need to be cautious in  reaching  an
    adverse  decision  in  a  protection  appeal,  particularly  when   the
    appellant had previously been at risk of serious ill-treatment.

12.  At paragraph 29 the judge stated,

         "Considering all the evidence before me in the round I am satisfied
         even to the lower standard of  proof  that  the  appellant  is  not
         reasonably likely to be at real risk at the present time on  return
         to Albania.  I agree with the respondent that  his  regular  visits
         back to  Albania  have  themselves  demonstrated  that  he  has  no
         difficulties in staying in that country for long periods  with  his
         mother in Tirana who has never been targeted.  There is no evidence
         that he was in hiding during these  visits  or  in  any  other  way
         taking special precautions.  There has been no incident when he has
         had to seek protection from the police and, of course, this is  all
         in the context that it appears that the blood feud  may  well  have
         ended in 1998  when  the  appellant  said  that  the  last  killing
         occurred on either side."

    The judge was consequently satisfied that the appellant no longer  held
    a well-founded fear of persecution under the Refugee Convention  or  of
    being subjected to serious harm contrary to Articles 2  and  3  of  the
    ECHR.

13.  The judge then went on to consider the appellant's  Article  8  rights,
    with respect to the Immigration Rules relating to foreign criminals and
    in particular Section 117C of the 2002 Act.  The judge  concluded  that
    the appellant's deportation would not breach Article 8.  There has been
    no challenge to the Article 8 findings and I need say no more.

The challenge to the judge's decision

14.  The appellant challenges  the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to  her
    assessment of risk.  The grounds are commendably focused.  They contend
    that the judge erred  in  law  in  rejecting  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant's mother changed address on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    evidence corroborating this.  Specifically, the grounds contend:

    (a)  that it was never put to the appellant that he  had  not  provided
         corroborating evidence of his mother's changing of addresses;


    (b)  that the judge erred in law in that it was incorrect to  say  that
         there was no evidence of  his  mother  changing  addresses  as  the
         appellant himself gave oral evidence on this point  and  the  judge
         failed to make a clear  finding  as  to  whether  she  accepted  or
         rejected this evidence; and


     (c)     the judge erred in law in requiring the appellant  to  provide
         corroborating evidence in any event.

    These grounds were said to materially  undermine  the  crucial  factual
    element of the appellant's claim. Permission to appeal was  granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal on these three narrow points.

15.  Ms Iengar adopted the grounds of appeal.  She  reminds  me  that  Judge
    Gillespie found an extant blood feud in his decision in 2002  and  that
    the blood feud had a pervasive and enduring hold.  She submitted,  with
    respect to paragraphs 26 and 29 of the judge's decision, that the issue
    of the absence of corroborative evidence was not put to the  appellant,
    that there was no finding by the judge as to  whether  his  mother  had
    stayed in different places in rented accommodation, and in  any  event,
    the judge erred in law in  requiring  corroborative  evidence  on  this
    point. She provided the decision in HKK (Article 3: burden/standard  of
    proof) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00386 (IAC) in support. Her  commendable
    submissions reflect the written grounds of appeal.

16.  Ms Jones  relied  on  a  case  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358 in  submitting  that
    the judge properly applied the Devaseelan principles and,  despite  the
    strong  finding  by  Judge  Gillespie,  was  entitled  based   on   the
    appellant's frequent returns to Albania to reach the  conclusions  that
    she did.  She submitted that it was implicit in the decision  that  the
    judge had taken account of all relevant matters.

Discussion

17.  in respect of ground of appeal (a), the appellant essentially  contends
    that it was never put to him that he had not provided evidence  of  his
    mother's frequently changing  address,  and  that  this  was  therefore
    procedurally unfair. The obvious relevance of any evidence relating  to
    the length of time that the appellant  remained  in  Albania,  and  the
    circumstances  in  which  he  stayed  with  his  mother,  was   however
    manifestly apparent from the basis of his claim  and  would  have  been
    clear to the appellant throughout the appeal process. There was no need
    for the absence of such evidence to be specifically put to him when the
    burden of proof rests of him and where the importance of the  existence
    of such evidence was self-evidence. The appellant  was  represented  by
    the same solicitors since at least August 2018 and he  has  been  aware
    since at least November 2018 of the respondent's view that his repeated
    visits to Albania undermined his  protection  claim.  This  is  readily
    apparent from the reasons for refusal letter.  The  appellant  and  his
    solicitors knew of the appeal hearing, which took place in  June  2019,
    as early as February 2019 when the notice of hearing  was  issued.  The
    appellant could be expected to be aware of  how  long  he  remained  in
    Albania and this was clearly and  effectively  put  to  him  in  cross-
    examination. There was no need for the appellant to be told that he had
    not provided corroborating evidence of his mother changing address  and
    there has been no procedural unfairness.

18.  In relation to ground of appeal (b), I find there is no  merit  in  the
    contention that the judge was  incorrect  to  say  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant's mother changed address.  It is of  course
    correct that the appellant's oral evidence  constitutes  evidence.  The
    judge was however demonstrably aware that the appellant  gave  evidence
    and of the content of his oral testimony. It  is  satisfactorily  clear
    from paragraph 26 of the  judge's  decision  that  she  did  take  into
    account the appellant's claim, and that any  reference  by  her  to  an
    absence  of  evidence,  properly  considered  in  the  context  of  the
    decision,  related  to  an  absence  of  independent  evidence.  It  is
    irresistibly clear from the decision, read as a whole, that  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's  claim  that  his  mother  frequently  changed
    address.

19.  The third ground  (c)  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  requiring
    corroborative evidence.  I am not however persuaded that the judge  did
    require corroborative evidence.  The  burden  of  proof  rests  on  the
    appellant to prove that he is a refugee or someone who is at risk of  a
    breach of Article 3,  albeit  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   At
    paragraph 26 of the  judgment  the  judge  is  pointing  out  that  the
    appellant has not discharged the burden of proving his case. There is a
    distinction between pointing out the  absence  of  sufficient  evidence
    required to discharge a case  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  and
    requiring evidence to be produced.

20.  However, if I am wrong in that regard, I consider, in  the  alternative
    whether the judge did err in law in requiring  corroborative  evidence.
    There is no requirement for corroborative evidence in this jurisdiction
    but a judge is entitled to take into account the  absence  of  evidence
    that one would reasonably expect to be  available.  The  appellant  has
    known since at least November 2018 that his visits to Albania were very
    much in issue.  If he returned for lengthy periods of time  this  would
    undermine his claim that he continued to be  at  risk  from  the  blood
    feud.  The length of time that the appellant remained in Albania during
    his various  visits  is,  with  respect,  obviously  relevant.  If  the
    appellant stayed with his mother  in  rented  accommodation  one  would
    reasonably expect  to  see  evidence  of  rental  agreements  or  other
    evidence connecting  or  associated  with  the  mother's  residence  at
    different addresses. The importance of  providing  such  evidence  must
    have  been  apparent  to  the  appellant,  and  indeed  to  his   legal
    representatives. I find, in these circumstances, that the judge did not
    err in law to the extent that she drew an adverse  inference  from  the
    absence of corroborative evidence of  the  mother  staying  in  various
    rented accommodations in Tirana. I am not satisfied that the judge  has
    made an error of law requiring the decision  to  be  set  aside  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


D.Blum                                  20 March 2020

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

