
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th November 2016                         |On 21st November 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               MR SHWAN ADAMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose (agent for Broudie Jackson & canter,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge I F Taylor) promulgated on 30th June 2016.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 1st August 1990. He entered
      the UK clandestinely in May 2015 and claimed asylum.

   3. His claim for asylum was based on the  fact  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity and claimed to be a member of the Kurdish  Democratic  Party
      of Iran (KDPI) and that he had been working  for  them  in  Iran.  His
      involvement came to the attention of the authorities and as  a  result
      he fled the country.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant
      and he also had a letter of support from the KDPI in Paris.


   5. The Judge, in his findings, referred to a number of  discrepancies  in
      the Appellant's claim and did not accept  the  Appellant's  claims  to
      have done for the KDPI in Iran.


   6. So far as the letter from KDPI is concerned the Judge  noted  that  it
      was  potentially  of  great  significance  because  it  confirmed  the
      Appellant to be a supporter of the  KDPI;  that  oppression  had  been
      exercised against him by the regime of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran;
      that he had been forced to  flee  Iran  and  would  be  in  danger  if
      returned.


   7. The Home Office Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      relied upon a Danish Refugee Council Report  on  Iranian  Kurds  dated
      September 2013 which set out the procedure for  obtaining  letters  of
      recommendation issued by the KDPI. That procedure was  not  challenged
      by Mrs Johnrose on behalf of the Appellant.  The  procedure  is  that,
      following enquiries with the party's headquarters at  Khoysanjak  Camp
      in KRI the letter of recommendation will be sent by  fax  directly  to
      the asylum administration of the country in question and it will never
      be  handed  to  the  recommended  person  himself.   If   the   asylum
      administrator requests the original  letter  the  KDPI  representative
      will send a letter by post directly to the asylum administration.


   8. The Judge noted at paragraph  25  that  the  procedure  had  not  been
      followed in this case as the Appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  had
      requested the letter but it had been  sent  by  fax  directly  to  his
      solicitors.


   9. The letter concerned was produced only on the morning of  the  hearing
      together with its translation. The Appellant said  that  it  had  been
      sent direct to his solicitors and he had not seen it before.


  10. At paragraph 26 the Judge noted that Mrs Johnrose  had  urged  him  to
      make positive findings of fact with regard to the  provenance  of  the
      document as set out by the Appellant in his oral evidence. However, he
      went on to say that given the clear disparity  between  the  procedure
      set out in the Danish Refugee document and the procedure  in  relation
      to the Appellant it was entirely reasonable to  expect  some  evidence
      from the Appellant's solicitors  to  confirm  or  deny  what  in  fact
      happened. The Judge said that this evidence  could  be  obtained  both
      quickly and easily and would not necessarily require the  case  to  be
      adjourned to another  date.  He  went  on  to  say  that  despite  his
      misgivings, which he pointed out on several occasions to Mrs Johnrose,
      there was no enthusiasm to obtain any evidence  from  the  Appellant's
      solicitors with regard to this important document. He went on  to  say
      that if necessary he would have been content to adjourn  the  case  to
      another day but there had been no request for an adjournment.


  11. The Judge went on to disbelieve that the  Appellant's  solicitors  had
      not shown the letter to the Appellant prior to the hearing as  it  was
      dated April 2016.


  12. The Judge went on to find he could place no reliance on that document.


  13. At paragraph 27 he relied upon the Appellant being unwilling to obtain
      further evidence from his own solicitors to confirm the account he had
      given in his oral evidence about the provenance of  the  document  and
      also relied on the other adverse findings to find the Appellant to  be
      without credibility.


  14. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  assert
      that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  placing  a  requirement  of
      corroboration and on the absence  of  corroboration  to  make  adverse
      findings. The grounds also assert that the Judge erred in  failing  to
      apply the principles of MA Switzerland, Application  no.  52589/13  in
      that the Secretary of State ought to have checked the authenticity  of
      the letter if there been doubts as to its authenticity. Before me Miss
      Johnrose withdrew the second ground as the Secretary of State had  not
      been provided with the letter prior to the hearing.


  15. Attached to the application for permission to appeal was a copy of Mrs
      Johnrose's record of proceedings from the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
      as it related to the Appellant's oral evidence regarding the  document
      in question and  the  cross  examination.  There  is  also  a  witness
      statement by the solicitor with conduct of the  case  confirming  that
      she had not provided a copy of  the  document  to  the  Appellant  and
      confirming that it was received by fax on an  unknown  date  in  April
      without a cover sheet and that an original letter was never sent.


  16. I indicated to Mrs Johnrose that the additional evidence  attached  to
      the application could be relevant only if I  were  to  find  that  the
      Judge made an error of law in the Decision and Reasons.  Mrs  Johnrose
      sought to rely on the case of E v SSHD [2004] WCA Civ 49 as  authority
      for her  submission  that  I  ought  to  admit  the  new  evidence  in
      determining the error of law issue.


  17. I find that case does not assist Mrs Johnrose. It is not asserted that
      the Judge made a mistake of fact  which  was  disclosed  only  by  new
      evidence.   What  E  did  was  confirm  that  the  Ladd  and  Marshall
      principles apply  save  in  very  specific  circumstances,  which  are
      inapplicable to this current case.


  18. The Ladd and Marshall principles are, in  summary:  first,  the  fresh
      evidence could not have been obtained with  reasonable  diligence  for
      use at the trial; secondly, that if given, it probably would have  had
      an important influence  on  the  result;  and,  thirdly,  that  it  is
      apparently  credible  although   not   necessarily   incontrovertible.
      Furthermore, as a general rule the fact that the failure to adduce the
      evidence was that of the party's legal advisers provides no excuse (Al-
      Mehdawi v Home Secretary [1990] IAC 876.


  19. E is of course now very old and the court  was  considering  Procedure
      Rules which no longer exist. The court was  also  considering  whether
      the Tribunal ought to have admitted evidence that was submitted  after
      the hearing but before the decision was promulgated;  in  other  words
      while the Tribunal was still seized of the matter. In  this  case  the
      hearing took place on 13th June 2016 and the decision was  promulgated
      on 30th June 2016. The additional evidence was only produced with  the
      application for permission to appeal dated 14th July 2016. The  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge therefore  was  given  no  opportunity  to  decide
      whether to consider it or not.


  20. Furthermore, it is abundantly clear from the Judge's decision that  he
      had made clear, during the course of the hearing,  his  concerns  over
      that  document  and  its  provenance  and  offered  Mrs  Johnrose  the
      opportunity to make enquiries. It would have been an easy  matter  for
      Mrs Johnrose to have made  a  telephone  call  to  the  solicitors  or
      alternatively to have sought an adjournment. She did  neither.  Before
      me, Mrs Johnrose argued that she had not seen the  document  prior  to
      the hearing herself and therefore could not have made  any  enquiries.
      In my view that simply emphasises the need for her to have  asked  for
      the opportunity to make those enquiries when the situation arose.  She
      did not do so. Nor was the evidence from the solicitor  adduced  after
      the hearing but before the appeal was determined.


  21. The evidence therefore falls foul of the Ladd and Marshall principles.
      Furthermore, the evidence itself does no more than  confirm  that  the
      Appellant had not seen the document prior to the hearing. It  adds  no
      weight to the document itself and has no bearing on any  consideration
      of its authenticity. Indeed, the document itself which is contained in
      the Appellant's bundle, contains no indication of the fax number  from
      which it was sent. In short, it could have originated from anywhere.


  22. Not only did the Judge reject the document on the basis of its lack of
      provenance and corroboration from the  solicitors  but  he  also  paid
      particular attention to the Danish Refugee Council document and he set
      out paragraph 2.1.5 of that document  in  full  in  his  Decision  and
      Reasons, which reads as follows:-


        "Regarding letters  of  recommendation,  KDPI's  representative  in
        Paris informed the delegation that when the representation in Paris
        is requested to verify whether  a  person  is  a  party  member  or
        sympathiser, it will ask the  party's  headquarters  in  Khoysanjak
        camp in KRI to investigate the case. Upon receiving the answer from
        Khoysanjak, the representation in Paris  will  issue  a  letter  of
        recommendation. In the letter, in  addition  to  the  name  of  the
        person in question, it is stated in French whether the  recommended
        person  is  a  KDPI  member  or  a  sympathiser.  The   letter   of
        recommendation, which is signed by KDPI's representative in  Paris,
        will be sent by fax directly to the asylum  administration  in  the
        country in question; it will never be  handed  to  the  recommended
        person himself. If the given  asylum  administration  requests  the
        original letter, the KDPI  representation  in  Paris  will  send  a
        letter by post directly  to  the  asylum  administration...  KDPI's
        representative in Paris has seen many forged versions of the letter
        of recommendation delivered to asylum administrations  in  European
        countries. KDPI's representative  in  Paris  pointed  out  KDPI  is
        concerned about forged documents in relation to asylum applications
        particularly as the Iranian government may send  undercover  agents
        to Europe to apply for asylum in KDPI's name."


  23. Thus it was not simply difficulties over the document's provenance and
      doubting the Appellant's claims as to how it was obtained that led  to
      its rejection but also the fact that it did not match the  description
      from the body itself as to how such documents are brought into being.


  24. Accordingly, the Judge was entitled to place no weight on  that  piece
      of evidence for the reasons that he gave.


  25. The new evidence as to the solicitor's role in failing to send  it  to
      the Appellant  therefore  would  not  have  assisted.  Mrs  Johnrose's
      argument that the Appellant should not be prejudiced  by  failures  of
      her solicitors or indeed herself in seeking an  adjournment,  is  also
      without merit given the other difficulties that I have identified with
      that document.


  26. The Judge in this case gave careful consideration to the  claim  as  a
      whole, noted and made adverse credibility findings in relation to  the
      Appellant's claim itself, which have not been challenged, and rejected
      the "KDPI" letter for the reasons he gave all of which  were  open  to
      him on the basis of the evidence before him.


  27. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is not tainted by any error of law,
      material or otherwise.

  28. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  29. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.


Signed                              Date 18th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
