
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00173/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre| Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th September 2019                  | On 2nd January 2020               |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                    MHAA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chapman which was promulgated on 20th  March  2019.
    The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keane by way of a decision dated 7th May 2019.

2.   I considered various  documents  in  respect  of  this  case  including
    provision of copies of the Appellant's bundle which was provided at the
    time to First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  and  a  skeleton  argument
    drafted by Ms Bachu dated today.  I also heard  oral  submissions  from
    both advocates.

3.   The Appellant was represented by  experienced  immigration  and  asylum
    solicitors at the hearing at the First-tier but thereafter  he  drafted
    grounds of appeal to the Tribunal against the refusal of  the  decision
    by himself.  A summary of those grounds say in part as follows:

         "First of all I am very unhappy about the law decision  the  reason
         for that when I did the screen interview I  had  received  all  the
         statement which I gave into makes sure if I satisfied if I  had  to
         sign it and send it back.   However  I  did  some  correction  then
         before you receive it.  You send me the  refusal  letter  and  that
         make me to ask also I really want to ask at the court unfortunately
         I did not have the chance to mention it.  Secondly I feel you  have
         mixed my case and there is a lot of misunderstanding  regarding  my
         case.  Also I am sure that I  have  explained  every  single  steps
         regarding my particular situation  during  this  four  years.   For
         instance I have been asked the same  questions  during  screen  and
         asylum interview and I did answer the same thing only a little  bit
         extra information.  I was asked about my  passport  at  the  asylum
         interview and I mentioned it was in Turkey even  though  at  screen
         interview I was asked the same question and I did answer same thing
         but only I added that at the moment my passport has been posted  to
         Finland.  Thirdly I totally agree that I got  refused  letter  from
         other country and the reason I came here was  only  to  protect  my
         life until Finland decided to send me back to Iraq  which  is  very
         dangerous place for me to live.  In conclusion I really  unexpected
         for this decision it made me shocked  when  person  disagreed  with
         this decision."

4.   The grant of permission by Judge Keane says in part as follows:

         "The Appellant applied in-time for permission to appeal against the
         decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chapman promulgated on
         20th March 2019 in which the judge dismissed the appeal on  asylum,
         humanitarian protection, and human  rights  Articles  2,  3  and  8
         grounds...It was contended in the grounds that the judge should not
         be afforded weight to discrepancies which ought to be discerned  if
         remarks had been made by the Appellant in the  screening  interview
         compared with remarks made by him  at  an  asylum  interview.   The
         factual basis of the complaint was  not  established  certainly  at
         paragraph 38 of his decision the judge remarked that  there  was  a
         significant inconsistency of the two  sources  that  also  compared
         with each other but the judge went on to decline to  afford  weight
         to such a matter, and then importantly Judge Keane went on  to  say
         "as the Appellant personally prepared the grounds I have considered
         the judge's decision in order to  ascertain  whether  there  was  a
         strong and arguable error or  errors  of  law  but  for  which  the
         outcome of the appeal might have been different".  The judge  found
         that the Appellant had not given a credible account of  events  for
         reasons mentioned at paragraphs 39, 40 and 41 of his decision.   At
         paragraph 39 the judge relied on eleven  discrete  concerns.   Such
         concerns  were  arguably  to  be  construed  as  concerns  with   a
         plausibility of the Appellant's claim.  They did  not  reflect  the
         assessment of the evidence which in essence was  an  assessment  of
         credibility.  At paragraph 40 of his decision  the  judge  remarked
         that there were several examples why the  Appellant's  account  was
         incoherent, inconsistent or simply not credible.  It was  incumbent
         upon the  judge  to  give  reasons  for  supporting  such  dramatic
         findings and the judge arguably did not do so either  at  paragraph
         40 of his decision or elsewhere in his decision.  At  paragraph  41
         of his decision the judge remarked that  the  Appellant  had  shown
         that he is prepared to adapt and change his account and he feels it
         is appropriate to do so and when it serves its own  purpose.     In
         fairness to the  judge  the  judge  supported  such  a  finding  by
         remarking upon two considerations made in a  late  edition  to  the
         Appellant's account of his parents  having  disowned  him  and  his
         response is to seek some professionals when asked about photographs
         of Z.  To fasten  upon  merely  two  facets  of  the  evidence  was
         arguably an uncertain foundation so does the finding  as  important
         as the finding that the Appellant was prepared to adapt and  change
         his account when he felt it appropriate to do so and when it served
         his own purpose.  Overall the judge argues he failed to any or  any
         adequate reasons to support  his  finding  as  to  the  Appellant's
         credibility.  The judge's decision disclosed an arguable  error  of
         law or errors but for which the outcome of the  appeal  might  have
         been different. The application for permission is granted"

5.   In her helpful skeleton argument Ms Bachu sets out  the  background  to
    the appeal and she says that when granting permission Judge  Keane  had
    noted that it was arguable what was a failure to give reasons  and  she
    says in accordance with Durueke  (PTA:  AZ  applied,  proper  approach)
    [2019] UK 00197 (IAC) that this is arguably a  Robinson  obvious  point
    and/or one which has a strong  possibility  of  success  and  she  says
    applying AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT
    0024 (IAC) I should find that there is an error of law.

6.   There is detailed reference in the skeleton argument  to  paragraph  39
    of Judge Chapman's findings that  the  judge  had  taken  an  incorrect
    approach to issues and credibility and the  proper  approach  was  that
    identified by the Court of Appeal in HK v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and there is further reference  to
    updates to this in terms of duty to give reasons the more  recent  case
    of SB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ where Lord Justice Green noted at paragraph 44:

         "An Appellate Court needs to be able to  satisfy  itself  that  the
         fact-finder has at least identified  the  most  relevant  piece  of
         evidence and giving sufficient reasons...for accepting or rejecting
         it."

7.   There is also reference to the decision of the Upper Tribunal MM  (UPDS
    risk on return) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00023 whereby it is  submitted  and
    said that where an aspect of an account is inherently unlikely it  does
    not necessarily follow that it is true.  That is, as I say,  a  helpful
    reminder of the position in relation to the  assessment  of  whether  a
    claim is incredible or plausible, unreliable or the like.

8.   In her oral submissions Ms Bachu who  said  all  she  possibly  can  on
    behalf of the Appellant had explained with great care and  skills  that
    the judge made considerable errors the judge had conflated plausibility
    with credibility.  Ms Bachu took me through the eleven subparagraphs at
    paragraph 39 of the judge's decision.  She also took me to pages 47 and
    57 of the original Appellant's bundle  which  is  background  material,
    firstly from the Immigration  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  honour  based
    violence in Kurdistan from 2016 and  secondly  the  Danish  Immigration
    Service Honour Crimes Against Men in  Kurdistan  from  2010.   A  short
    summary of those documents is as follows: At page 47 that honour  based
    violence is common, more prevalent in Iraqi Kurdistan."

9.   At page 57 that illegitimate section of relationships or offences  that
    are dealt with according to Kurdish tradition and Islam principles.  An
    offence against a family's honour is serious and conflicts  can  mainly
    arise between the two families directly involved in  some  cases  other
    families could be involved depending on the linkage of  those  families
    to the client.

10.  Ms Bachu rhetorically asked how does one deal with these  aspects  that
    plausibility needs to be assessed in its entirety.  Further  there  was
    an absence of an  explanation  in  relation  to  paragraph  13  and  in
    subparagraph 6.  Judge Keane when granting permission noted reliance on
    incoherence at paragraph 40.  Ultimately when looking at  the  entirety
    of the account the judge had clearly made errors.  It was clear from MA
    (Somalia) that inherent implausibility does not mean that the claim  is
    untrue.  The judge had failed to grapple with the basis of the refusal.
     The judge had failed in following in line with MK (Pakistan)  to  give
    reasons and SB (Sri Lanka) required there to be  a  duty  required  and
    said that there was a duty to give reasons.  It was submitted that  the
    decision was unsafe and that the matter ought to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with no preserved findings.

11.  Mr Mills in his submission said that although there is reliance on  the
    case of Durueke that case did not assist  the  Appellant  because  what
    Judge Keane has done is precisely what the Upper  Tribunal  in  Durueke
    were saying should not occur. What one had here was an extension of one
    statement from Judge Keane that he would have allowed  the  appeal  but
    that is not sufficient.  Mr Mills  referred  to  HK  that  it  will  be
    potentially dangerous to reject an  appeal  alone  in  respect  of  one
    aspect of cultural context.

12.  Mr Mills took me to paragraph 39 subparagraphs (1), (2) and he said  he
    also possibly relied on (3) of the judge's decision, but in  any  event
    he said if one read that in full it was clear that the judge  was  well
    aware of the cultural context and cultural background.  In relation  to
    paragraph 39 subparagraph (6) this was not raised before it was  raised
    for the first time in oral submissions  today.   There  was  additional
    reasoning apart from paragraph 39 and paragraphs 40 and 41.  Indeed the
    judge later went on to  deal  with  Section  8  issues.   This  was  an
    Appellant who had claimed asylum in Finland, his brother  lived  there,
    the Appellant's claim for asylum had  failed  in  Finland  and  it  was
    thereafter that the Appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  and  had
    sought asylum here.  As I understood Mr Mills' submissions  if  it  was
    not for lapse in  the  paperwork,  the  Dublin  Convention  would  have
    applied in this case so that removal would have taken place.

13.  Ms Bachu in her response said that the case law and the legal  position
    applied.  Judge Keane had identified  what  he  thought  were  arguable
    material errors of the law.  The test was met.  Insofar  as  paragraphs
    39 subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3) were  concerned  those  may  well  be
    plausibility aspects but they went  to  the  core  of  the  Appellant's
    account.  That needed to be assessed with the entire claim as  was  put
    forward.  This in any event was that paragraph 39(1) was at  odds  with
    the  objective  evidence   in   the   circumstances   here   in   Iraq.
    Relationships do occur outside marriage.  There was no reason  why  the
    evidence was disregarded.  The objective evidence supported that  these
    relationships do occur and that paragraph 39(2) says similar  arguments
    of these concerns affect the credibility finding which were made.

14.  Insofar as 39(6) is concerned this was the procedural  fairness  aspect
    and Ms Bachu said this was a Robinson obvious  point.   She  apologised
    for the lateness of it but there were  two-fold  aspects.   Firstly  if
    reasons were given as to how the Appellant had left Iraq  and  secondly
    how you arrange to do so and this was not factored into this particular
    finding.  There was procedural unfairness in  making  adverse  findings
    against the Appellant in the absence of asking him.

15.  Insofar as paragraph 39(5) was concerned this related to the  Appellant
    leaving  Iraq  but  leaving  his  partner   behind.    There   was   no
    consideration of the analysis as to the necessity for the Appellant  to
    leave with a risk now that he faces as I  understood  this  submission.
    Ultimately in relation to the other matters, for example  the  passport
    issued, the Appellant had dealt with that within his grounds of appeal.

16.  I turn then to consider my judgment. That  requires  me  to  deal  with
    care the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman's.  Paragraph 39
    has already been referred to at some length but it is worth summarising
    it again.   Importantly, the judge noted at the beginning of that quote
    "I have then gone to consider the Appellant's evidence  very  carefully
    because I find that I have significant difficulties  in  accepting  his
    account as credible for the following reasons". This was just after the
    judge had said that there were significant inconsistencies between  the
    Appellant's  claim  at  the  screening  interview  and  at  his  asylum
    interview but the judge ultimately said at the end of paragraph 38 that
    he was going to disregard the differences between the accounts given at
    the two interviews and that they  would  not  feature  in  his  overall
    conclusions.

17.  In my judgment it is quite clear the judge was  being  as  fair  as  he
    possibly could in relation to the assessment of the evidence. That  was
    the correct, fair and lawful approach  in  my  judgment.  It  showed  a
    balanced and even-handed approach.   The  judge  then  summarised  over
    eleven subparagraphs the following reasons why  he  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's account credible:

    (1)  He did not find it credible that  the  relationship  with  Z  took
         place as claimed and he referred to the cultural nuance  i.e.  that
         she was from a strict Kurdish family.


    (2)  He did not find credible that Z would visit the  Appellant's  shop
         and that she would close it whilst they spent time together without
         someone spotting what was happening informing Z's family  and  this
         was according to the Appellant  a  family  that  could  locate  him
         wherever he might go in Iraq but they  did  not  know  about  their
         daughter right under their noses.


    (3)  That there would be the photographs taken in  the  way  that  were
         suggested.


    (4)  That Z's mother could have noticed that Z was  pregnant  when  the
         pregnancy was only twelve weeks simply by looking at Z.


    (5)  This deals with whether or not the Appellant  would  simply  leave
         the country the next day.


    (6)  How the Appellant managed to afford and arrange his exit from Iraq
         so quickly; and


    (7)  There is a lack of expression of emotions by Z having been killed.


    (8)  In relation to photographs and how these came to be destroyed.


    (9)  References to the Appellant's passport and the agent from Finland.


    (10) That there had been two claims for asylum  and  that  it  was  not
         credible that he had no intention of going to Finland and  this  is
         where the Appellant had ended up.


    (11) That the Appellant claimed to be disowned by his parents.

18.  Additional to those eleven findings the judge also  said  at  paragraph
    40 that there were aspects which he the judge found to  be  incoherent,
    inconsistent and simply not credible and this of course was  after  the
    judge had made those other findings.  At 41 the judge noted there  were
    even further aspects there was a late edition to  his  account  of  his
    parents having disowned him as an example of that and the other was  in
    relation to the responses to seek some questions he was asked about  in
    relation to photographs of Z.

19.  The judge also comprehensively after all those  other  findings  as  is
    required by the law dealt with Section 8 matters the judge concluded he
    simply could not ignore that there had been a previous failed claim for
    asylum in Finland where the Appellant had  lived  for  some  period  of
    years.

20.  The judge also fully and comprehensively dealt  with  the  humanitarian
    protection aspects of the claim particularly taking  into  account  the
    decisions in AA (Iraq)  [2015]  UKUT  00544  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) [2018].  Indeed there is no appeal  before  me  in
    respect of the latter aspects but I do note that the judge  dealt  with
    those at length. He dealt correctly with those aspects of the claim.

21.  I return then to the appeal itself.  In my judgment,  in  view  of  the
    comprehensive decision of the judge then if it was only the grounds  of
    appeal that I had to consider then I  would  have  concluded  that  the
    appeal was hopeless and that there would be no basis to set  aside  the
    decision of the judge.

22.  It  is  necessary  in  this  case  though  to  consider  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal by Judge Keane.  I am reminded by Mr Mills of  the
    reach of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Durueke. Mr Mills reminds  me
    that any hesitation that I might myself  have  as  to  whether  or  not
    permission would have been granted in the way that it has I nonetheless
    have to go on to consider whether sufficient merit has  been  shown  in
    respect of the grounds now enumerated before me with the assistance  of
    the grant of permission to appeal by Judge Keane.

23.  In short, what is submitted on behalf of the Appellant  is  that  there
    were Robinson obvious points showing errors of law in the  decision  of
    Judge Chapman and that there was the conflation  of  plausibility  with
    credibility.  Having considered matters carefully,  in  my  judgment  I
    conclude that there is no material error of law.  In my judgment it  is
    important  to  note  that  nowhere  was  Judge  Chapman   saying   that
    relationships outside marriage do not occur in  Iraq.   Indeed  I  take
    judicial notice of the fact that relationships  outside  marriage  take
    place,  I  am  sure  in  absolutely   every   country.   Whether   such
    relationships are outlawed or not.  It is a  fact  of  life  that  such
    relationships outside of marriage occur.

24.  In my judgment nowhere from within  the  background  material  can  the
    Appellant gain assistance from any of the  documentation  that  I  have
    referred to.  Pages 47 to 57 of the background material which had  been
    brought to my attention says no more than that there are these problems
    with the way in which relationships outside marriage  are  dealt  with,
    those problems being that  there  are  honour  killings  and  that  the
    legislation seeks to outlaw such relationships.  So in my judgment  the
    background  material  certainly  does  not  support  the  Appellant.  I
    obviously accept that the regime and society in Iraq does  not  approve
    of relationships outside of marriage and indeed goes as far as to  kill
    persons who engage in such activities, but that is not the point of the
    ground of appeal.

25.  It is also important to look  to  what  paragraph  39  of  the  judge's
    decision actually says.  The judge explains that he was  aware  of  the
    cultural nuance in terms of the way in which the family honour  aspects
    arise but he did not find it  credible  that  this  relationship  could
    possibly have occurred in the way in which the  Appellant  himself  had
    described along with all of the other aspects of the Appellant's  claim
    and all the other findings which were made against him.

26.  In  my  judgment  the  judge  was  quite  entitled  to  come  to  those
    decisions.  Just as he was for example to say at paragraph  39(4)  that
    he concluded it unlikely that Z's pregnancy would be showing after just
    twelve weeks of being pregnant.  There  was  nothing  wrong  with  that
    finding and there is no basis for me to go behind it.   The  judge  was
    quite entitled to say as he did at 39(6) that there was a  lack  of  an
    explanation as to how the Appellant was able to arrange his  exit  from
    Iraq so quickly.  I of course appreciate that now it has been said that
    this was a matter which  should  have  been  specifically  put  to  the
    Appellant.  In my judgment this goes  nowhere  near  being  a  Robinson
    obvious point.  It is not something  which  is  so  difficult  to  have
    imagined was relevant as not to have been fully and  clearly  explained
    by the Appellant himself in any event.  in  my  judgment  it  is  quite
    clearly that the opposite applies. Namely that if the Appellant's  case
    was that he had to flee in urgent and emergency circumstances  then  it
    was incumbent upon him to explain how it was that he was able to do so.
    This was after all, his home and life in Iraq.

27.  Insofar as the Section 8 matters  are  concerned  in  my  judgment  the
    judge was quite entitled to conclude that a person who had fled Iraq to
    go and live in a country where his brother was living  and  where  this
    Appellant then claimed asylum there but where this Appellant failed  in
    his asylum claim there are all highly pertinent matter.  The judge  was
    entitled to note it  was  only  after  that  failed  attempt  that  the
    Appellant then left the third country to come to the UK. The judge  was
    entitled to conclude that these were all matters  capable  of  damaging
    the claim itself and the judge quite properly dealt with the Section  8
    matters after having made the findings at paragraph 39 in those  eleven
    paragraphs and then at paragraph 40 and 41. This was yet another reason
    which supported the judge's conclusions.

28.  Reminding myself of the Court of Appeal's decision in R (Iran)  I  have
    to consider that there is an error of law in the  judge's  decision.  I
    conclude that there is simply no basis upon which it can be  said  that
    there is any material error of law in Judge  Chapman's  decision,  even
    when looking at it  with  the  helpful  assistance  which  Judge  Keane
    provides within his decision when granting permission to appeal.  There
    is no incoherence in the judge's decision. It is

29.  Therefore in my judgment  I  conclude  that  despite  the  careful  and
    detailed submissions of Ms Bachu who has said all that she possibly can
    on behalf of the Appellant, the appeal against the  decision  of  Judge
    Chapman is dismissed.  Therefore  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    stands.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
Therefore  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   stands   and   the
Appellant's appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed: A Mahmood                       Date. 30 09 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed: A Mahmood                                Date; 30 09 19

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

