
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00917/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 June 2019          |On 13 June 2019                         |
|                        |                                        |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. B.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the UK lawfully  in  2011  with  leave  to
           remain until February 2013, however that leave was cancelled  in
           December  2011  so  that  she  became,  and  has  remained,   an
           overstayer. There  has  been  a  protracted  series  of  appeals
           prompted by the December 2011 decision, but  her  appeal  rights
           were finally exhausted in March 2016.
        2. In August 2018 the Appellant lodged her most recent  application
           for international protection, which was  refused  on  9  January
           2019.  Her appeal against that decision was heard and  dismissed
           on all grounds by First Tier Tribunal Judge Cary in  a  decision
           promulgated on 13 March 2019.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal that decision  on
           Article 8 grounds only, by decision of 8  April  2019  of  First
           tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker. It was considered arguable that
           the Judge's approach had failed to  make  adequate  findings  in
           relation to the best interests of her children, and, had  failed
           to follow  the  guidance  to  section  117B(6)  set  out  in  KO
           (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.


      The litigation history
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing it was observed by  Mr
           Selway that  I  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  error  of  law
           challenge to a 2014 Tribunal decision, in a decision of 1  March
           2016. Upon enquiry neither party made an application for  me  to
           recuse myself in the light  of  that  2016  decision,  and  both
           confirmed that they were content that I should hear the  current
           appeal. Having separately reviewed the matter for myself, I  was
           not satisfied that there was  any  proper  basis  upon  which  I
           should recuse myself of my own motion.

      The Appellant's position
        7. As noted in the grant of permission the Appellant's challenge is
           restricted to the Judge's dismissal of her Article 8 appeal.
        8. The Article 8 appeal that was pursued before Judge Cary was  not
           founded upon any  "family  life"  relationship  enjoyed  by  the
           Appellant. The Appellant's position remained (as it had been  in
           2014 and 2016) that she and the children had no contact with the
           father of her children [39]. She did  not  claim  to  have  ever
           entered into a new relationship.
        9. Nor did the Appellant identify any aspect of  her  own  "private
           life" that was said to enjoy any particular strength, sufficient
           to engage Article 8. The focus of her Article 8 appeal was  upon
           the "private life" of her eldest child, who had been born in the
           UK, and who had attained the age of seven by  the  date  of  the
           hearing, and who was thus a "qualifying child"; section 117D(1).


       10. The Appellant is not, and has never been, liable to deportation.
           Since the Appellant's case was that she was a "sole  parent"  to
           her two children, there was no dispute before  Judge  Cary  that
           she enjoyed a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
           them both. Thus her case was,  in  essence,  that  the  "private
           life"  formed  by  her  children,  and  their  "best  interests"
           outweighed the  public  interest  in  the  family's  removal  to
           Pakistan. In  that  sense  her  case  was  contingent  upon  the
           strength of the claim that  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect
           either of her children to leave the UK.


      The challenge
       11. As advanced by Mr Selway, the  first  limb  to  the  Appellant's
           challenge to the decision of Judge  Cary  appeared  to  be  that
           since the Respondent had failed to effect the removal  from  the
           UK of the Appellant and her children, he was necessarily  unable
           to  rely  upon  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance   of
           immigration controls; s117B(1). If that was indeed the nature of
           the challenge then I am satisfied that there is no merit in  it.
           The significance of the passage  of  time  since  2011  for  the
           Appellant's Article 8 claim was rehearsed in EB (Kosovo)  [2008]
           UKHL 41. The Appellant has not  attempted  either  before  Judge
           Cary, or now, to establish either that there has been any  delay
           of significance on the part of the Respondent, or, that any such
           delay  was  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system   yielding
           unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes.
       12. There was no reliable evidence upon  which  the  Tribunal  could
           have concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  have  genuinely  or
           reasonably concluded that the Respondent had no interest in  her
           removal from the UK. Nor was there any relationship entered into
           with a  sense  of  impermanence  that  the  parties  could  have
           persuaded themselves had acquired a lack of precariousness.
       13. Accordingly the significance of the passage of time was, as  the
           Judge recognised, that he  had  to  assess  the  nature  of  the
           Article 8 case as it was at the date the appeal  was  called  on
           before him. Whilst the Judge had available to him  the  findings
           made by the Tribunal in  2013,  and  again  in  2014,  upon  the
           Appellant's  Article  8  claim  as  it  was  then  advanced,  he
           recognised that he had to assess the situation as it was at  the
           date of the hearing. There is no dispute that  he  did  so,  and
           that he recognised that the Article 8 claims of both parent  and
           children had strengthened with the passage of time.
       14. Had the Judge simply been considering the  position  as  it  had
           been in 2016, then he would  have  had  no  alternative  but  to
           reject the Appellant's Article 8 claim  outright,  since  as  he
           noted, there was no evidence placed before him to  suggest  that
           any of the findings of fact made  in  2014  or  2016  should  be
           revisited.  The  Judge  also,  correctly,  identified  that  the
           Appellant's position in 2016 (when she was also  represented  by
           Mr Selway) was that her removal in the company of her two infant
           children to Pakistan would not engage the Article  8  rights  of
           any of them [B6 #16]. Her case then was that  it  engaged  their
           Article 3 rights because they faced a real risk of serious  harm
           in the event of removal to Pakistan - a claim that was  rejected
           as untrue.
       15. Mr Selway's challenge therefore appeared to shift before me to a
           second,  narrow,  complaint  that  although   the   Judge   had,
           correctly, directed himself to the guidance to be found in KO he
           had necessarily failed to follow it, because otherwise he  would
           have found that the best interests of the children were for  the
           family to remain in the UK, and thus he would have been bound to
           have allowed the appeal. In my judgement this argument was quite
           plainly rejected  in  KO  [51],  and  there  is  nothing  in  AB
           (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 to suggest otherwise.
       16. As I understood it, Mr Selway's argument then shifted once  more
           to a  third,  wider  complaint,  that  although  the  Judge  had
           purported to consider the  circumstances  of  the  children  and
           their mother he had  no  evidence  upon  which  to  support  the
           findings  he  had  made,  so  that  he  had  fallen  into   mere
           conjecture, and had failed to undertake a "real world"  analysis
           of the evidence and the Appellant's position.
       17. I reject that argument. In my judgement, when  the  decision  is
           read as a whole, it is clear that the Judge's starting point was
           not to rehearse the  Appellant's  immigration  history  for  the
           purpose of "visiting the sins of the parent upon the  children",
           but for the purpose of identifying; (a)  what  weight  he  could
           give to the Appellant's evidence, and, (b) the proper context in
           which he was to assess the question of whether it was reasonable
           to expect the children to go to Pakistan with their mother.
       18. As the Judge clearly identified this was not an appeal in which,
           sadly, the Appellant's evidence could be taken at face value.  I
           would refer back to my decision of 1 March 2016 [B7-] in which I
           set  out  her  litigation  history,  and  analysed  the  adverse
           findings that had from time  to  time  been  made  against  her.
           Repeatedly the  Tribunal  has  been  required  to  make  adverse
           findings upon the Appellant's evidence, as  the  nature  of  the
           different claims to be entitled to remain in the UK that she has
           made from time to time have evolved.  Most  recently  the  claim
           that was advanced for the first time  before  me  in  the  Upper
           Tribunal in 2014 that either she or the children  might  face  a
           real risk of harm upon removal to Pakistan  was  rejected  as  a
           fiction in the light of the earlier findings of the Tribunal.
       19. In order to consider the true circumstances of her  children  it
           was not only important for the Judge to consider the weight that
           could be given to the Appellant's  evidence,  but  it  was  also
           necessary for him to consider the unchallenged findings that had
           previously made against the Appellant, Thus it was relevant that
           the Tribunal had previously concluded;
             i) the Appellant had been well  educated  in  Pakistan  at  the
                expense of her family;
            ii) she had been employed in Pakistan as a  teacher  of  English
                and Maths;
           iii) she had conceived her eldest  child  in  Pakistan  prior  to
                travelling to the UK;
            iv) her family had financed her travel to the UK in  order  that
                she might live in the UK with the father  of  her  children,
                and,
             v) the Appellant  was  precisely  the  sort  of  qualified  and
                educated woman who would be well able to  secure  well  paid
                employment in a city in Pakistan and earn sufficient  to  be
                able to support  herself  and  her  children  from  her  own
                resources.
       20. As the Judge noted the Appellant had adduced no evidence  before
           him to suggest that any of these findings needed to be revisited
           [39], and his starting point in the  assessment  of  the  weight
           that could be given to her evidence was to  note  that  she  was
           someone who was prepared to seek to mislead the  Respondent  and
           the Tribunal in an effort to remain in the UK [40].
       21. The  Judge  noted  their  mother's  unsupported  assertion  that
           neither of the children had any  fluency  in  either  spoken  or
           written Urdu. I do not accept Mr Selway's claim that he accepted
           it was true. In my judgement he neither rejected that assertion,
           nor accepted it, but reasoned that even if  it  were  true,  the
           children would be able to adapt and to acquire the essentials of
           the culture and language in Pakistan within a reasonable time of
           arrival. I can see no  error  in  that  approach  to  unreliable
           evidence. Nor is there  any  error  in  the  reasoning  offered.
           International schools teaching in English exist in Pakistan, and
           there is no proper evidential basis for a suggestion  that  they
           would be inaccessible to these children. Moreover the  Appellant
           as their mother  is  a  qualified  and  experienced  teacher  of
           English and Maths in Pakistan, and I can identify no  evidential
           basis upon which it could sensibly be argued that she was unable
           to teach her own children Urdu, should they in  truth  lack  any
           spoken or written fluency in  it.  In  the  circumstances  I  am
           satisfied that the Judge was entirely correct to  conclude  that
           both children would be able to access education in Pakistan.
       22. The "best interests" of a qualifying child who is not a  British
           citizen, and who is not at an important  educational  milestone,
           are not conclusive of the reasonableness of the expectation that
           they  should  leave  the  UK  with  their  parent(s).  Were   it
           otherwise, it is clear that the appeal of NS, in KO  would  have
           succeeded. Their  Lordships  noted  that  it  was  in  the  best
           interests of the children concerned in  that  appeal  for  their
           family to remain in the UK, but  concluded  that  there  was  no
           error of law in the assessment of the evidence that had  led  to
           the assessment  that  it  was  reasonable  (in  the  context  of
           s117B(6)) to expect them to leave the UK with their parents. The
           conduct of the parent was  not  irrelevant,  since  it  was  the
           context in which the assessment had to be undertaken,  and  thus
           mere reference to that  conduct  by  the  Judge  could  not,  of
           itself, establish a material error of law in his approach.
       23. In this case the Appellant's conduct had led  to  her  being  an
           overstayer in the UK since 2011, and to have pursued a course of
           conduct  towards  the  Respondent  and  the  Tribunal  that  was
           dishonest. Thus the proper  context  for  her  appeal  was  that
           although she was not liable to deportation, she  nonethless  had
           to leave the UK  unless  she  could  bring  himself  within  the
           provisions of s117B(6).
       24. That was the context in which the Judge had to consider  whether
           it was reasonable to expect her eldest child to  leave  the  UK,
           because as KO states, ordinarily in  that  context  the  natural
           expectation would be that the Appellant's children would do  so.
           In my judgement that is the  context  in  which  the  Judge  did
           consider the evidence before him concerning the circumstances of
           both children. I am satisfied that it was open  to  him  on  the
           evidence to make the findings of primary fact that he made,  and
           they were adequately reasoned. It follows that it  was  open  to
           him to reach the conclusions in relation to s117B(6),  and  upon
           the  proportionality  assessment  concerning   the   Appellant's
           "private life" appeal, that he did. Again I  am  satisfied  they
           were adequately reasoned; MD  (Turkey)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958.
           Adequacy does not import a counsel of perfection. The  Appellant
           as the losing party, and her advisers, are  able  to  see  quite
           clearly why she lost.
       25. The Judge did not have the benefit of the very  recent  decision
           in AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661,  because  this  was  only
           promulgated on 12 April 2019, but nothing  turns  on  that.  The
           Court  of  Appeal  were  then  concerned  with  British  citizen
           children, and in each case the child lived with their mother,  a
           British citizen. Neither mother nor child would leave the UK  in
           the event that the father was removed. Thus the Court of  Appeal
           was not concerned with a situation in which the only  parent  in
           the children's life  had  no  leave  to  remain,  and  thus  was
           required to leave the UK.
       26. In the circumstances, and as set out above, I am satisfied  that
           the Judge did not fall into any material error of  law  when  he
           dismissed the Article 8 appeal,  notwithstanding  the  terms  in
           which permission to appeal was  granted.  In  my  judgement  the
           grounds fail to disclose  any  material  error  of  law  in  the
           approach taken by the Judge to the public interest that requires
           his decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 13
   March 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision to dismiss
   the Appellant's human rights appeal which requires that decision  to  be
   set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her  or  the
        children. This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 10 June 2019




