
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00487/2020

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House Without a Hearing   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 November 2020                           |On 14 January 2021            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                      Between


                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Barker, promulgated on 4  August  2020,  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent  made  on  2  January
    2020 to refuse his asylum and protection claim.

 2. The appellant's case is that he faces persecution on return to Sudan as
    he is a member of the Berti black African Darfuri tribe.   It  is  also
    his case that he faces persecution due to his anti-Sudanese  government
    political involvement both in Sudan and the United  Kingdom,  including
    active involvement with JEM.  He also states that his removal to  Sudan
    would be in breach of Article 3 of the Human  Rights  Convention  given
    that he suffers from PTSD and epilepsy for which he receives  treatment
    in the United Kingdom.

 3. Although accepting that the appellant  is  a  national  of  Sudan,  the
    respondent  rejected  the  remainder  of  his  claim,  relying   to   a
    significant extent on an earlier decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes, promulgated on 8 June 2015.   The  respondent  did  not  accept
    either that his health claim had reached the high threshold of severity
    to engage Article 3.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and a witness,  MESK.   She
    also had before her expert reports from John Birchall, and a consultant
    neurologist Holger Allroggen.  She also had evidence in the form  of  a
    letter from Mr Sediq Hamad,  chairperson  of  Darfur  Union  UK  and  N
    Ireland, this only being a photocopy.

 5. The judge did not accept that the appellant was a member of  the  Berti
    tribe nor was she satisfied that he was involved with JEM  or  that  he
    would be at risk on return to Sudan.  She did not  accept  either  that
    the appellant's medical conditions were such as to engage Article 3  as
    he had not demonstrated he suffered from any  medical  conditions  that
    were of a type of severity that could not be treated in Sudan.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on several  grounds.   It  is
    averred that the judge had erred:-

      i) in identifying the wrong country of Iraq when the  appellant  is  a
         national of Sudan at paragraphs 39 to 40;

     ii) in rejecting a request for an adjournment;

    iii) in not properly applying Paposhvili v Belgium;

     iv) in not addressing the findings of the  expert  as  to  the  current
         medical facilities in Sudan which were inadequate to deal with  the
         appellant's medical problems;

      v) in disregarding the evidence of the witness MESK who confirmed that
         he is of the Berti tribe and  had  known  the  appellant  in  2011,
         simply stating the witness did not know whether the  appellant  was
         still in contact with his wife, this being an insufficient basis to
         reject his evidence;

     vi) in failing to make her own independent credibility findings, merely
         seeking to rely on the findings of Judge Holmes.

 7. On 22 September 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  granted  permission
    on limited grounds.  Judge  Lindsley  considered  that  the  judge  had
    directed herself properly in respect of the previous  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the  refusal  of  an  adjournment  was
    justified.  She considered that the error  in  naming  the  appellant's
    country as Iraq was not a material error, as in all  other  points  the
    judge had understood that the  appellant  is  from  Sudan  nor  was  it
    arguable that there are any errors in relation to the treatment of  the
    expert report of Mr Birchall as there was  no  medical  evidence  which
    goes to the impact of the appellant returning to a place  with  limited
    or no treatment and so the report could not affect the outcome.

 8. Judge  Lindsley  did,  however,  consider  it  was  arguable  that  the
    reasoning for dismissing the evidence of MESK was insufficient as it is
    arguable  the  evidence  was  not   vague,   lacking   in   detail   or
    contradictory, contrary to what was  stated  in  paragraph  65  of  the
    decision.  She also considered it arguable that the  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence was incorrect; the  fact  that  the  evidence  of  the
    consultant neurologist was in the form of a letter, not  a  report  was
    not a reason not to give it weight and whilst it was not arguable  that
    the medical evidence which showed that there would be an Article 3 risk
    on return to Sudan, it is arguable that the evidence of PTSD  ought  to
    have been considered properly in relation to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's protection claim.

 9. Judge Lindsley then gave directions stating  that  in  her  provisional
    view it would be appropriate to determine whether  the  making  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and if so whether it should  be  set  aside  without  the  need  for  a
    hearing.  She then gave a timetable for submissions and  objections  to
    be made.

10. On 26 October 2020 the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal  stating:



         Having reviewed this case we consider that the  matters  identified
         by  UTJ  Lindsley  at  [6]  of  her  decision  on  the  appellant's
         application for permission to  appeal  reveal  material  errors  in
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Barker's consideration and application of
         the medical evidence about the appellant's PTSD.  Consequently,  we
         invite the Upper Tribunal to set aside the FtTJ's decision.   Given
         that there would need to be a  de  novo  hearing  with  substantial
         findings of fact required, we respectfully suggest the remittal  of
         this appeal to a differently constituted FtT.

11. In deciding whether to proceed without a hearing I note the  provisions
    of the directions given and of the amended presidential  guidance  note
    referred to in Fordham J's decision in, JCWI v  the  President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 and the order set out in that decision.
     I bear in  mind  that  the  appellant  has  been  legally  represented
    throughout and has made no  objection  to  this  matter  being  decided
    without a hearing.  I note further that the grounds of appeal  conclude
    as follows:-

         It is respectfully submitted that there are arguable errors of  law
         and that this matter should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
         for a remittal hearing, in the alternative permission should kindly
         be granted and proceed to an Upper Tribunal oral hearing  as  there
         are arguable material errors of law.

12. In light of the concession made by the respondent and bearing  in  mind
    the overriding objective of the Procedural Rules I am satisfied on  the
    particular facts of this case that it would be  proper  to  proceed  to
    determine this appeal without the need for a hearing.

13. Given the concession by the Secretary of State that  the  judge  failed
    properly to assess the evidence relating to the appellant's PTSD  which
    is relevant to his credibility I am satisfied that for the reasons  set
    out in full in the grounds, and as identified by Judge Lindsley in  her
    grant of permission that the findings with regard  to  credibility  are
    not sustainable.  It therefore follows that on  that  basis  alone  the
    decision falls to be set aside as it involved the making of a  material
    error of law.

14. Further, I am satisfied also that the judge's approach to the  evidence
    of MESK was also flawed,  again  for  the  reasons  identified  in  the
    grounds and by Judge Lindsley in  her  grant  of  permission.   In  the
    circumstances, despite the fact that the judge  properly  relied  to  a
    significant extent on the  findings  of  Judge  Holmes  in  an  earlier
    appeal, I conclude that the decision  did  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and it will  not  be  possible  to  preserve  the
    findings of fact reached  by  Judge  Baker.   These,  particularly  the
    evidence of Mesk are material  and  accordingly,  I  am  satisfied  the
    decision must be set aside.

15. I am not, however, persuaded that, given  the  history  of  this  case,
    given the limited nature of the grounds and the previous case  that  it
    would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) The appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a  date  to  be
    fixed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date  1 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

