
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00144/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 August 2019                              |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     SAM
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Gardner, instructed Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1984 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007  and  applied  for  asylum.  That
    application and a subsequent appeal were  rejected  but  the  appellant
    remained  in  the  United  Kingdom,  making  further  submissions  most
    recently in May 2017.  By  a  decision  dated  10  December  2018,  the
    Secretary of State, having accepted the appellant's  submissions  as  a
    fresh claim, refused his application for international protection.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 March 2019, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turns on the judge's decision to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC). At the  initial  hearing
    at Cardiff on 8 August 2019, I  informed  the  representatives  that  I
    intended to allow the appeal  and  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.  I  gave  my
    reasons at the hearing so will now briefly summarise those reasons.

 3. I find that the judge was  not  justified  in  departing  from  country
    guidance. At [23], the judge sets out  what  he  considers  to  be  the
    current security situation in parts of Iraq. In doing so, he  fails  to
    give any or any adequate references to background material or  evidence
    to support the assertions which he makes. He concluded  that,  'in  the
    circumstances it is unrealistic in my view to place any reliance on the
    country guidance from  2015.  As  Ms  Gardner  [who  appeared  for  the
    appellant] emphasised herself in her skeleton argument,  the  situation
    in  Iraq  is  volatile  and  fluid.'  The  judge's  acceptance  of  the
    appellant's argument that the security situation in Iraq  is  'volatile
    and fluid' does not sit easily with his conclusion  that  circumstances
    have changed to such an extent and with such a degree of permanence  in
    former contested parts of Iraq that it was necessary to depart from the
    existing country guidance. I am not satisfied that the judge has  given
    sufficient reasons for departing from that guidance.

 4. Secondly, the  judge  seeks  to  address  the  problems  faced  by  the
    appellant who has no identity documents including a CSID  or  passport.
    At [29], the judge noted that,  'armed  with  a  laissez  passer',  the
    appellant could be returned  to  Baghdad.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant 'could leave the airport and attempt to locate his records at
    the Central Registry there but I accept there is no relative or  friend
    to help him and he has no Arabic. His best  option  appears  to  be  go
    through immigration control at the airport and obtain the  letter  from
    the airport police setting out his  basic  details.  This  should  then
    unable to pass through checkpoints on  arrival  at  Erbil.'  I  do  not
    consider these observations to amount to a firm factual foundation  for
    the judge's subsequent unequivocal  conclusion  that  '[the  appellant]
    could return to the IKR.' [33] Describing the appellant's 'best option'
    is not, in my opinion,  adequate  for  concluding  that  the  appellant
    could, without exposing himself to real risk in  Baghdad  as  a  single
    male Kurd, accesses records at  the  Central  Registry  and  thereafter
    travel without difficulty overland to the IKR. In my opinion, the judge
    has fallen into error; on the particular facts, it was not open to  the
    judge to conclude that the appellant would  be  able  to  obtain  fresh
    documentation, reside safely in Baghdad for the time it would take  him
    to attempt to obtain a CSID and then to travel overland safely  to  the
    IKR.

 5. I set aside the decision of the judge. Applying  the  existing  country
    guidance of AA (Iraq) and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation), I am
    satisfied that the appellant should be granted humanitarian protection.
    However, the appellant should be aware that any grant of leave  may  be
    of short duration; fresh country guidance is imminently  expected  from
    the Upper Tribunal and, in the light of that guidance, it  may  be  the
    case that the appellant will be deemed able to return safely  to  Iraq.
    However, that is a matter for the Secretary of State at a future date.



Notice of Decision

    I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 21 March 2019. I remade the  decision.  The  appellant's
    appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.






Signed                              Date 10 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







