
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                          |On 17th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                   P-B T-S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson, Counsel, instructed by Ansah
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (DRC) born on [ ] 1978.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK in June
    2005 when he was granted leave to enter as a student until 31st October
    2005.  He was then granted subsequent periods of leave to remain in the
    same capacity until 30th  September  2009.   Thereafter  the  Appellant
    applied for further leave to remain  as  a  student  and  also  as  the
    dependant of an EEA resident, but these were refused.  Having indicated
    that he wished to make an Assisted Voluntary Return to the DRC in 2012,
    the Appellant was arrested on 22nd August 2015 as  an  overstayer.   He
    applied for asylum on 25th June 2016.  That application was refused for
    the reasons given in an Asylum Decision dated 20th December 2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Zahed (the Judge) sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  6th February
    2017.  He decided to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his decision dated 5th May 2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  20th  September
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the asylum appeal because he found the Appellant to
    be lacking in credibility and did not believe what the  Appellant  said
    about  his  reasons  for  seeking  asylum.   The  Judge  dismissed  the
    Appellant's human rights appeal because he found that the Appellant had
    no family in the UK and had not given any evidence as to the  Appellant
    having a private life in the UK.

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Ferguson  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law in coming to these conclusions.  She referred to the grant
    of permission and argued that the Judge had relied too  much  upon  the
    reasons for refusal given in the  Respondent's  Asylum  Decision.   The
    Judge had failed to give any proper consideration to what the Appellant
    had said during his asylum interview.  However,  Ms  Ferguson  accepted
    that the Appellant had returned to the DRC in 2008, 2009, and 2010.  He
    had also inquired about the possibility of an Assisted Voluntary Return
    in 2012.

 5. As regards the Appellant's human rights claim, Ms Ferguson argued  that
    the Judge had given a wholly inadequate analysis at paragraph 21 of the
    Decision.

 6. In response, Mr Kotas referred to the Rule 24 response and argued  that
    there had been no such errors of law.  The grounds of  application  for
    leave amounted to no more than a disagreement with the decision of  the
    Judge and therefore an attempt to re-litigate the  appeal.   The  Judge
    had made findings open to him on the evidence  and  had  explained  his
    reasons for his decision so that the Appellant knew why he had lost his
    appeal.  The Appellant's own evidence summarised at paragraph 8 of  the
    Decision was that the Appellant had no profile in the DRC.

 7. As regards the delay in the Judge  producing  his  Decision,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that there must be a causal link between the  delay  and  any
    error of law.  In this case, any error was  not  material  because  the
    Appellant's appeal was bound to fail in any event.

 8. I find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  concerning  the
    Appellant's asylum appeal.  The decision of the Judge in  this  respect
    is based entirely upon his findings of  fact  and  as  to  credibility.
    However, those findings are unsustainable and unreliable because of the
    delay in the Judge producing his written decision.  He heard the appeal
    on 6th February 2017, and his Decision is  dated  5th  May  2017,  very
    nearly three months later.

 9. However, I find such error not to be material.  Owing to the fact  that
    the Appellant returned to his own country three times between 2008  and
    2010, and inquired about  the  possibility  of  an  Assisted  Voluntary
    Return in 2012, it must be the case that the Appellant's claim to  have
    a fear of returning to the DRC is  not  credible.   His  asylum  appeal
    therefore cannot succeed regardless of any error of law.

10. I also find an error of law in respect of the  human  rights  decision.
    The Judge's consideration of this part of the matter is cursory in  the
    extreme.  It is not in dispute that the Appellant has no family in  the
    UK, but it cannot be the case that he  has  no  private  life  in  that
    country bearing in mind that he has lived, studied,  and  worked  there
    since June 2005.  The  Judge's  decision  that  the  Appellant  has  no
    private life in the UK which the Judge has not  sufficiently  explained
    amounts to an error of law.

11. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal.  There needs to
    be much further evidence of the Appellant's private life in the UK  and
    therefore my decision is that the decision in the appeal will be remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statements.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law but only  as  regards  the
    Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

13. I set aside that decision.

14. The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated 15th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
