
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00680/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 August 2016                    |On 8 August 2016                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR BAKHTEYAR  AHMADI
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the Upper Tribunal, against a decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock hereinafter "the Judge") dismissing his
appeal  against  a  decision  of  24 July 2015  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection or any form of leave to enter or remain.

2.    By way of background, the appellant was born on 21 September 1984 and
is an  Iranian  national  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He  entered  the  UK  on
15 June 2015, in a clandestine manner, and claimed asylum on that date.  He
asserted that he was at risk  upon  return  to  Iran  because  he  had  been
involved in the smuggling of  alcohol  and  the  smuggling  and  storing  of
political oppositionist leaflets and had avoided military service.   It  was
also contended, on his behalf, that as a person who had left Iran  illegally
and who would be returning as a failed asylum seeker, he would  be  at  real
risk of detention and hence persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  on  that
account alone.   The  respondent,  in  short,  disbelieved  the  appellant's
account save for what he had had to say about his nationality and  ethnicity
and took the view that he would not be at risk for any reason  at  all  upon
return.

3.    The appeal was considered by the Judge at an oral hearing which  took
place on 21 April 2016.  Both parties were represented and  the  appellant
gave oral evidence.  The Judge rejected the appellant's account  concerning
smuggling, involvement with political leaflets and avoidance or escape  from
military service.  He was, though, invited to  depart  from  what  was  then
existing country guidance in BA (demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)
Iran CG (2011) UKUT 36 (IAC) and SB (risk on return - illegal  exit)  Iran
CG (2009) UKAIT 00053 and to conclude that the appellant would indeed be at
real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  on  account  of  his
returning as a failed asylum seeker who had exited Iran illegally,  even  if
the rest of the account was not true.  The Judge, however,  concluded  that
material which had been placed  before  him,  including  background  country
material, did not show that it would be appropriate to depart from the  then
current country guidance cases.

4.    That was not the end of the matter because  permission  to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal was obtained.  Permission had been sought solely on  the
issue of the assessment of risk to failed asylum seekers who had  left  Iran
undocumented and illegally.  Permission was granted on  that  basis  and  it
was noted that a new country guidance decision covering  the  above  matters
was likely to be issued in the near future.  That country guidance case  has
now been promulgated and is cited as  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal  Exit:   Failed
Asylum Seeker) Iran CG (2006) UKUT 00308  (IAC).   Permission  having  been
granted, and the new country guidance  case  having  been  promulgated,  the
matter was listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  so
that further consideration could be given as to whether  or  not  the Judge
had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from that.

5.    At the hearing representation was as indicated  above.   Although  the
appellant had had legal representation until  quite  recently  he  explained
that he was no longer being assisted by his former solicitors  and,  indeed,
they had written to the Upper Tribunal to confirm that that was  the  case.
He told me, with the assistance of a  Farsi  speaking  interpreter  whom  he
appeared to fully  understand  throughout,  that  he  had  lost  his  public
funding and did not have the means to pay for legal representation  himself.
 In the circumstances I decided to proceed because it seemed to me  that  if
public funding had been lost it was unlikely that new  solicitors  would  be
able to secure new public funding and it was also unlikely, on the basis  of
what he himself had said,  that  he  would  be  able  to  place  his  former
solicitors in funds or  place  any  new  solicitors  in  funds  himself.   I
explained to him that the grounds had only challenged the Judge's treatment
of the illegal exit/return as a failed asylum seeker  issue  and  that  that
was what the hearing would be concerned with.

6.    The appellant, in support of his contention that the Judge had  erred
in law, said that it was not just a question of his having  left  illegally.
His life was in danger because of all the reasons he had told the Judge and
he had told the Judge the truth.  If he had to return he would be  executed
or imprisoned.  It seemed to me that, understandably because  he  is  not  a
lawyer, the appellant wished  to  reopen  all  of  the  matters  decided  by
the Judge albeit that I had explained to him the issue with which  I  would
be concerned.

7.    Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, submitted that, following SSH  and
HR, the appellant simply did not have a case.  In  view  of  what  was  said
therein the Judge had adopted the right approach to risk  upon  return  for
persons who had  exited  illegally  and  made  unsuccessful  asylum  claims,
notwithstanding that he had not  had  the  benefit  of  that  decision  when
making his own decision.

8.    In SSH and HR, a decision reached after careful consideration of  much
evidence including expert evidence, the  Upper Tribunal  reached  the  view
that Iranian males in respect of whom the authorities in Iran have  not  had
any previous adverse interest, do not face a real  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm upon return to Iran on account of having left illegally  and/or
being failed asylum seekers.  It was said that,  in  particular,  there  was
not a real risk of prosecution leading to imprisonment.  That was  important
because there had been some suggestion that conditions  for  those  detained
in Iran might breach of Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (ECHR).

9.    Mrs Pettersen also directs me to paragraph 34 of the Upper Tribunal's
decision in SSH and HR, in which it was  said  that  Kurdish  ethnicity,  of
itself, did not create a real risk of ill-treatment on return nor did it  do
so in conjunction with illegal exit or a failure  to  make  good  an  asylum
claim abroad.

10.   In truth, what is said in SSH and HR is  utterly  destructive  of  the
arguments which have been advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in  this
appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I consider that the Judge, in deciding  not
to depart from  previous  country  guidance,  did,  in  effect,  follow  the
correct approach to the question of  risk  on  return  on  account  of  this
appellant as a person who had exited illegally  (and  the Judge  seemed  to
accept that he had) and who had failed in his  asylum  claim  and  would  be
returning  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.   Accordingly,  I  conclude   that
the Judge's decision, which is a well considered and carefully reasoned one
in all respects, shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law and
shall stand.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed:                           Date: 08/08/2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable and as no fee has been paid there can be no fee  award.



Signed:                           Date:

M R Hemingway
