
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00520/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 June 2016                       |On 11 July 2016                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     aa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AA, is a male citizen of Eritrea who was born  in  1989.
    He appealed against a decision of  the  respondent  to  deport  him  to
    Eritrea.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 March 2016 allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds
    (Articles 3 and 4 ECHR) but dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to follow  MA  (draft
    evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059  and
    MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190  (IAC).
    The grounds record that the judge found that the appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness and that the judge had failed to take into account the
    appellant's  father  who  was,  on  the  appellant's  own  account,   a
    government supporter [22].  It was likely, in those circumstances, that
    the appellant had not left Eritrea illegally.

 3. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the
    Secretary of State, confirmed  that  there  was  no  challenge  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the judge's finding that, in addition to facing  a
    real risk of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR, the  appeal  had
    also been allowed on the discrete ground that the appellant's return to
    Eritrea would breach Article 4 (prohibition against slavery and  forced
    labour).  The judge had considered Article 4  in  the  context  of  the
    government service which the appellant  was  reasonably  likely  to  be
    forced to engage indefinitely upon his return to  Eritrea.   The  judge
    recorded [67] that Article 4.1.(b) excludes forced or compulsory labour
    "of a military character" but found  that  "conscription  [in  Eritrea]
    imposed by the regime ... is infinite and arbitrary and goes beyond the
    service of a military character".  The judge noted that  deployment  of
    those conscripted may well include agricultural, construction, teaching
    and civil service work in addition to work of a military nature [68].

 4. In a Rule 25 statement, the appellant's solicitors point out  that  the
    grounds of appeal do not accurately summarise the appellant's evidence.
     At [22], the judge recorded that the appellant's  father  had  been  a
    government supporter but had "become disillusioned".  Further, "in June
    2002 the appellant's father was arrested and his  whereabouts  are  not
    known".  Therefore, to describe the appellant's father in  the  grounds
    of appeal as a  "government  supporter"  is  not  accurate.   I  agree.
    Indeed, the entire grounds of appeal are predicated on  the  assumption
    that the appellant, the son of a government  supporter,  may  not  have
    left Eritrea illegally and therefore will not face a real risk of  ill-
    treatment upon return.  First, as I have said, that is not an  accurate
    statement of the facts as found by the judge who,  notwithstanding  his
    rejection of large parts  of  the  appellant's  account,  did  not  act
    irrationally or perversely by concluding that the  appellant  had  left
    Eritrea illegally.  Secondly, as Mr Diwnycz acknowledged at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing, the grounds  of  appeal  challenge  only  the  appeal
    allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.  No mention is made in  the  grounds
    of appeal to Article 4 ECHR save, at the beginning of the  grounds,  to
    record that the judge had allowed the appeal  on  both  Article  3  and
    Article 4 grounds.  The judge dealt with Article 4 separately from  the
    remainder of the appellant's claim whilst Article 4 is an absolute (and
    not qualified) right under the ECHR as, of course, are Articles  2  and
    3.  The appellant had claimed that his right  not  to  be  enslaved  or
    forced into labour against his will contrary to Article 4 ECHR would be
    infringed should he return to Eritrea, the judge (on the  facts  as  he
    has found them) concluded that the appellant did face a  real  risk  of
    enslavement/forced labour and  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are wholly silent as to the fact that the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 4 grounds.  It follows that, even if  the  judge  had
    erred in his assessment of Article 3 ECHR (and I find that he did not),
    the appeal would still have been allowed under Article 4.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 4 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


