
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00390/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd January 2020               |On 10th January 2020                 |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                                     TF

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of the Ivory Coast born on 25 July 1998 and
    he appealed the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    promulgated on 18 September 2019 dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant claimed that he owned car washes in the Ivory  Coast  and
    in 2017 and 2018 he held regular meetings with his employees concerning
    updates regarding the business and the authorities became suspicious of
    those meetings. On 25 April  2018  the  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with a business visa for a conference organised by his employer
    Maritime National Equipment Services. He returned to the Ivory Coast on
    1 May 2018 and he asserts he was detained by the authorities on  5  May
    2018 and accused of training militia, collecting money for the  militia
    abroad and storing weapons. He was mistreated in detention and released
    after protests by his employees. He was rearrested on 13 May  2018  and
    ill-treated and beaten. His mother was killed. He  was  again  detained
    for 3 days in Camp Commando of Koumassi. A friend managed to secure his
    release from detention and arranged his onward journey and  escape.  He
    travelled on 1 June 2018 to Ghana and onward to the United Kingdom.

 3. At the hearing before the first-tier Tribunal the appellant  relied  on
    the country expert report by Karen O'Reilly, medico-legal reports by Dr
    Juliet Cohen and documentary evidence regarding his claim  including  a
    police summons.

 4. The grounds of appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  were
    fourfold

    (i) the judge materially erred in failing to analyse the reports of  Dr
    Cohen as part of an overall assessment of the  appellant's  credibility
    before rejecting his credibility. The judge  failed  to  recognise  the
    expert, Dr Cohen's, report as independent corroborating evidence of ill-
    treatment.

    (ii) the judge erred in a similar way in considering the country expert
    report of Ms O'Reilly. The judge accepted the expert's credentials  and
    it was incumbent upon the judge to assess the  appellant's  credibility
    "through the spectacles provided by the information... about conditions
    in the country in question". The judge erred in describing  the  report
    as one based on a positive  credibility  finding  about  the  appellant
    because the report included a detailed analysis of the plausibility  of
    the  claim  in  the  light  of  the  country  background   information.
    Additionally,  the  judge's  assessment   of   the   report   contained
    fundamental errors and omissions. Contrary to the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 42 of the determination, the expert analysis of  the  country
    situation in  the  Ivory  Coast  offered  an  explanation  of  why  the
    authorities would "out of the blue" arrest and  detain  the  appellant.
    Secondly the judge omitted from consideration material aspects  of  the
    report for example the appellant's account of torture as  being  highly
    consistent with the country background material {76],  [78]  and  [98].
    Contrary to HK v Secretary of State [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037  the  judge
    reached plausibility findings without analysing the expert evidence.

    (iii) there was an erroneous approach to the documentary  evidence  and
    contrary to Tanveer Ahmed (documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan  *
    [2002] UKIAT 00439 at [35] and [38].  The evidence should be considered
    "as a whole or in the round".

    (iv)  the judge applied  the  wrong  threshold  to  article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights  claim  on  medical  grounds.  The
    correct test was as set out in  (Paposhvili   v  Belgium,  13  December
    2016, ECtHR  (Application  No  41738/10),  which  requires  substantial
    grounds to be shown that an individual  "would  face  a  real  risk  on
    account of the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
    country or the lack of  access  to  such  treatment  being  exposed  to
    serious rapid and irreversible decline in his or her  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy".

 5. No rule 24 response was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 6. Appearing before me Mr Walker conceded that there was indeed  an  error
    of law in the determination, noting the 'Mibanga points', and that  the
    matter should be remitted to  the  first-tier  Tribunal  owing  to  the
    fundamental nature of the legal errors.

    Analysis

 7. In relation to  ground  (i)  the  approach  in  the  determination  was
    contrary to Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 367. The judge
    accepted that Dr  Cohen  was  suitable  expert  and  the  evidence  was
    insightful and informative but nonetheless at paragraph 63, stated that
    Dr Cohen's "clinical findings have to be placed alongside  my  findings
    which is that the appellant's account is not true for the reason I have
    given" and further at paragraph 65 the judge stated

    "Regarding the apparent injuries Dr Cohen's conclusions are, in effect,
    the appellant is accurate and truthful  about  how  he  received  those
    injuries. It is perfectly possible and feasible the appellant has  been
    whipped and beaten but the medical evidence cannot tell us by whom,  in
    what circumstances or when. To answer those questions one must go  back
    to the general  credibility  findings  and  the  believability  of  the
    appellant's case. In terms of credibility  and  believability,  I  have
    found the appellant's case wanting and for  that  reason,  I  find  the
    medical evidence carries little weight"


    Paragraph 65 clearly shows  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    medical evidence in the round and as part  of  the  overall  assessment
    when considering credibility.  The  medical  report  should  have  been
    integral to the assessment on credibility; that did not occur  and  was
    an error of law

 8. The judge also failed to  analyse  Dr  Cohen's  report  as  independent
    corroborating evidence of  the  appellant's  account  contrary  to  the
    principles set out in KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  [2019]  UKSC
    10.  The reports from Dr Cohen analysed  the  appellant's  account  and
    concluded that there was no exaggeration or  embellishment  because  he
    readily pointed out lesions owing to accidental causes. The account did
    include other instances of trauma and causes of  scarring.   The  judge
    did not address the  report  in  the  light  of  JL  (medical  reports-
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145.  The report does not  necessarily
    lack independent status merely because it was based on the  appellant's
    account.  This evidence should have been properly assessed.

 9. Again, in relation to ground (ii) the judge made  credibility  findings
    and then addressed the expert evidence in a  compartmentalised  manner.
    That was an error of law. For example, at paragraph 66 the judge stated



    "I find her report does not assist me or the appellant  in  his  appeal
    because the report is based upon  a  positive  finding  of  credibility
    which is not in line with the findings I reached".

10. As set out in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367  at paragraphs 24 and 25
      "24. It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must not  reach
      his or her conclusion  before  surveying  all  the  evidence  relevant
      thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal if alliterative  example,  one
      cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so  also  frequently  one
      cannot make a case, in the sense of establishing its truth,  otherwise
      than by combination of a number of pieces  of  evidence.  Mr  Tam,  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State, argues  that  decisions  as  to  the
      credibility of an account are to be taken by the judicial  fact-finder
      and that, in their reports, experts, whether in  relation  to  medical
      matters or in relation to in-country circumstances, cannot  usurp  the
      fact-finder's  function  in  assessing  credibility.  I  agree.  What,
      however, they can offer, is a factual  context  in  which  it  may  be
      necessary for the fact-finder to survey the allegations placed  before
      him; and such context may prove a crucial aid to the decision  whether
      or not to accept the truth of them. What the fact-finder does  at  his
      peril is to reach a conclusion by reference only  to  the  appellant's
      evidence and then, if it be negative, to ask  whether  the  conclusion
      should be shifted by the expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's
      attention to a decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004,  namely
      HE (DRC - Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT  00321  in
      which, in paragraph 22, it said:
           "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant
           to credibility, the  Adjudicator  should  deal  with  it  as  an
           integral part of the findings on credibility rather than just as
           an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to which  he
           would otherwise come."
    25. In my view  such  was  the  first  error  of  law  into  which  the
    adjudicator  fell.  She  addressed  the  medical  evidence  only  after
    articulating conclusions that  the  central  allegations  made  by  the
    appellant  were,  in  her  extremely   forceful   if   rather   unusual
    phraseology, 'wholly not credible'".

11. In relation to ground (iii), the judge stated at paragraph 58 "I  place
    no evidential weight on any of the  documents  including  summonses  in
    view of my findings about the appellant's credibility".  This  approach
    runs counter to the guidance given  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  such  that  the
    evidence should be considered as a whole  or  in  the  round  and  that
    included documentary evidence.

12. I am not persuaded by the challenge to ground (iv) particularly in  the
    light of Secretary of State v PF  (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139, where
    the Court of Appeal confirmed that the principles in N  v  SSHD  [2005]
    UKHL 31 remained binding on the courts  pending  the  decision  by  the
    Supreme Court in relation to AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

13. Bearing in mind  the  credibility  findings  were  fundamental  to  the
    decision as a whole and are flawed for the reasons given above, despite
    my observations on ground (iv), I set aside the  decision  as  a  whole
    with no preserved findings, and remit the matter on agreement  of  both
    the Secretary of State and Ms Patyna to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    hearing.

14. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed           Helen Rimington             Date    3rd January 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



