
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00795/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [H H]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE, promulgated on 22nd  August  2017,  following  a
    hearing at  Birmingham  Sheldon  Court  on  13th  July  2017.   In  the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon
    the Respondent Secretary of State, subsequently applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 7th October
    1992.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  2nd
    December 2016 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim, who  arrived  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor from Iraq on 12th March 2008, was that he feared persecution  due
    to his religious beliefs as a Christian convert if he was  required  to
    return to Iraq (see paragraph 9).  The judge held  that  the  Appellant
    had overall "been consistent in his account of when and how  he  became
    involved with  the  Christian  faith  and  about  the  process  of  his
    conversion" (paragraph  19)  and  that  he  was  "a  genuine  Christian
    convert".  The main issue thereafter, for the judge to  determine,  was
    the issue of risk upon return to Iraq.   The  judge  heard  submissions
    from the Respondent that the objective evidence showed  that  religious
    minorities  were  not  persecuted  in  Iraq,  and  evidence  from   the
    Appellant's representative,  "that  the  situation  is  different  with
    apostates", as is set out in the expert report prepared by Sheri Laizer
    (pages 435 to 456 of the Appellant's bundle), because this  shows  that
    the Appellant would indeed be at risk (see paragraph 20).

 4. The judge, accordingly, proceeded to decide that  the  Appellant  could
    not find safety in Iraq and that internal relocation  would  be  unduly
    harsh for him, such that the appeal fell to be allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons  as  to  why  the  Appellant  could  not  successfully
    relocate in Iraq, and in particular to the KRG area.  Second, the judge
    did not explain why she  preferred  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    expert over the evidence relied upon by the Respondent in  the  refusal
    letter.  On 8th November 2017 permission to appeal was granted  by  the
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had  not  even  indicated  in  her
    decision what the expert states about the risk to the Appellant in  the
    KRG or why such a risk might cross the threshold into persecution.

Submissions

 6. In the submissions before me, Mrs Aboni, appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, relied upon the grounds of application.  First,  the  judge
    had found  the  Appellant  to  be  a  genuine  convert  from  Islam  to
    Christianity.  However, the objective evidence contained  in  the  Home
    Office guidance (referred to at paragraph 20) was  that  in  general  a
    person from a religious minority will not be at risk of serious harm in
    the southern governorates including the IKR.  Given that the judge  had
    found (at paragraph 21) that the Appellant could potentially return  to
    the IKR, it was not credible to say that the Appellant would be at risk
    due to his religious conversion "no matter where in Iraq  he  relocated
    to".  It was not enough for the judge to say that  he  is  required  to
    look into individual  circumstances,  and  having  done  so,  would  be
    satisfied in coming to this conclusion.

 7. Second, the judge did not make any finding that the Appellant would  be
    treated as an apostate and the judge's finding in relation to  risk  on
    return is unreasoned or inadequately reasoned.

 8. Third, insofar as the judge allowed the appeal under  Article  8  ECHR,
    this was partly predicated on the finding that the Appellant's risk  on
    return is a very significant obstacle to his  reintegration  (paragraph
    21).  Fourth, the judge's finding (at paragraph 25) that  even  if  she
    was wrong in this, the Appellant's removal will  not  be  proportionate
    because this is wholly unreasoned.

 9. For his part, Mr Bandegani submitted that, it was not enough  to  place
    reliance upon the treatment of religious minorities in the Secretary of
    State's official guidance, because this was a  case  that  went  beyond
    that, namely, into the specific  question  of  how  converts  from  one
    religion to another risk being treated as "apostates".  Even though  in
    2006 a new constitution was settled, following the first free and  fair
    elections in that country, in the aftermath of the allied  invasion  by
    the UK and USA, the  fact  was  that  sharia  law  still  remained  the
    foundational law of Iraqi community.  Under  this,  the  Appellant  was
    going to be treated as  an  apostate,  and  this  was  clear  from  the
    evidence of Sheri Laizer as the expert in this appeal.   Quite  simply,
    it is submitted, this  appeal  could  not  succeed  for  the  following
    reasons.

10. First, the Respondent Secretary of State, in  arguing  that  a  country
    guidance case should not  be  followed,  had  to  circumvent  the  high
    threshold imposed by Brooke  LJ  in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.
    Otherwise, there was no error of law.   All  this  amounted  to  was  a
    disagreement with the decision of the judge below.

11. Second, and most importantly, it is not the case  that  the  judge  has
    simply chosen to ignore relevant evidence, before  deciding  to  follow
    the country guidance.  The judge considers everything  that  is  placed
    before her.  She then decides, for reasons that  she  gives,  that  she
    should follow the country guidance and allow  the  Appellant's  appeal.
    This is clear from the way in which the judge  accepts  the  Respondent
    Home Office Presenting Officer's submission that "the  Appellant  would
    be able to obtain new travel documentation as the Home Office  and  the
    embassy would have details of his ID card following his return in 2011"
    (see paragraph 21).  The judge even accepted that the Appellant  "would
    be able to obtain his CSID card with relative ease", and that he  could
    return, as a person of Kurdish ethnicity, to the IKR in principle.

12. However, at this stage, the judge decides to give her reasons for  why,
    to all practical intents and purposes, this was not a viable  situation
    with respect to this Appellant.  She goes on to state that,

         "In the light of the fact  that  the  Appellant  has  converted  to
         Christianity from Islam and therefore be viewed as an apostate, and
         in consideration of the country expert report when  taken  in  line
         with the country guidance which indicates that  individual  factors
         must be considered when assessing what risk may exist, then I  find
         that I am satisfied that the Appellant would be  at  real  risk  of
         persecution on return ..." (paragraph 21).

13. It was clear from this, submitted Mr Bandegani, that the judge was  not
    privileging one category of evidence over another.  She has  taken  the
    trouble to consider everything, and then providing her reasons for  why
    the appeal should be allowed.  There  were,  as  she  said,  individual
    factors, and these are in line with the  country  guidance,  suggesting
    that there was a risk to the Appellant, on the lower standard.

14. Third, if one looks at the Home Office  country  guidance  information,
    this is only on "Iraq: Religious Minorities", and is not on "apostates"
    per se (dated August 2016).   Even  so,  submitted  Mr  Bandegani,  the
    "policy summary" (at page 122  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  is  worth
    noting, as a snapshot of the guidance that is given to the Secretary of
    State when decisions in such cases  are  made.   Whilst  it  begins  by
    saying that  in  general  religious  minorities  are  not  at  risk  of
    persecution in Iraq, it then goes on to say (at paragraph  3.1.2)  that
    "in general, a person from a religious minority is likely to be at risk
    of persecution from Daesh in  the  'contested'  areas  (Anbar,  Diyala,
    Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah al-Dan), and from armed  groups".   This  was
    significant because the Appellant  was  actually  from  "Kirkuk".   The
    policy summary then goes on to say that, "a  person  from  a  religious
    minority may not be able to obtain protection from the state  in  areas
    outside the KRI" (paragraph 3.1.3).

15. It was this information, submitted Mr Bandegani,  that  the  judge  was
    paying heed to when concluding at paragraph  21  of  the  determination
    that the "individual factors" pertinent  to  the  Appellant's  position
    meant that she could not realistically decide that the Appellant  would
    not be at risk of persecution or serious harm as an apostate  in  Iraq.
    Fourth, although Mr Bandegani had premised his submissions on the basis
    that there was a risk of "persecution" to the Appellant  on  the  basis
    that he was an "apostate", it  was  equally  clear  that  he  stood  to
    succeed if there was "discrimination" (as  against  persecution),  that
    prevented him from practising his faith for fear of the state,  because
    he would then be able to come under  the  protection  provided  by  the
    seminal case of HJ (Iran).

16. Finally, the report of Sheri Laizer had made it abundantly  clear  that
    there would be no protection for the Appellant outside the IKR in Iraq,
    so that if the Appellant would be treated as a  "apostate"  within  the
    IKR, because of his conversion from Islam to  Christianity,  that  left
    him exposed to ill-treatment in other parts of Iraq as well,  and  this
    was clear from what Sheri Laizer had said at pages  435  to  439.   The
    reason she gives is that, "in practical terms"  there  are  checkpoints
    across the country, where  the  Appellant  will  be  stopped,  by  both
    extremist Shia and Sunni forces, and be targeted,  for  his  conversion
    from Islam to Christianity (see page 435).

17. In reply, Mrs Aboni submitted that the report by Dr  Sheri  Laizer  was
    not specific enough, because  it  focused  very  largely  on  religious
    minorities such as the Yazidi, and then went on  to  speak  about  land
    seizure, before stating that the Appellant would not  be  able  to  fit
    into the local minority communities because he  was  Kurdish,  but  she
    does not give adequate reasons for why the Appellant would specifically
    be at risk.





No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

19. First, as Mr Bandegani, who has conducted this appeal in a thorough and
    highly  efficient  manner,  submitted,  the  threshold  for  setting  a
    decision below on the grounds of unreasonableness is a high one.   This
    was made clear by LJ Brooke in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, where  His
    Lordship stated, "it is well known that 'perversity' represents a  very
    high hurdle" (see paragraph 11).  His Lordship went on to explain that,
    "far too often practitioners use the word  'irrational'  or  'perverse'
    when these epithets are completely inappropriate"  (at  paragraph  12).
    So is it the case here.  The judge in this case makes it clear that the
    Appellant is from Kirkuk, which is a contested area, and although it is
    a case as the Presenting Officer pointed out, that the Appellant  would
    be able to obtain new travel documents and thereafter a CSID card "with
    relative ease", the fact of his conversion to Christianity, would  mean
    that he would be viewed as an apostate and that the individual  factors
    relevant to him meant that he would be at risk (paragraph 21).

20. Second, Mr Bandegani is entirely right in submitting that  the  country
    guidance is fundamentally on the question  of  "religious  minorities",
    and that insofar as it gives consideration to  issues  of  "conversion"
    (at paragraph 5.3),  these  are  matters  that  are  not  just  as  yet
    unresolved within the Iraqi community, but insofar as this is so, there
    is a very real risk to the Appellant  of  being  persecuted.   This  is
    because the  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines  make  it  clear  that  the
    constitution of Iraq, whilst requiring the Iraqi state to  uphold  both
    freedom of religion and the principles of Islam, fails to  resolve  the
    contradiction that Islamic sharia law "includes capital punishment  for
    leaving Islam".

21. Indeed, it does not end there.  This is because  there  is  "widespread
    animosity towards converts  from  Islam  and  the  general  climate  of
    religious intolerance"  such  that  "the  conversion  of  a  Muslim  to
    Christianity would likely result in ostracism and/or  violence  at  the
    hands of the convert's  community,  tribe  or  family"  and  that  many
    continue to believe that "apostacy from Islam is punishable  by  death"
    (paragraph 5.3.1).

22. Finally,  there  is  evidence  that  the  position  of  "apostates"  is
    deserving of a particularised attention, in the way that is not  always
    apparent from the country guidance.  This is clear from the fact  that,
    although  paragraph  5.35  refers  to  a  fact-finding  mission  report
    published in April 2016 by the Danish Immigration Service, which  noted
    that, "the law discriminates with regard to conversion, as Muslims  are
    not allowed to convert", it does not go on to elaborate upon  what  the
    position is where Muslims in Iraq do convert, beyond simply saying that
    there is "discrimination".

23. Thus, although there is  a  reference  to  conversion/apostacy  in  the
    "Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada covering  the  period  2011  -
    July 2014" (see paragraph 5.3.6)  it  does  not  make  clear,  what  Mr
    Bandegani pointed out in his  submissions,  namely,  that  this  report
    states that apostates "are often faced with  severe  persecution"  (see
    the second page of this document).  The report by the Refugee Board  of
    Canada makes it clear that "hostility towards converts is  widespread".



24. In all the circumstances, therefore, the decision of Judge  Boylan-Kemp
    MBE cannot be said to have been one that was not open for her to reach,
    and having made it, it is plain that it is well-reasoned, given what is
    made clear at paragraph 21 of the determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018

