
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/00110/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |              Decision Promulgated   |
|On 22nd May 2017                      |On 31st May 2017                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Blakewells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh date of birth  20th  December
    1985.  He appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Manyarara dated 9th February 2017 to dismiss his appeal
    on protection grounds.








    Anonymity Order


 2. This case involves a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Timeliness


 3. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal was promulgated on the 9th
    February 2017.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    received until the 14th March 2017. That was out of time. I am prepared
    to extend time. Having had regard to the material before me,  including
    an 'activity report' confirming  receipt of a fax, I  accept  that  the
    Appellant's representatives did initially try to fax the application to
    the Tribunal on the 24th February 2017, and that they  were,  it  seems
    wrongly, advised that the transmission went through.




    Error of Law


 4. The Appellant claims to have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Bangladesh for reasons of his imputed political opinion.  The  crux  of
    his case is that his brother is a leader of Jamaat-e-Islami,  and  that
    the current government of Bangladesh have sought to have him, and those
    associated with him, arrested. The  government  is  run  by  the  Awami
    League, who are Jamaat-e-Islami's political opponents.  False  criminal
    charges have been levied against his brother.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal considered this account, and  rejected  it  for
    want of credibility.

 6. The short point made in this appeal is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made a  fundamental  error  of  law  in  that  when  it  evaluated  the
    plausibility of the account, it did so without any reference to country
    background material that had been expressly relied upon before it.   Mr
    Bonavero made a number of other submissions about the  reasoning  -  or
    rather lack of it - but his central argument was that the Tribunal must
    have erred in failing to weigh in the balance evidence about Bangladesh
    capable of demonstrating that  this  claim  was,  at  the  very  least,
    plausible.

 7. Examples of such evidence can be found in the 'Country Information  and
    Guidance' report  published  by  the  Home  Office  in  February  2015:
    Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government. At 2.4.1  the  report  states
    that during 2013 members of Jamaat-e-Islami  faced  pressure  from  the
    government, including the police raiding its headquarters. At 2.5.5 the
    CIG reports that the Assistant General-Secretary  of  the  organisation
    was executed and that police  shot  protesting  activists  dead.   This
    evidence was consistent with  the  Appellant's  claims  that  both  his
    brother and brother-in-law had been forced into hiding by a  government
    campaign to kill or imprison high-profile members of the party.


 8. Mr McGirr agreed that on the face of the determination, the evidence in
    question was not considered by the First-tier  Tribunal.  He  submitted
    however that this was  not  a  material  error.   Plausibility  in  the
    context of the prevailing  political  situation  will  not  necessarily
    establish  that  a  claim  is  credible.   He  pointed  out  that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal might well have been the same,
    even if the Tribunal had expressly had regard to the country background
    material.

 9. The parties agree that the  failure  to  weigh  all  of  the  available
    evidence in the balance was an error of law. Mr McGirr is right to  say
    that the decision might well have been the same, but I  cannot  however
    be satisfied that it would have been.  Consistency with the  background
    material was a factor that would have to be weighed in the  Appellant's
    favour, and it was not.  It follows that the error of law must be  held
    to be material: all of the credibility findings are  affected  and  the
    decision accordingly must be set aside.

10. The parties agreed that  in  the  circumstances  the  only  appropriate
    course of action would be that the Upper Tribunal remit the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other than  Judge
    Manyarara.  I agree.


    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside in its entirety.


12. The matter is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


13. There is a direction for anonymity.

                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    26th May
                                                                        2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 27th March 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Keene


