
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00903/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2016                 |On 28 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  L  K
    Gibbs, promulgated on 1 August 2016. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    on 18 August 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer.

Background

 2. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  23  June  2015,  at
    Birmingham airport. He applied for asylum on arrival. The basis of  the
    appellant's asylum claim is that he was a  supporter  of  the  HDP;  in
    2008/2009 he attended demonstrations and handed out leaflets and he was
    twice arrested while attending  protests.  The  appellant  left  Turkey
    instead of reporting to the Turkish authorities as  he  was  instructed
    when released from his second arrest.

 3. The respondent rejected the appellant's claims in a decision  dated  17
    December 2015. In essence, the only aspects of his account  which  were
    accepted were  his  name,  nationality,  ethnicity  and  religion.  The
    Secretary of State pointed to a number of inconsistencies  between  the
    account provided by the appellant during his  screening  interview  and
    that  given  subsequently.  Adverse  comment  was  made  regarding  the
    appellant's failure to learn the Kurdish language given his claim to be
    a committed  Kurdish  rights  activist.  Furthermore,  the  appellant's
    ability to remain in his home area for over a year following  his  last
    claimed  release  suggested  that  his  fear  of  the  authorities  was
    speculative.

 4. In the course of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant gave evidence in  Kurmanji.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant  was   an   unreliable   witness   owing,   principally,   to
    inconsistencies between his screening and substantive asylum interviews
    and as such he would be returned  to  Turkey  with  the  profile  of  a
    Kurdish Alevi Muslim and no more.

Error of law

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on  the  basis  that  firstly,  it  was
    arguable that the judge failed to reach findings  in  respect  of  core
    aspects of the appellant's claim, that being his alleged  inability  to
    converse in Kurdish and his father's membership of the BDP and  support
    of  HADEP;  secondly,  that  the  judge  placed  undue  weight  on  the
    appellant's answers in the screening interview and did not  assess  his
    evidence in the  round  with  reference  to  the  background  material;
    thirdly it was said the judge failed to have regard to the  appellant's
    claim that he avoided the  authorities  by  changing  his  address  and
    remaining in hiding which explained why he had no further problems from
    the authorities; fourthly the judge failed to  reach  findings  on  the
    appellant's claim to have used a fake Turkish passport to travel to the
    United Kingdom and lastly, the judge made  no  reference  to  the  risk
    factors referred to in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00312.

 6. The FTTJ granting permission said as follows;

         "I am satisfied that it is arguable that the judge materially erred
         in law  by  not  fully  engaging  with  material  elements  of  the
         Appellant's claim that he had been in hiding prior to leaving on  a
         false passport, spoke Kurmanji, and his father had previously  been
         detained by the authorities for pro-Kurdish activity.  All  grounds
         may be argued."

 7. The Secretary of State's response of 12 September 2016 stated that  the
    respondent opposed  the  appeal;  it  was  considered  that  the  judge
    appropriately directed herself and that the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was Kurdish Alevi Muslim but not that he was involved in  any
    political activities. It was said that the judge was entitled  to  find
    that the appellant was not credible in respect of his claim.

The hearing

 8. Ms Panagiotopoulou relied on the grounds. She argued that the judge had
    not taken into account that the appellant was in hiding, in relation to
    her findings regarding the appellant's ability to remain in Turkey  for
    an extended period of time following his release from  detention;  that
    the judge did not take into consideration that the  appellant  had  not
    left Turkey in his own name; she made no  findings  in  relation  to  a
    material consideration, namely his use of Kurmanji during the  hearing;
    there were no findings regarding the father's membership of the HDP and
    she had not taken into  the  explanation  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement that his replies during the screening interview had not  been
    recorded. There was also said to be a  lack  of  reference  to  country
    conditions.

 9. In response, Ms Ahmad relied on an extract from South Bucks  Council  v
    Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33. She argued that the judge had considered all
    the evidence, made findings on the principal controversial  issues  and
    concluded that he was not credible. It  was  the  appellant's  account,
    during his screening interview, that he had used a passport in his  own
    name to leave Turkey and the judge appreciated that it was said to be a
    false document. The issue of the father's membership of HDP was  not  a
    main issue in the case. Ms Ahmed argued that the judge had  appreciated
    that the appellant gave evidence in  Kurmanji  and  took  no  point  in
    relation to this matter but in terms of his claim,  full  reasons  were
    given for rejecting this. A different  decision  would  not  have  been
    reached had every issue been addressed.

10. In reply, Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the majority of the judge's
    negative credibility findings related to differences between  what  the
    appellant said in the screening and  substantive  interviews  and  that
    undue emphasis was placed on this.

11. At the end of the hearing I announced that the judge made  no  material
    errors of law and I upheld her decision. My reasons are as follows.

Decision on error of law

12. The appellant's appeal turns on the  inconsistencies  between  what  it
    recorded at his screening interview and what he said at his substantive
    asylum interview. In essence, when he was screened on  his  arrival  he
    stated that he  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  have  "a  more
    comfortable life;" adding that he had been threatened by the police and
    Sunni Muslims on 12 March 2014 while attending a  protest  against  the
    massacre of Alevis. At  part  five  of  the  screening  interview,  the
    appellant said that he had never been arrested; furthermore, there  was
    no mention of periods of detention nor that he was a member of the HDP.

13. It was argued on the appellant's behalf that the judge erred in finding
    that he was of no real interest to the Turkish authorities  because  he
    had been able to safely remain in his home area for in excess of a year
    between his claimed release from detention and his  eventual  departure
    from Turkey. Ms Panagiotopoulou criticised the  judge  for  not  taking
    into consideration the appellant's evidence in  his  witness  statement
    that he was in hiding. Indeed,  at  [5]  the  judge  records  that  the
    appellant kept a "low profile." Yet, in  paragraph  7  of  his  witness
    statement, while the appellant asserts that he "stayed in  hiding,"  he
    proceeds to explain that this meant he "kept a low profile and did  not
    get involved with any activities. It was not safe forever." There is no
    other explanation of what he meant by being in hiding. Accordingly, the
    judge did not err in recording that he  kept  a  low  profile,  nor  in
    finding at [23] that this alone did not satisfactorily account for  the
    absence of problems for over a year, given that claimed  to  be  wanted
    and that he was required to report to the authorities during this time.

14. A further criticism of the judge was that she concluded  the  appellant
    left Turkey using a passport which bore his name.  Yet,  this  was  the
    account he provided during his screening interview, at  2.1.  At  [23],
    the judge also took into account the appellant's claim that this was  a
    false passport. Earlier at [16] of the decision and reasons, the  judge
    set out her detailed reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim  that
    his answers in the screening interview were either wrongly recorded  or
    translated. There is no challenge in relation to these findings.

15. The respondent took issue with the appellant's  apparent  inability  to
    speak Kurmanji, in that it was considered  incredible  that  a  Kurdish
    activist would be unable to speak Kurmanji. This was, in any event, one
    of the respondent's weaker points. The judge noted at the hearing  that
    the appellant used a Kurmanji interpreter but did not  go  on  to  make
    favourable findings as a result. There was no requirement for her to do
    so and even if she had, this alone, would  have  been  insufficient  to
    outweigh the many negative findings she went on to make.

16. The appellant's claim that his father was a member of HDP was  never  a
    core part of his claim in view of the fact that he was relying  on  his
    own alleged political activities in Turkey. The principal issue was the
    veracity of the appellant's  account  as  to  his  own  experiences  in
    Turkey. Between [16] and [23] of the decision and  reasons,  the  judge
    sets out a plethora of reasons as to why she  rejects  the  appellant's
    claim.  At  [24],  she  makes  a  global  finding  on  the  appellant's
    credibility, that "he is an unreliable witness." Furthermore, at  [25],
    she states that the appellant's profile on return to Turkey was that of
    a "Kurdish Alevi Muslim, and no more." From the aforementioned findings
    it is patently obvious,  that  the  only  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account which the judge was prepared to accept  were  his  nationality,
    ethnicity and religion. Ms Panagiotopoulou did not seek to  argue  that
    the appellant would be at risk in Turkey on this basis alone.

17. The judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant's account was not
    credible and her reasons for doing so were more than adequate.

18. I make the following anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed   Date: 27 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
