
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/00909/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   19th                   December                    2017
     On 2nd January 2018


                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
                                  Between:

                          MR EZEKIEL TAIWO OLAJIDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      No  legal  representation  present  (Appellant  in
person)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This case last came before me sitting in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
      12th October 2017.  At that time, I adjourned the appeal, in order  to
      give time for the Appellant to find  and  pay  for  alternative  legal
      representation, his  previous  solicitors  Messrs  Arndale  Solicitors
      having dropped his case the  day  before  the  appeal  hearing  listed
      before the Upper Tribunal on the basis that  they  wanted  payment  up
      front, which the Appellant could not afford.

   2. However, when the case came back before me today on the 19th  December
      2017, Mr Olajide again asked for an adjournment,  and  in  his  letter
      dated  the  12th  December  2017  which  he  handed  in  to  seek   an
      adjournment, together with what  he  told  me  orally,  he  said  that
      although his friends from the church had  promised  to  help  him  out
      financially they had not been able to help him gather the �700  needed
      to pay a solicitor, so he was again unrepresented.  In his  letter  he
      said that he had been to Refuge Action on the 12th December  when  the
      letter was written who called Bolton CAB to see if they would be  able
      to represent the Appellant at the appeal, but they said that they were
      at capacity and they would not be able to represent him until February
      2018.  On that basis the Appellant asked for his case to be  adjourned
      until February 2018 so he could find a solicitor who  could  represent
      him.

   3. Mr  McVeety,  however,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  opposed  the
      adjournment, and  correctly  pointed  out  that  this  was  the  third
      occasion, firstly before the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever, and then before myself in  the  Upper
      Tribunal and again today, when the Appellant had sought an adjournment
      on the basis he had not been able to pay for legal representation.  He
      submitted that there was no evidence from Bolton CAB to indicate  that
      they would actually take his case in February, and that the  Appellant
      had been unable  to  find  any  legal  assistance,  whether  from  the
      Citizens Advice Bureau or otherwise, prior  to  the  adjourned  appeal
      hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

   4. I bore in mind in this case the overriding objective and the  need  to
      deal with cases both fairly and justly, pursuant  to  Rule  2  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 including  delivery  of
      the case in ways which are proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the
      case, the complexity of the issues, anticipated costs and resources of
      the parties, avoiding unnecessary formality in seeking flexibility  in
      the proceedings, ensuring so far as practicable that the  parties  are
      fully able to  participate  in  the  proceedings,  using  any  special
      expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively and  avoiding  delays  for
      proper consideration of the issues.  However, bearing in mind that the
      Appellant had not been able to secure legal  representations  on  what
      had been effectively three occasions, with  just  his  assertion  that
      Bolton CAB would be able to take his case in  February  2018,  without
      any written evidence from them saying that that was the case  or  that
      they  had  actually  agreed  to  represent   him   in   February,   in
      circumstances where previous time had been granted  for  him  to  seek
      representation and to arrange funds to obtain the services of a  legal
      representative, but that had not been forthcoming, I did not  consider
      it proportionate, fair or just to adjourn the case until February,  in
      order to see whether in fact Bolton CAB would agree to represent  him.
      The case  could  not  simply  be  adjourned  ad  infinitum,  to  allow
      representation to be ultimately obtained, when he had been  unable  to
      obtain such representation since February 2017,  when  the  case  came
      before Judge Lever, now some 10 months previously.

   5. The Grounds of Appeal had been drafted  by  previous  solicitors,  and
      properly set out in the arguments relied upon by the Appellant in  the
      appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  Further, given  that  this  was  an
      asylum appeal, I  carefully  considered  the  Judgment  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lever with anxious  scrutiny,  taking  account  of  the
      Grounds of Appeal and what was then said in support of the  appeal  by
      the Appellant himself, together with the submissions made in the  Rule
      24 Reply and the submissions made by  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent, before making my decision.

   6. The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  he  had
      come to the United Kingdom in 2004 on a visit visa and returned  again
      in 2005 on a visit visa again until 2007, but his claim  was  that  he
      had owed money or the return of goods to a man called Hamza,  who  had
      been pestering and threatening the Appellant for  the  return  of  the
      money or goods owed for a period of time. The Appellant's case is that
      he had gone to the police to report that matter  and  Hamza  had  then
      stopped threatening him, he had stopped writing to the  Appellant  and
      stopped visiting the Appellant.  Judge Lever  in  his  decision  found
      that simply an alleged fear of Hamza because of an unpaid debt did not
      engage a Refugee Convention ground  or  protective  rights  under  the
      ECHR, and that in any event on the Appellant's own account his actions
      in going to the police were  sufficient  to  remove  any  threat  from
      Hamza.  He therefore rejected the Appellant's protection claim.

   7. Judge Lever went on to consider the Appellant's claim that due to  his
      health he would  be  unable  to  access  necessary  medical  help  and
      assistance in Nigeria,  and  noted  the  evidence  the  Appellant  had
      suffered a stroke in 2013 and that clinical psychology were unable  to
      be sure whether or not the Appellant had  a  cognitive  impairment  or
      whether there were motivational issues and that he has been treated by
      means of medication for epilepsy and hypertension.  It was said  there
      was a letter also from the social worker who said that  the  Appellant
      suffered from lower back pain, high blood pressure  and  hypertension.
      Judge Lever found that there was no indication that the Appellant  was
      currently undergoing  any  form  of  treatment  or  that  he  had  any
      operational procedure pending and that following his stroke in 2013 he
      had made sufficient recovery that he could live and move independently
      although his memory may have been affected and there was a requirement
      for him to take a range of medication listed in order to  assist  with
      ongoing medical difficulties, such as high blood pressure and epilepsy
      and the Appellant's own case that he did not have day-to-day care, and
      appeared to live independently in a house with 2 others, but they were
      not relatives or  friends.   The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
      medical conditions were not sufficient to amount to a  breach  of  the
      Appellant's Human Rights and  found  that  apart  from  the  fact  the
      Appellant attended church and had friends within the  community  there
      was no evidence of any other  activities  or  private  life  developed
      during his time that he was in the UK and there was no evidence he had
      ever entered employment in the UK.  He found there was  a  functioning
      healthcare system in Nigeria and 24-hour  care  available  in  certain
      places.  He found that the decision would not amount to  a  breach  of
      the Appellant's Human Rights under Article 3 or Article 8.

   8. The Appellant had now sought to appeal against that decision  for  the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of  Appeal.   That  document  is  a
      matter of record and is therefore not repeated in its  entirety  here,
      but in summary, it is argued that the Judge failed to take account  of
      the fact the Appellant suffers from memory loss and  as  a  result  is
      incapable  of  looking  after  himself,  which  was  said  to  be   an
      exceptional feature and that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  apply  such
      exceptionality when considering the Article 8 case.  It is  said  that
      the Judge did not take account of the fact that the  Appellant  was  a
      vulnerable witness when making findings in respect of credibility  and
      the viability of obtaining medication upon returning  to  Nigeria  and
      his ability to relocate given his health problems.  It  is  said  that
      the Judge has not carried out a proportionate assessment under Article
      8 and has failed to consider and apply the relevant  legal  principles
      in Article 8 medical claims and had not given consideration as to  the
      case of Akhalu (Health Claim: ECHR Article 8) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 400.
       It is said that the Judge failed  to  consider  and  apply  paragraph
      276ADE(6) in terms of whether there were  very  significant  obstacles
      for the Appellant to be reintegrated back into Nigeria  and  this  his
      health would be an impediment and it is argued that the  Judge  failed
      to assess the impact of removal on the Appellant  and  has  based  his
      findings upon an assumption the Appellant's family  in  Nigeria  would
      help and support him to access his medication.  It is argued that  the
      Judge failed to consider or refer to the Clifford Chance report in the
      findings and the fact that it was  said  there  that  most  people  in
      Nigeria cannot access healthcare  because  it  is  not  affordable  or
      available to them.  It is  further  said  that  there  was  procedural
      unfairness in  that  Refugee  Action  made  a  paper  request  for  an
      adjournment in order to obtain legal  representation  and  the  appeal
      could not be justly determined, as  the  Appellant  had  been  wrongly
      deprived of public funding and the Appellant struggled to present  his
      case at the Upper Tribunal due to his vulnerability and  the  lack  of
      grasp of the case.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on
      the 19th July 2017 who found that there are arguably three  errors  of
      law.  Firstly he found it was arguable that the  Judge  perpetrated  a
      procedural irregularity  which  made  a  material  difference  to  the
      outcome and reflected a lack of fairness and he should  arguably  have
      granted the Appellant's request for an adjournment in order to  secure
      legal representation.  Secondly it is said that there was an  arguable
      error in failing to resolve the issue of the  Appellant's  credibility
      and arguably the Judge  did  not  make  explicit  findings,  and  that
      thirdly the Judge made an arguable error in determining the Article  8
      appeal and arguably did not accord weight to the  Appellant's  private
      life established in the UK, but merely concluded that his return would
      not bring about a disproportionate interference with his private life.
       It was on that basis only that permission to appeal was  granted  and
      permission to appeal was not granted  to  argue  all  of  the  grounds
      raised within the Grounds of Appeal.  It is therefore the  Grounds  of
      Appeal upon which it was granted, which I address in my decision.

  10. I bear in mind that in the case  of  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  Fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 0048418, it was found by Mr Justice  McCloskey,  the  then
      President of the Upper  Tribunal  that  a  refusal  to  accede  to  an
      adjournment request could in principle be erroneous in law in  several
      respects including potentially the failure  to  take  account  of  all
      material  considerations,  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to
      intrude, denying the party a single fair hearing, failing to apply the
      correct test and acting irrationally, which in practice in most  cases
      the question would be whether the refusal to apply the effective party
      with a right to a fair hearing and was said to be applied as  that  of
      fairness and whether there was any deprivation in the party's right to
      a fair hearing.

  11. In this case, in refusing the adjournment request at [21],  the  Judge
      gave  clear,  adequate  and  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting   the
      adjournment request, firstly on the grounds that  on  the  Appellant's
      case even if credible and at its highest had never engaged  a  Refugee
      Convention ground or other international protection  treaty,  secondly
      on the basis the Appellant appeared to have  had  the  opportunity  of
      consulting solicitors who did not take his case and thirdly  that  the
      Appellant had not been wrongly deprived of  public  funding  and  that
      Refugee Action were no doubt aware that public funding was limited and
      the fact the Appellant does not have legal representation did not mean
      that his case on appeal could not be justly  determined.   He  further
      found that there had been a significant  delay  on  the  part  of  the
      Appellant in presenting his claim for asylum.  Further, the  Appellant
      had attended with Mr Chapman from Refugee  Action,  who  although  not
      acting as a Mckenzie Friend, it was clear from [8]  that  Judge  Lever
      had invited him to add anything at any  stage  that  he  felt  may  be
      important to the Appellant or he felt the Appellant's memory may be at
      fault because of his medical condition.

  12. Not every case needs a legal representative before an  appeal  can  be
      heard before the First-tier Tribunal, and Judge Lever in this case, by
      seeking for Mr Chapman to assist the Appellant, ensured that there was
      fairness in the hearing and that the Appellant had not  been  deprived
      of the right to a fair hearing.  The Judge clearly took account of the
      relevant aspects when considering the adjournment request refusal  and
      did take into account the material considerations.  Nor has  he  acted
      irrationally, he has applied the correct test and has not  denied  the
      Appellant a fair hearing.  The first ground of appeal therefore  lacks
      merit.

  13. In respect of the second ground upon which permission was granted,  it
      was arguable that the Judge had failed to resolve  the  issue  of  the
      Appellant's credibility and simply stated that  the  following  points
      emerged from a claim made by the Appellant at [22], the point actually
      being made by the Judge thereafter from paragraph [23]  onwards,  that
      even if the Appellant's claim was credible,  it  neither  engaged  the
      Refugee Convention or his protection rights under the ECHR,  and  that
      it simply related to his disagreement about an unpaid  debt  and  that
      Hamza had stopped threatening the Appellant after  the  Appellant  had
      been to the police.  Further, the Judge explained, given  the  passage
      of time it was extremely difficult to know how Hamza would be aware of
      the Appellant's presence in  Nigeria  particularly  if  the  Appellant
      wished to relocate to  another  part  of  Nigeria  upon  return.   The
      Judge's findings that even on the basis of the Appellant's account, if
      credible, would not be sufficient  to  entitle  him  to  international
      protection, was a finding open to the Judge on the evidence, and given
      the nature of the Appellant's claim, could not in any way be described
      as irrational or perverse, and was in reality, the only  finding  open
      to the Judge on that evidence.  His claim did  not  engage  a  Refugee
      Convention or any protected rights, and on his own case, the Appellant
      was no longer being threatened by Hamza, after he visited the  police.
      Given that the Judge's finding was  that  even  at  its  highest,  the
      Appellant's claim did not entitle  him  to  protection,  there  is  no
      material error in the Judge's findings in that regard.

  14. In respect of the third ground upon which  permission  to  appeal  was
      granted where it was arguable that the  Judge  did  not  consider  the
      Appellant's private life  properly  when  considering  the  Article  8
      claim, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever at [30]  clearly  set  out  the
      Appellant's evidence that he attended  church  and  appeared  to  have
      friends within the  community,  but  other  than  that  there  was  no
      evidence of any activities or private life developed in  his  time  in
      the UK and that, there was also clear findings that he  spoke  English
      and there was no evidence he had entered into employment.   The  Judge
      further found that the Appellant had been unlawful in the UK since mid-
      2007 and therefore his private life such as it  may  be,  counted  for
      little, in terms of a private  life  developed  since  that  time,  in
      accordance with Section 117B(4).  The  Judge  therefore  has  properly
      taken account of the Appellant's private life in the UK  and  properly
      set out the evidence in that regard and taken  it  into  consideration
      when considering the Article 8 claim.  There is no material  error  in
      that regard.

  15. Further, although permission to appeal was not specifically granted in
      respect of the arguments raised regarding the Appellant,  it  is  also
      clear from the findings of Judge Lever  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      undergoing any schedule of treatment,  and  in  terms  of  his  health
      although having suffered a stroke in 2013, the evidence was unclear as
      to whether or not he had cognitive impairment  or  other  motivational
      issues. He was simply taking medication for epilepsy and hypertension,
      high blood pressure but he did not need day-to-day care and was living
      independently in a house with two others who  were  not  relatives  or
      friends.   The  Judge  has  therefore  properly  assessed   that   the
      Appellant's health conditions were  not  sufficient  to  amount  to  a
      breach of either Article 3 or Article 8 on health grounds,  and  there
      was no material error in the Judge's  consideration  in  that  regard.
      Although criticism had been made of the fact  that  he  had  not  made
      specific reference to the Clifford Chance report, there is no evidence
      that in fact that was written by an expert  on  the  country,  and  is
      simply signed Clifford Chance LLP,  and  simply  seems  relates  to  a
      summary of background information in terms of  police  protection  and
      healthcare and whether  witchcraft  was  recognised  as  an  issue  in
      Nigeria. It was  not  a  report  from  an  expert,  on  the  country's
      situation. As it was simply rehearsal of the background evidence,  the
      judge did not specifically need to refer to the same by name.

  16. The Judge had made perfectly adequate  findings  at  [31  and  32]  in
      respect of the healthcare provision within Nigeria, and  further  made
      previous findings that even at  its  highest,  the  Appellant  was  no
      longer at risk from Hamza, given that Hamza  had  stopped  threatening
      him following the Appellant having reported Hamza's behaviour  to  the
      police.  There was no material error in that regard either.   However,
      therefore, even though the Appellant has been  in  person  before  the
      Upper Tribunal, I have given  careful  and  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever,  and  in  that  decision,
      Judge Lever has given clear, adequate and sufficient reasons in a well-
      reasoned and thorough  determination,  and  the  decision  reveals  no
      material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever  does  not  reveal  any
material errors of law and is maintained;

I make no anonymity direction in this case, no such Order having  been  made
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever and no  such  Order  having  been  sought
before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 19th December 2017


