

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/00271/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 17 October 2017                     |        On 19 October 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     JN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify JN. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
       rise to Contempt of Court proceedings. I do so in order to  preserve
       the anonymity of JN whose asylum claim remains outstanding.





Background

    2. The Respondent refused JN's  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection  on  29  December  2016.  Her  appeal  against  this  was
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Housego  ("the   Judge")
       following a hearing on 24 February 2017.

The grant of permission


   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted  permission  to  appeal  (24
      July 2017) as it is arguable that


       "the Judge failed to make findings of fact on  key  aspects  of  the
       Appellant's claim and found that she was not homosexual or  bisexual
       despite evidence from two witnesses  that  he  found  to  be  highly
       credible that she is homosexual."


Respondent's position

    4. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice  (9  August  2017)  that  the
       Judge directed himself appropriately and made findings open  to  him
       on the evidence as the Appellant had changed her evidence  regarding
       her sexuality at the  hearing.  Mr  Diwynicz  did  not  add  to  the
       submissions.


Discussion

    5. Despite the length of the Judge's decision, I am satisfied that  his
       assessment of the background was inadequate to such an extent as  to
       amount to a material error of law. That is because no findings  were
       made on the core part of her claim that as a direct  result  of  her
       lesbian relationship being discovered, she had been  beaten  by  her
       mother, subjected to rituals by her grandmother, been  given  lashes
       by the village Chairman, attacked by locals,  and  that  her  female
       partner had been killed. Nowhere in  the  "findings"  sections  from
       [104-127] is there any reference to this let alone assessment of it.
       The subsequent assessment of the semantics  of  terminology  between
       being lesbian or bisexual when either would have sufficed,  and  the
       rejection of the views of experts in the field who the  Judge  found
       to be "witness of transparent honesty" was based  on  an  inadequate
       evidential base in the absence of findings in that core part of  the
       claim.


    6. I am therefore satisfied that a material error of  law  occurred  to
       such an extent that the decision cannot stand.


    7. I am also satisfied having heard from the representatives that it is
       appropriate to remit the matter de novo  as  the  errors  go  beyond
       those contained within the Presidential Guidance  for  retention  in
       the Upper Tribunal.




Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  hearing
    with no findings being preserved, not before Judge Housego.











Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
18 October 2017

