
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00253/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2018                            |On 02 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                   MISS DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Riaz Khan & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Armenia born in August 2000.  She is
    appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin
    promulgated on 22 February 2018 dismissing her appeal against the
    decision of the respondent to refuse her application for asylum on 20
    December 2017.

 2. I note as a preliminary matter that on 4 October 2018 an application
    was made under Rule 15(2A) for permission to permit new evidence in the
    form of a birth certificate of the appellant's child who was born on 24
    August 2018.  This was not raised by Mr Ahmed at the hearing and no
    argument was pursued which relates to this evidence.  Given that this
    evidence has no relevance to the issue before me, which is whether
    Judge Colvin made an error of law, it is not admitted.

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 24 December 2016 on a visitor's visa
    and claimed asylum on 4 July 2017.  The basis of her claim is that she
    is from a traditional Yezidi family and is at risk of death or severe
    harm as a consequence of having had sexual intercourse outside of
    wedlock.  She claims that she revealed her sexual activity to a cousin
    and that subsequently her father became aware of it.  She claims that
    her father became angry, beat her and would have stabbed her were it
    not for her mother fending him off.  She claims that her father has
    threatened to kill her as she has dishonoured the whole family.

 4. The appellant claims that her mother took the threat from her father
    seriously and decided firstly to take her to a friend's house about two
    hours away and then to the UK, where she has been living with a distant
    aunt.  The appellant claims that her mother told her not to contact her
    and that she would make contact but after nearly six months without
    contact she telephoned her mother who told her that her father had
    beaten her repeatedly and was planning her murder.  She was advised not
    to return home or call again.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge set out at paragraph 20 of the decision a summary of the
    objective evidence about Yezidi women and domestic violence in Armenia.
     The judge stated as follows:

         "The appellant has submitted background information particularly in
         relation to Yezidis and domestic violence in Armenia.  Yezidis are
         the largest minority in Armenia with an estimated number between
         30,000 and 50,000 living there.  In a news article from Global
         Voices on teen marriages for Yezidi girls it is reported that it is
         common among young Yezidi women who regularly finish school as
         early as 14 to prepare for marriage.  The report Domestic Violence
         in Armenia records the high prevalence of domestic violence and
         that 17% of homicides recorded in 2015 were committed by family
         members.  It also refers to existing legal barriers preventing
         effective investigation and prosecution of domestic violence cases.
          Even when the police have the power to intervene, it is reluctant
         to assist the victims considering domestic violence to be a "family
         matter."  A further report on domestic violence by the Council of
         Europe makes similar points including the fact that the Criminal
         Code does not specifically cover violence against women and it
         falls within generic offences".

 6. Although the judge found aspects of the appellant's evidence to be
    inconsistent and lacking in plausibility, he accepted the core of her
    account.  However, he did not accept that the appellant would face a
    risk on return.  At paragraph 26 the judge stated:

         "It may be that this relationship occurred and that her parents
         came to know about it through her cousin.  However, whilst I am
         willing to accept that her father may well have reacted with
         significant anger and her mother may even have decided to remove
         her from the family home for a while so that the situation could
         calm down, I do not find even on the lower standard of proof that
         the appellant has shown that she was or is at real risk of being
         killed or seriously hurt by her father for the reasons given
         above".

 7. The judge at paragraph 25 considered the appellant's circumstances in
    the context of the objective background information.  The judge stated
    that there was

         "a lack of background information before me that suggests or
         corroborates that a threat of killing or actual killing is likely
         to occur to a daughter in the Yezidi community in these
         circumstances or whether there are alternative ways that Yezidis
         deal with a family's perceived dishonour.  There is no doubt that
         domestic violence is pervasive in Armenia as confirmed in the two
         reports referred to above but these reports make no reference to
         honour killings".

 8. The judge also noted that the appellant comes from the capital city and
    not a rural area, and that her older sister was allowed to finish her
    education and was not forced into marriage.  The judge stated that this
    suggests a reasoned approach towards Yezidi traditions in this
    particular family.  The judge also found that the appellant's father
    could be said to have assimilated into Armenian society given that he
    is a police officer.  The judge also stated that the fact of the father
    being a police officer indicates that there are likely to be restraints
    on his conduct.

Grounds of Appeal and Submission

 9. The grounds of appeal make two arguments.  The first submission in the
    grounds is that there is a presumption of risk that is created by the
    appellant's father's conduct such that it is arguably perverse for the
    judge to have concluded that the appellant would not be at risk.  The
    grounds also challenge the judge's assessment of the appellant's
    credibility.

10. Before me, Mr Ahmed on behalf of the appellant focused on the first of
    the grounds of appeal.  He highlighted that the appellant was a minor
    when she left Armenia and when the appeal was heard.  He claimed that
    the objective evidence shows that there is ineffective and insufficient
    police protection for a person in the appellant's circumstances.  He
    also maintained that given the judge had accepted that the appellant
    had engaged in a sexual relationship and that this conduct had resulted
    in her having to flee the country to avoid harm from her father, it was
    not consistent for the judge to find that the appellant would not be at
    risk.

11. Mr Ahmed acknowledged that no evidence had been put before the First-
    tier Tribunal to substantiate that honour killings take place in
    Armenia but maintained that it was not necessary to show this as it had
    been accepted that physical violence had been used, and likely would be
    used again, against the appellant.

12. Mr Jarvis questioned whether the arguments put forward by Mr Ahmed were
    in the grounds of appeal and objected to them being raised.  He also
    argued that the judge's conclusions were consistent with the objective
    evidence.

Analysis

13. The judge found that there was a lack of background information to
    corroborate - or even suggest - that a threat of killing or actual
    killing is likely to occur to a girl in the Yezidi community in the
    circumstances of the appellant.

14. The appellant submitted to the First-tier Tribunal several reports and
    articles concerning the situation faced by women in Armenia.  This
    included a report published by the Coalition to Stop Violence Against
    Women entitled "Femicide in Armenia: A Silent Epidemic" and a Council
    of Europe Report entitled "Gap analysis of Armenian criminal law in
    light of the standards established by the Council of Europe Convention
    on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic
    Violence."  In addition, articles concerning teen marriages by Yezidi
    girls and domestic violence in Armenia were submitted. There is no
    reference in any of these articles or reports to honour killings or
    girls in the Yezidi community in Armenia being subjected to violence as
    a consequence of dishonouring the family by engaging in premarital
    sexual relations. The judge was therefore clearly correct when he found
    that the appellant's claim to be at risk of being murdered (or
    subjected to violence) by her father because of having engaged in
    premarital sex was not corroborated by the objective evidence.

15. The judge found that the appellant's family were likely to take a
    "reasoned approach towards Yezidi traditions".  The appellant's parents
    live in the capital city, allowed their older daughter to complete her
    education and did not impose a forced marriage on her.  This contrasts
    to the description given in one of the articles submitted by the
    appellant (an article headed Armenia: Yezidi Girls Fated for Teen
    Marriage) where it is said that Yezidi girls regularly finish school as
    early as 14 to prepare for marriage and the circumstances of girls who
    are allowed to continue with their education are compared to those from
    more traditional families who cease their education at around 14 in
    order to enter into marriage. Given the contrast between the
    description in the objective evidence of marriage at aged 14 and the
    experience of the appellant's sister it was open to the judge to find
    that the appellant's family do not take an extreme approach to Yezidi
    traditions.

16. Given that (a) the background evidence does not show that there is a
    practice of honour killing or violence against daughters because of
    "dishonouring" the family; and (b) the appellant comes from a family
    which is not at the extreme end of the spectrum of level of adherence
    to Yezidi traditions, I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to
    find that even though the appellant was truthful about her father
    threatening her just after he discovered she had engaged in premarital
    sex, there is not a reasonable likelihood that she would be killed or
    subjected to violence (as opposed to being shunned or ostracised) upon
    returning to Armenia. The appeal is therefore dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and therefore stands.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 24 October 2018               |

