
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00371/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     s a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by City Legal
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  20th
    December 2017.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian dismissed the appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 17th July 2018.  The Appellant now appeals
    with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes  on  15th
    August 2018.

 2. There is essentially one ground of appeal and that ground contains that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number of material  errors  within
    the decision which undermine the decision as a whole.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Bramble accepted that there were  a  number
    of errors in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Error of Law

 4. One overall difficulty with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in
    my view is that much of the decision appears to be a  regurgitation  of
    the reasons for refusal letter.   In  fact  it  is  unclear  where  the
    recitation of the refusal letter ends  and  the  judge's  own  analysis
    begins.  It appears at paragraphs 6 to 27 is a summary of  the  reasons
    for refusal letter.  Although it appears at times that the judge  added
    his own views within those paragraphs, neither representative was  able
    definitively to point to  expressions  of  the  judge's  own  views  or
    analysis within these paragraphs.

 5. The judge went on to set out the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs  28
    to 29 and the evidence of the Appellant's witness at paragraph 30.   It
    appears that the judge's own analysis is at paragraphs 32 onwards.

 6. However, there is a mistake of fact at paragraph  34  where  the  judge
    said "There was no  evidence  before  me  that  the  letter  from  [the
    witness] reflected a temporary address (of the BNP in the UK) and  that
    they were moving to a permanent address." However, the judge heard oral
    evidence on exactly this matter as recorded at paragraph 30.  It may be
    that the judge did not accept this evidence, but he failed to undertake
    any analysis of this oral evidence in considering this  issue.   It  is
    not enough just to say there was no evidence before him when there  had
    been oral evidence on this matter which has not been analysed.

 7. As accepted by Mr Bramble there is a further mistake  at  paragraph  37
    where  the  judge  appears  to  have  mistakenly   misinterpreted   the
    Appellant's evidence as having been that he was  at  college  when  the
    court case against him was heard, whereas it is not in dispute that  it
    was the Appellant's evidence that he was at college at  the  time  when
    the attempted murder which the Appellant claims he was accused  of  was
    committed (question 140 to 142 in the asylum interview).

 8. In my view these matters amount to material errors  of  law.   The  two
    mistakes of fact were mistakes in regard to issues  which  are  at  the
    heart of the Appellant's claim and are matters  which  are  capable  of
    affecting the overall credibility conclusions.

 9. The structure of the decision itself is  something  which  has  led  to
    significant confusion in reading the decision.   Where  there  is  such
    confusion as in this case then it is difficult  for  the  Appellant  to
    know the reasons for the  dismissal  of  his  appeal.   Accordingly,  I
    consider that the inadequacy of reasons along with the mistakes of fact
    are such that they go to the heart of the decision  and  undermine  the
    decision to such an extent that I must set it aside.

10. It was agreed between the parties that as a result of these errors  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order to remake the decision in the appeal is such that, having  regard
    to the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law.  I set it aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  to  be  heard
by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Andonian.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 2nd November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 2nd November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
