

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00832/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Royal Courts of Justice               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2017                        |On 17 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 Saqib Waqas
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Khan of Counsel, instructed by Thompson and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant challenges  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Amin  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum,  human  rights   and
      humanitarian protection grounds. He is a Pakistani national born on 10
      April 1986. He arrived  here  as  a  student  in  September  2009  and
      obtained an extension until  January  2012.  He  applied  for  an  EEA
      residence card as the spouse of a Polish National but  the  respondent
      considered he had entered into a sham marriage and the application and
      ensuing appeal were unsuccessful. The appellant exhausted  his  appeal
      rights in April 2015 and was  placed  on  reporting  restrictions  but
      failed to report. He was encountered at a fast food restaurant  on  13
      November 2016 and three days later he claimed asylum.  The  claim  was
      refused on 16 January 2017.


   2. The appellant claimed that he would face  ill  treatment  in  Pakistan
      because he would be seen as a convert to Shia Islam  (even  though  he
      had not converted). He claimed to have been abducted from a  bus  stop
      in 2008 and to have been questioned about his  involvement  with  Shia
      people. He maintained that he had been ordered to go to a Shia  mosque
      and shoot at the worshippers but he  refused.  As  a  result,  he  was
      beaten and threatened with  death.  One  of  the  perpetrators  was  a
      Christian friend who was also an  MQM  supporter.  The  appellant  was
      treated for his injuries in a hospital and then spent some 3-4  months
      with a friend. He was located there by the MQM and so he moved to  his
      uncle's house where he remained without incident for some eight months
      before he left the country. Additionally, he claimed to be involved in
      a land dispute with his brothers.


   3. The judge did not believe either limb of  the  appellant's  claim  and
      dismissed his appeal. No article 8 claim was pursued.


   4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 24  March
      2017.


         The Hearing


   5. At the hearing before me on 15 May 2017, I heard submissions from  the
      parties.


   6.  Mr  Khan  submitted  that  the  judge   had   unreasonably   required
      corroboration  of  the  asylum  claim  and  had   made   findings   on
      plausibility. Reliance was placed on the decision of  Gheisari  [2004]
      EWCA Civ 1854. It was the appellant's case that the  judge  failed  to
      carry out an assessment about whether the events actually  took  place
      and simply found them  to  be  "incredible".  He  submitted  that  the
      respondent had not complained of the lack of a medical report  in  the
      refusal decision and yet the judge had indicated that one should  have
      been obtained. The judge  also  erred  in  finding  that  it  was  not
      credible that the appellant had not disclosed the alleged beatings  to
      his doctor in the UK. Finally, the judge had erred in concluding  that
      the  appellant's  claim  of  a  corrupt  Pakistani  police  force  was
      speculative when there was background material confirming that.


   7. Mr Clarke responded. He placed reliance on HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and
      ST (Corroboration - Kasola) Ethipia [2004] UKIAT 00119.  He  submitted
      that the judge had  taken  a  text  book  approach  and  had  properly
      directed herself. She was entitled to conclude that it was  reasonable
      to  expect  the  appellant  to  provide  corroborative   evidence   in
      circumstances described in the determination. The  plausibility  point
      was not made out. The judge gave ample reasons  for  her  conclusions.
      She was also  entitled  to  find  that  it  was  speculative  for  the
      appellant to maintain the police would inform the MQM about  him  when
      he also claimed to be  under  government  protection  at  his  uncle's
      house. There had also been a lengthy  delay  of  seven  years  in  the
      making of the claim and a previous failed EEA application based  on  a
      sham marriage. The appellant had been legally represented  so  it  was
      not  accepted  that  he  would  not  have  been   aware   of   asylum.
      Furthermore, he had failed to report as required and had  been  caught
      working illegally. The claim about a land dispute was an  addition  to
      his account and the judge was entitled to reject it given  that  there
      had been no dispute between the appellant and his brothers in  the  17
      years since their father's death. The appeal should be dismissed.


   8. Mr Khan repeated his submission that there had  been  evidence  before
      the judge of police corruption. He submitted that the judge was  wrong
      to reject the appellant's explanation for the  lack  of  corroborative
      evidence. The  judge  had  taken  the  wrong  approach  and  not  made
      considered findings of fact.


   9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which  I
      now give.


                   Findings and conclusions

  10. Essentially the appellant takes issue with the findings of  the  judge
      on the credibility of his claim; specifically,  with  respect  to  the
      claim of a kidnapping and assault and the  sufficiency  of  protection
      available  to  him.  The  judge  was  also  criticised  for  requiring
      corroborative evidence from the appellant.


  11. Three judgments have been relied on by the parties. On  the  issue  of
      fact finding, the court held in Gheisari: "Fact finding is a sensitive
      exercise and never more so than in asylum cases, where  the  judge  of
      fact is not choosing between two sides  but  trying  to  evaluate  the
      truthfulness of what is usually one person's account. We know that  in
      real life the improbable, even the incredible, sometimes happens.  The
      question for a Tribunal of fact is not whether an event which has been
      described to it was likely to occur but is whether the event,  however
      improbable (or for that matter however probable), did in  fact  occur"
      (at paragraph 10). The court also held that the judge has to make  his
      or her own evaluation of the claim and the probability of an event "is
      not a guarantee of its veracity" (at 12).


  12. More recently in HK, the court warned that it could  be  inappropriate
      to rely on inherent probability in asylum cases (at 29)  and  that  it
      was not right to reject a claim merely because of  implausibility  (at
      30; relying on Awala [2005] CSOH 73).


  13. In ST the Tribunal held that  "the  fact  that  corroboration  is  not
      required does not mean that an Adjudicator is required to leave out of
      account the absence of documentary evidence which might reasonably  be
      expected. An appeal must be determined on the basis  of  the  evidence
      produced but the weight  to  be  attached  to  oral  evidence  may  be
      affected by a failure  to  produce  other  evidence  in  support.  The
      Adjudicator was entitled to  comment  that  it  would  not  have  been
      difficult for the appellant to provide a death certificate  concerning
      his brother or some evidence to support his  contention  that  he  had
      received hospital treatment" (at 15). At paragraph  16,  the  Tribunal
      found  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  imposed  a  requirement   for
      corroboration by her remarks.


  14. I now look at the determination of the judge.


  15. On the issue of corroboration, I note that the judge properly  reminds
      herself of the fact that corroboration is not a requirement  and  that
      asylum seekers often  have  difficulties  in  obtaining  documents  in
      support of their claims (at paragraph 29).  She  found,  nevertheless,
      properly following the guidance in ST, that  "on  the  facts  of  this
      case, it would not have been difficult for the  appellant  to  provide
      medical evidence regarding  his  treatment...".  She  noted  that  the
      appellant remained in contact with his sister and  that  his  siblings
      had visited him in  hospital.  She  noted  that  his  claim  that  the
      hospital wanted a bribe in order to provide evidence  had  never  been
      previously mentioned.  She  also  noted  that  there  was  no  medical
      evidence to support his contention to have memory  problems  (at  27).
      That again, would have been  easy  evidence  to  obtain  from  his  UK
      doctor. It is plain then,  that  the  complaint  that  the  judge  had
      unreasonably required corroborative documentary  evidence  is  without
      any basis. The judge was aware of the correct approach and applied it.
      She was entitled to conclude that evidence could reasonably have  been
      obtained and to reject the explanation for why it was not produced.


  16. I look next at the judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's  claim  of
      having been kidnapped from a bus stop. The judge did not believe  this
      claim was credible because the event had occurred  in  broad  daylight
      (at 30), because the appellant had been taken to  a  college  building
      which just happened to be shut, that he had no idea of the date of the
      event (and I note that he is an educated man) (at 32), that one of the
      kidnappers was a Christian friend and no reason had been given for why
      he should have turned against the  appellant  (at  31),  that  he  had
      failed to disclose his alleged assault to doctors in  the  UK  despite
      attending for assistance and without any good reason (29), that  there
      was no explanation for why the MQM would be after him to carry  out  a
      terrorist attack on their behalf when they themselves had the capacity
      within their ranks to do so or why they  would  then  free  him  after
      having made threats to kill him (at 31 and 39), that his  account  was
      internally inconsistent (at 38), that he was able  to  remain  without
      further incident at his uncle's house for 7-8  months  (40),  that  he
      waited some seven years after his arrival to  claim  asylum  and  then
      only made it after his leave expired,  after  his  application  for  a
      residence card following  a  sham  marriage  was  rejected,  after  he
      absconded and after he was arrested for working without authority (33-
      35). Clear and compelling reasons have  been  given  for  the  judge's
      rejection of the claim. I do not  find  that  cherry  picking  certain
      words or phrases from the determination is helpful. The  determination
      must be read as a whole and when it is, I am satisfied that the  judge
      did not base her  conclusions  merely  on  the  improbability  of  the
      account (as per Gheisari).


  17. Lastly, I consider the issue of whether there would be  a  sufficiency
      of protection for the appellant on return. The judge  considered  that
      the appellant speculated when he maintained that he would not  receive
      protection.  Whilst  the  submissions  were  directed  at  the  police
      generally being potentially corrupt,  according  to  country  material
      before the judge, it is plain that what she found speculative was  the
      appellant's claim that the police would  inform  the  MQM  about  him.
      There is no evidence for such an assertion. The MQM is not  the  party
      in power and Mr Khan  did  not,  in  his  submissions,  point  to  any
      evidence which would support the contention that the police force  was
      aligned to this party. On that basis, and because  the  appellant  had
      clearly received government protection whilst at  his  uncle's  house,
      the judge was entitled to find that his assertion was speculative.


  18. No submissions were made with  regard  to  the  judge's  findings  and
      conclusions on the land dispute.


  19. Having considered all the submissions and the evidence  before  me,  I
      conclude that the judge did not err in the manned alleged and that her
      decision is sustainable.


  20. Decision


  21. The decision does not contain any errors of law.


  22. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


  23. Anonymity


  24. There was no request to continue the order for anonymity and I see  no
      reason to do so given the circumstances of this case.

    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 15 May 2017
