
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/00658/2019


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                     A K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this order because this is a protection claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For  the  appellant:      Mr  L  Lourdes,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by   IP
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.

                           Decision and Directions

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Hanbury  who,  following  a  hearing  on  22  February  2019,
    dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of  17  December
    2018 to refuse his asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claims  of  1
    August 2017.

 2. The sole issue is whether the judge's refusal to  adjourn  the  hearing
    has led to the appellant having been deprived of a fair hearing.

 3. The appellant was not present at the  hearing  before  the  judge.  His
    representative, Mr I Pannawala, requested an adjournment on  the  basis
    that the appellant had suffered from an asthma attack and was unable to
    attend the hearing. The judge  informed  Mr  Pannawala  that  he  would
    require documentary evidence in support of the  application.  The  case
    was then stood down.

 4. At about 12:55 hours, Mr Pannawala submitted  a  faxed  document  which
    recorded that, at 7:03 hours that morning, the appellant  had  attended
    the A&E department of Whipps Cross Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust. He
    was discharged at 11:07 hours with "no wheezes or obstructions, a clear
    chest". No follow-up treatment was  given  but  he  was  given  "verbal
    advice". There was some reference to "TTO PRED 40 mgs OD for four  more
    days".

 5. The judge noted that the document did not suggest  that  the  appellant
    was unfit to attend the Tribunal. The judge considered that there was a
    "lack of any proper medical reason for adjourning the appeal" (para 7).
    He noted that the notice of hearing dated 8 February 2019 informed  the
    appellant that the appeal would be heard in his absence if he failed to
    attend the hearing without a satisfactory explanation for his  absence.
    He took into account the overriding objective and the delay and cost of
    adjourning the hearing. He decided to refuse the adjournment request.

 6. The appellant's application to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission
    to appeal was refused.  His  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson who said, inter alia,  that  "it
    was arguable that the judge erred by not making  further  enquiries  to
    see if the medication itself might be a sufficient indicator  that  the
    appellant  was  suffering  from  a  condition  which  might  well  have
    inhibited him from attending the hearing of his appeal".

 7. Following the grant  of  permission,  the  appellant's  representatives
    (unfortunately) did not submit evidence concerning the medication  that
    the appellant was  given  at  Whipps  Cross  hospital;  in  particular,
    whether the reference to "PRED 40 mgs" was a reference to  the  steroid
    Prednisolone and the significance of a dose of 40 mgs.

 8. Prior to the commencement of the hearing before me, Mr Walker  gave  Mr
    Lourdes a handwritten note of some information that was  returned  when
    he "Googled" the name of the medication and the dose of  40  mgs.  This
    stated that Prednisolone is a steroid and that 40 mgs is  a  high  dose
    which produces psychological side effects which  include  irritability,
    agitation, euphoria or depression.

 9. Mr Lourdes relied upon Mr Walker's handwritten note.  In  my  view,  Mr
    Walker's hand-written note constitutes evidence by  Mr  Walker  of  the
    information he obtained from his own research. It amounted to Mr Walker
    giving  evidence  at  the  hearing  which,  as  representative,  he  is
    precluded  from  giving.  On  that  basis,  I  rejected   Mr   Walker's
    handwritten note. Furthermore, there was no indication of any source.

10. I further reject any suggestion that the judge was under any obligation
    to conduct his own enquiries about  the  medication,  especially  given
    that the appellant was represented at the hearing before him.

11. At the invitation of  Mr  Lourdes,  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant. He said he had an  asthma  attack  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing and that  he  attended  the  A&E  Department  at  Whipps  Cross
    Hospital. He had blood tests and also had his blood pressure taken.  He
    was given treatment by nebuliser and 40mgs of the steroid Prednisolone,
    i.e. 8 tablets. He only takes Prednisolone when he has an acute  asthma
    attack. Normally, he uses two types of inhaler to control  his  asthma.
    The treatment that he was given  at  Whipps  Cross  Hospital  made  him
    drowsy. He could not concentrate. After  discharge  from  Whipps  Cross
    Hospital, he had to take 40 mgs of Prednisolone  for  four  more  days.
    This is a high dose. He could not travel to the  hearing  centre  after
    being discharged because he was feeling drowsy and sick with nausea.

12. I accept the appellant's evidence. I  am  satisfied  that,  upon  being
    discharged from Whipps Cross Hospital on 22 February 2019, he was in no
    fit condition to travel to the hearing centre, give evidence  and  have
    his evidence tested under cross-examination.

13. I am therefore satisfied  that  the  judge's  failure  to  adjourn  the
    hearing has deprived the appellant of a fair hearing.  I  am  satisfied
    that para 7.2(a) of the Practice Statements  for  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    applies.

14. I therefore set aside the judge's decision and remit this appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the merits  on  all  issues  by  a
    judge other than Judge Hanbury.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hanbury  involved  the
making of an error  of  law  such  that  the  decision  is  set  aside.  The
appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the merits on all  issues  by  a  judge
other than Judge Hanbury.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 3 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
