
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
PA/00648/2016

                                                  PA/00649/2016

                                                  PA/00650/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 5 May 2017                         |         On 25 May 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                rohitha nilruk mandalawalli achirige acharige
            hetti mudalige inoka samanmali dharmarathna de silva
                     kushan flower mandalawalli acharige
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Carroll) who dismissed their  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 14 January 2016 refusing their application  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka,  the  first  appellant  ("the
    appellant") born on 9 April 1974 is the husband of the second appellant
    born on 12  January  1977  and  they  are  the  parents  of  the  third
    appellant, born in the UK on 4 February 2012.

3.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 3 April 2010  with  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 dependant relative to accompany his wife.  Their leave  was
    extended in the same capacity until 21 September 2015 but on 5 May 2015
    it was curtailed to expire on 7 July 2015 on the basis that the  second
    appellant was not progressing in her  studies.   On  2  July  2015  the
    appellant applied for compassionate leave to remain outside  the  rules
    as a dependant of the second appellant.  The application  was  rejected
    because no fee was paid.  On  24  July  2015  he  attended  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit and on 24 August 2015 formally claimed asylum.

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim was briefly  summarised  in  [8]  of
    the  judge's  decision.   He  claimed  that  in  January  2008  he  was
    introduced to a Tamil man called Ganesh who asked him to do  some  work
    spraying boats. For four months the appellant did so carrying out  work
    on about 22 boats.  He had no indication that Ganesh was linked to  the
    LTTE but in December 2008, he was told by a friend that Ganesh had been
    killed and was linked to the LTTE.  He claimed that in January 2009  he
    was arrested  by  the  Terrorist  Investigation  Unit  and  taken  into
    detention where he was interrogated and beaten.  At the end of February
    2009 he was taken to  a  police  station  and  then  to  prison,  being
    released in June 2009 with the assistance of a lawyer on condition that
    he reported to the police every month.  He then  made  arrangements  to
    leave Sri Lanka as he feared being  re-taken  by  the  authorities  and
    tortured again.  Since being in the UK, the authorities  had  continued
    to look for him.

5.   The respondent accepted that the appellant's identity  and  nationality
    were as claimed but not that he had been arrested by  the  authorities,
    tortured, imprisoned or bailed in  June  2009.   Further,  it  was  not
    accepted that the Sri Lankan authorities were continuing  to  look  for
    him or that they had any adverse interest in him.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The appellants appealed against this decision They sought  to  rely  on
    documents obtained from Sri Lanka at pages  7-30  of  the  respondent's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.   These  include  a  "B  Report"
    filed in court against the appellant,  the  court  proceedings  against
    him, the  bond  he  signed,  a  warrant  issued  against  him  and  the
    certification of the Magistrate Court Registrar.  The appeal was listed
    for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on  8  July  2016  but  that
    hearing was adjourned on the respondent's application on the basis that
    the documents and particularly the arrest warrant from  Sri  Lanka  had
    only recently been provided by the appellant and the respondent  sought
    time to verify them.

7.   When the matter was relisted for hearing on 30 November 2016  there  is
    no evidence that any attempt had been made at verification  or,  if  it
    had, what the result was and the judge proceeded to hear the appeal  on
    the basis of the  available  evidence.   She  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant was credible about his account of being detained and tortured
    in Sri Lanka or his claimed fear of return.  She set out at [17(a)-(h)]
    the factors she took into  account  primarily  arising  from  the  oral
    evidence and then went on to consider the documentary  evidence  noting
    at [18] that the Presenting Officer had no evidence of and no knowledge
    of the outcome of the verification exercise.  The judge then considered
    the documentary evidence at [19(a)-(d)] and was not satisfied that  any
    weight could be attached to the documents in support of the appellants'
    claim.  She summarised her findings at [21] by saying:

         "I have considered  the  appellant's  case  in  the  light  of  the
         objective evidence and  the  current  country  guidance.   For  the
         reasons given above and for the reasons given by the respondent,  I
         do not find the appellant credible as to the basis of  his  claimed
         fear of return to Sri Lanka.  I do not believe that he  is  subject
         to an outstanding arrest warrant or that he is of any  interest  to
         authorities.  The  appellant  does  not  come  within  any  of  the
         categories of persons at real risk of persecution or  serious  harm
         on return to Sri Lanka."


    Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds and Submissions

8.   The grounds argue firstly, in respect of the documentary evidence  that
    the documents should have been easy to verify and could all be  checked
    and in reliance on PJ v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 and  in
    particular paras 30-32 that the respondent should have  been  prevented
    from  challenging  them.   The  grounds  then  challenge  the   factors
    identified by the judge in [17] (a), (c), (d),  (e)  and  (h),  arguing
    either that they should  not  have  been  taken  into  account  in  the
    assessment of credibility or that there had been a failure to  consider
    the explanation put forward.  The grounds then  challenge  the  judge's
    analysis and decision in relation to the documentary  evidence  as  set
    out in [19].

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in considering the  weight  to
         be placed on documents produced by the  appellants  only  after  he
         found against them in terms of credibility and not as part  of  the
         general assessment of the evidence.  All grounds may be argued."


Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

10.  The grounds in substance raise  three  challenges:  whether  the  judge
    erred in her approach to the assessment  of  the  documentary  evidence
    which the respondent had had the opportunity of verifying, secondly, in
    her assessment of the appellant's credibility in [17] and  thirdly,  in
    her assessment of the documentary evidence at [19]. The grounds raise a
    further issue, whether the judge considered the evidence as a whole.  I
    will consider these grounds in order.

(i)  The Consequence of the Respondent's Failure to Verify  the  Appellants'
    Documents

11.  Mr Martin submitted that the respondent had been given the  opportunity
    of verifying the appellant's documents and that, in accordance with the
    guidance in PJ v Secretary of State the  respondent  should  have  been
    prevented from challenging them or at least, in  the  alternative,  the
    judge should have dealt with his submissions on this issue as  set  out
    in his skeleton argument.  Ms Ahmad submitted that there  had  been  no
    obligation on the respondent to verify the documents and in the absence
    of such verification, the judge was right to assess the  documents  for
    herself and was entitled to find that they were not reliable.

12.  I am not satisfied that the paragraphs relied on in the judgment in  PJ
    v Secretary of State support the argument that in the present case  the
    respondent's failure  to  verify  the  documents  should  lead  to  the
    respondent being prevented from challenging them.  Paras 30-32  of  the
    judgment read as follows:

         "30. Therefore simply because a relevant  document  is  potentially
             capable of being verified does  not  mean  that  the  national
             authorities have an obligation to take this step.  Instead  it
             may be necessary to make an enquiry in  order  to  verify  the
             authenticity and reliability of a document - depending  always
             on the particular facts of the case - when it is at the centre
             of the request for protection and when  a  simple  process  of
             enquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its   authenticity   and
             reliability (see Singh  v  Belgium  [101]-[105]).   I  do  not
             consider that there is any  material  difference  in  approach
             between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in
             that in the latter case the Strasbourg court simply  addressed
             one of the exceptional situations where  national  authorities
             should undertake a process of verification.


         31.  In my view the consequence of a  decision  that  the  national
             authorities are in breach of their obligations to undertake  a
             proper process verification is that the Secretary of State  is
             unable  thereafter  to  mount  an  argument  challenging   the
             authenticity of the relevant documents unless  and  until  the
             breach is rectified by a proper enquiry.  It follows that if a
             decision of the Secretary of State is overturned on appeal  on
             this basis, absent a suitable investigation, it  will  not  be
             open to her to  suggest  that  the  documents  are  forged  or
             otherwise are not authentic.


         32.  Finally, in this context it  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the
             courts are not required to order the  Secretary  of  State  to
             investigate further areas of evidence or otherwise  to  direct
             her enquiries.  Instead on an appeal from a  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State it is for  the  court  to  enquire  whether
             there  was  an  obligation  on  her  to  undertake  particular
             enquiries, and if the court  conclude  that  this  requirement
             existed, it  will  resolve  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
             sustainably discharged her obligation (see  NA  (UT  Rule  45:
             Singh v Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 (IAC). If the  court  finds
             there was such an obligation and that it was not discharged it
             must assess the consequences for the case."

13.  In the present case it is not arguable that the documents relied on  by
    the appellants fell within one of the exceptional situations  envisaged
    in Singh v Belgium ECtHR, 2 October 2012, 33210/11, where the documents
    were easily verifiable and came  from  an  unimpeachable  source,  when
    national authorities are under  an  obligation  to  verify  them.   The
    respondent sought an adjournment to have the opportunity  of  verifying
    the documents and this was rightly granted in the  light  of  the  fact
    that she had not had a proper opportunity  of  considering  them.   The
    fact that she appears not to  have  taken  that  opportunity  does  not
    amount to a breach of an obligation to verify the  documents.   In  the
    absence of  any  evidence  that  the  documents  had  been  subject  to
    verification, it was for the judge to decide what  weight  to  give  to
    them in the light of the evidence as a whole.  Mr  Martin  argued  that
    the judge should have had regard to his submission about the impact  of
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in PJ v Secretary of State but I am
    satisfied that the judge dealt  with  the  matter  adequately  in  [18]
    noting that the hearing had  been  adjourned  at  the  request  of  the
    respondent to undertake a document verification exercise and that there
    was no indication of the outcome of that exercise. There  was  no  need
    for her to deal with the issue at any greater length.

(ii) The Challenge to the Judge's Assessment in [17]

14.  Mr Martin relied on his grounds arguing in  relation  to  [17(a)]  that
    the fact the appellant was not of Tamil ethnicity  and  there  were  no
    LTTE members or sympathisers in his family should not be regarded as  a
    factor to be taken against him.  In [17(b)] the judge  made  the  point
    that both the appellant and his father worked spraying boats for Ganesh
    but his father had not been arrested or detained.   The  grounds  argue
    that the judge failed to consider the appellant's explanation  that  he
    had a relationship with Ganesh and his father did not  and  that  while
    his father helped with some of the work  he  was  much  older.   It  is
    argued that this explanation should have been considered.

15.  In respect of [17(c)] where the judge commented on the  fact  that  the
    appellant had no scarring and  referred  to  an  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence where at Q42 the appellant had  said  he  had  been  given  no
    medication or treatment but in his oral evidence referred to  receiving
    ayurvedic treatment and at P34 of his bundle there was  a  letter  from
    the appellant's father saying that the appellant had been  taken  to  a
    number of doctors for continuous medical treatment.  The grounds  argue
    that on the appellant's  account  he  suffered  blunt  trauma  injuries
    causing bruising and that it is unclear why this would have caused  any
    injuries still visible more than seven years later  and  there  was  no
    obvious inconsistency between what the appellant and  his  father  said
    and that the appellant may have been saying that  he  had  received  no
    medical treatment as in  fact  he  received  ayurvedic  treatment.   In
    [17(d)]  the  judge  identified  an  inconsistency  between  what   the
    appellant and his father had said about  what  happened  following  the
    appellant's release.  The grounds argue that the  phraseology  used  by
    the appellant's father was not as precise as the appellant's and he was
    not cross-examined on this particular issue.

16.  In [17(e)] the judge commented on the fact that  the  appellant's  wife
    had not given evidence and in [17(f)] that there was no  evidence  from
    the Sri Lankan MP.  The  grounds  argue  that  this  has  the  feel  of
    requiring corroboration and does not have the  appearance  of  applying
    the correct lower standard of  proof.   Finally,  in  respect  of  para
    [17(h)] where the judge made the point that the appellant had  been  in
    the UK since April 2010 and had given no credible explanation  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum, it is argued that in his witness statement he
    had explained that his wife had a visa and he felt  protected  by  that
    and it was only when that  expired  and  his  father  was  experiencing
    difficulties that he claimed asylum.

17.  Ms Ahmad submitted that the factors taken  into  account  were  clearly
    relevant to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.   There  was
    no reason to believe that the judge had not considered all the relevant
    evidence and she had been entitled to rely on the absence  of  evidence
    which could reasonably be expected.

18.  I am not satisfied that there is any substance in the challenge to  the
    judge's reasoning in [17].  The fact the appellant  was  not  of  Tamil
    ethnicity and there were no LTTE members or sympathisers in his  family
    was clearly a relevant matter to be taken into account.  Similarly, the
    judge was entitled to comment on the fact the  appellant's  father  had
    not been arrested and on the discrepancy in whether the  appellant  had
    been in receipt of medical treatment.  It was for her  to  decide  what
    weight should be attached to discrepancies in the  evidence  which  are
    further set out in 17 (d) and (g).  It was open to the  judge  to  take
    into account the fact that evidence which was reasonably available such
    as evidence from the appellant's wife and the Sri  Lankan  MP  was  not
    adduced: TK (Burundi) v Secretary of State  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40.  The
    judge's  approach  does   not   indicate   that   she   was   requiring
    corroboration: she was commenting on the failure  to  produce  evidence
    the appellant could reasonably have been expected to produce.

19.  It was argued that the judge had not referred to explanations given  by
    the appellant, by way of example why he  had  delayed  claiming  asylum
    having been in the UK since April 2010 but that was a  fact  the  judge
    was entitled (and indeed required) to take into account  by  virtue  of
    s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimant's  etc)  Act
    2004 and there is no reason to believe that the judge did not take  the
    appellant's explanation into account or that she did not consider  this
    issue in the context of the evidence as a  whole.   In  substance,  the
    appellant is seeking to re-argue issues of  fact  which  were  for  the
    judge to assess.


(iii)    The Assessment of the Documentary Evidence at [19]

20.  Mr Martin sought to argue that the factors identified by the  judge  in
    [19] had failed to take into account a number of relevant matters.   In
    respect of [19(a)] the judge had pointed out that the appellant claimed
    at interview that he had been been arrested in January 2009 whereas the
    document at R29 indicated he was arrested in  April  2009.   Mr  Martin
    argued that it was at least possible that the  lawyer  had  said  April
    2009 as it was the case that legal advice was sought at that stage.  In
    [19(b)] the judge commented on the appellant's lack of understanding of
    some of the documents.  Mr Martin argued that this was  unfair  as  the
    appellant was not a lawyer and could not be criticised for his lack  of
    knowledge.  In [19(c)] the judge highlighted the apparent errors in the
    dates in the document.  Mr Martin submitted that the position  appeared
    to be that there was a wrong date recorded  which  had  affected  other
    paperwork.  He accepted that at first blush the position looked odd but
    it was possible that this arose through an administrative error.

21.  On these issues Ms Ahmad submitted that these were  essentially  issues
    of fact for the judge to resolve.  At [19(a)] the document clearly said
    April 2009 and in [19(b)] when the judge asked about the  originals  of
    the documents and the envelope they were sent  in,  the  appellant  had
    said that his father had posted the documents directly from  Sri  Lanka
    to the appellant's solicitors but this was inconsistent with  what  was
    said in the letter from the Sri Lankan lawyer that he had obtained  and
    posted the documents to the solicitor.  In [19(c)] there was  not  just
    one error highlighted but a number of errors.

22.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  her  assessment  of
    the documentary evidence.  She identified issues of concern, as she was
    entitled to do, which were for her to resolve and then to make findings
    of fact in the light  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole.   The  arguments
    rehearsed before me as submissions of law were in  substance  arguments
    on fact.  I am satisfied the  judge's  findings  and  conclusions  were
    properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

(iv)  Did the Judge consider the Evidence as a Whole.

23.  The judge granting permission to appeal raised  the  issue  of  whether
    the judge considered the weight to be  placed  on  the  documents  only
    after he had found against the appellants on  credibility  and  not  as
    part of the general assessment of the evidence. I am not satisfied that
    this is a case where the judge compartmentalised the  evidence  dealing
    with credibility in relation to the oral evidence and only after making
    an adverse credibility going on to consider the  documentary  evidence.
    The fact that the judge did not commit this error  is  clear  from  the
    fact that in [17] when starting her assessment of credibility, she said
    that  she  had  regard  particularly  to  the  following,  the  factors
    identified at [17(a)]-[17(h)].  She then said at [18] that she went  on
    to consider the documents submitted in support of the appeal noting  at
    [19] that she sought clarification  of  aspects  of  the  documentation
    going on to note in particular the points at [19(a)-(d)].

24.  The judge said at [20] that in the light of all the evidence  to  which
    she had referred and following the principles set out in Tanveer  Ahmed
    [2002] Imm AR 318, she was not  satisfied  that  any  weight  could  be
    attached to the documents and in  [21]  that  she  had  considered  the
    appellants' case in the light of the objective evidence and the current
    country guidance but for  the  reasons  given  she  did  not  find  the
    appellant credible as to the basis of his claimed fear.  In  the  light
    of these comments and reading  the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  am  not
    satisfied there is any substance in the argument that  the  judge  fell
    into the error identified by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga v Secretary
    of State [2005] EWCA Civ 367 of compartmentalising her approach to  the
    evidence.

25.  In summary, I am not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  and  it
    follows that the appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.  No
    anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 22 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter







