
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30th November 2018                   |On 21st December 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     HR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Gardner of Counsel, instructed by Migrant
                    Legal Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge O'Hagan  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 16th February 2018.



 2. The Appellant born in  May  1983  is  an  Iranian  citizen  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He left Iran on 1st December 2015 and arrived clandestinely
    in the UK on 18th January 2016 and claimed asylum.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he  would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  if
    returned to Iran as he is a supporter of the Kurdish  Democratic  Party
    of Iran (KDPI).  He claimed that for a period of about  six  months  he
    would carry letters and other material for the KDPI.   He  also  stored
    KDPI material at his family home which was subsequently raided  by  the
    Iranian security forces.  This caused the Appellant to  flee  with  the
    assistance of an agent.

 4. The application  for  international  protection  was  refused  on  20th
    December 2017 and the appeal heard by the FTT on 8th February 2018.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and a witness and dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.  The judge found  the  Appellant  to  be  an
    incredible witness, and did not place weight on the evidence  given  by
    the witness.  The judge did not accept the Appellant's  claim  to  have
    been working for the KDPI in Iran, and  did  not  accept  that  he  had
    undertaken any activities in the UK that would bring him to the adverse
    attention of the Iranian authorities if he was returned.

 6. The judge accepted that the Appellant had made posts on Facebook  which
    opposed the  Iranian  regime,  but  took  the  view  that  the  Iranian
    authorities  would  view  the  Appellant's   Facebook   activities   as
    opportunistic and carried out to bolster a fabricated asylum claim.

 7. Following dismissal of the appeal the Appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying upon three  grounds  which  are
    summarised below.

 8. Firstly it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  irrational  or
    unreasonable  findings  with  respect  to  the   Appellant's   internet
    activities in the UK and risk on return.  The judge had  accepted  that
    the Appellant had made posts that would be viewed as being  opposed  to
    the Iranian government.  It was submitted that the judge had  erred  in
    concluding that the Iranian authorities would simply view  these  posts
    as opportunistic in support of a fabricated asylum claim.

 9. It was pointed out that the Facebook posts included photographs of  the
    Appellant at KDPI events in the UK, and there were  pictures  insulting
    the Supreme Leader in Iran, and it was submitted that the judge had not
    provided adequate reasons for concluding that the  Iranian  authorities
    would simply view the posts to be opportunistic.

10. The second ground submits that the judge speculated regarding the  role
    of agents.  The judge at paragraph 40  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    passed through no fewer than four safe countries and  failed  to  claim
    asylum.  The judge found it was  unlikely  that  an  agent  would  have
    insisted on bringing the Appellant to the UK,  rather  than  permitting
    him to claim asylum in any of the safe  countries  through  which  they
    passed.  The judge found that from the perspective of an agent  working
    for profit, it might be supposed that "dropping him off  sooner  rather
    than going all the way  to  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  more  cost
    effective".  It was submitted that the judge had provided no source  or
    background evidence to support the assertion as to how the agent  would
    act.

11. The third ground contends that the judge made a  material  misdirection
    of law at paragraph 38 by speculating that it was not credible that the
    Appellant was able to amass a large sum of money very quickly in  order
    to pay an agent.  The Appellant had claimed he  had  raised  additional
    funds by selling his mother's jewellery, and the judge  agreed  with  a
    submission made by the Presenting Officer  that  it  was  difficult  to
    accept that he would have been able to arrange the sale of jewellery in
    such a short period  of  time.   The  judge  also  found  that  "it  is
    remarkably convenient that his uncle should happen  to  know  just  the
    person to get him out of the country at such short notice".  The  judge
    went on to accept that coincidences can happen,  and  if  that  was  an
    isolated point he would accept it, but looking at the  context  of  the
    account as a whole, it was appropriate to make an  adverse  credibility
    finding.

12. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty on 24th July 2018, and  I  set  out
    below, in part, the grant of permission;

         "3.  It is arguable, as asserted within the grounds of appeal  that
             the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has   not   adequately   and
             sufficiently explained why the Appellant's Facebook  postings,
             which  he  accepts  may  have  been  seen   by   the   Iranian
             authorities, will be considered to be  opportunistic  by  them
             and not place the Appellant at a real risk of persecution upon
             return.  Such postings in that regard have to be seen  through
             the eyes of the Iranian authorities, rather than the  eyes  of
             an Immigration Judge in the UK.  It  is  further  arguable  as
             argued that the judge has  speculated  regarding  the  actions
             that were likely to be taken by an agent as to whether or  not
             an agent would have brought the Appellant all the way  to  the
             UK rather than dropping him off earlier.  All of  the  grounds
             may be argued."

13. Following the grant of permission the  Respondent  did  not  provide  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

14. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. Miss Gardner  in  making  oral  submissions  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    argued in relation to the first ground, that if the judge had not  made
    an irrational finding in relation to  the  internet  activity,  he  had
    erred in law by providing inadequate reasoning for concluding that  the
    Iranian authorities would view the  Facebook  posts  as  opportunistic,
    such that the Appellant would not be at risk of persecution.

16. Miss Gardner pointed out that the Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity,  a
    Sunni Muslim, and that combined with his  anti-regime  postings,  meant
    that the regime would regard him as a KDPI sympathiser.

17. Miss Gardner pointed out that there was relevant guidance  on  internet
    activity in AB and Others (Internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC).

18. Examples of the Facebook posts were before the FTT in section F of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  Miss  Gardner  pointed  out  that  the  posts  are
    without doubt public as opposed to private, and this was accepted by Mr
    Howells.

19. With reference to the second ground of appeal, Miss Gardner relied upon
    the written ground, submitting that the judge  had  speculated  without
    making reference to objective background evidence.

20. The same point was made in relation to the third ground.

21. Miss Gardner submitted that  the  errors  are  material,  referring  to
    paragraph 26 of the FTT decision in which the judge states that he does
    not consider any one of the matters as being determinative,  but  views
    the individual matters on which he has found facts, to form part of the
    jigsaw of evidence before him.  The judge goes on to explain that it is
    the cumulative impact of all those matters, considered  in  the  round,
    which caused him to conclude that the  account  was  incredible.   Miss
    Gardner's submission was that if at least one  of  those  matters  fell
    away, it was relevant to the cumulative  effect,  and  meant  that  the
    decision was unsafe and should be heard afresh.

22. Mr Howells in making oral submissions submitted that  the  decision  of
    the FTT contained no material error of law.  Although it was  submitted
    to the judge that the Facebook posts  may  not  have  been  public,  Mr
    Howells acknowledged that it was clear from  the  documentary  evidence
    that the posts were public.  Mr Howells submitted that it was  open  to
    the judge to make a finding that the Iranian authorities  would  accept
    that the anti-government posts were an  opportunistic  attempt  by  the
    Appellant to bolster a fabricated asylum claim and  those  posts  would
    not put him at risk.

23. With reference to the second ground it was accepted that the judge  had
    speculated at paragraph 40, but Mr Howells submitted  that  this  error
    was not material given the  other  credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge.

24. With reference to the third ground, Mr Howells submitted  that  it  was
    open to the judge to make a finding that the Appellant's account of how
    funds were accrued so quickly was incredible and implausible.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. The decision of the FTT is comprehensive and prepared with care, but  I
    am persuaded the decision contains a material  error  of  law  for  the
    following reasons.

26. I find that the judge erred in considering the internet activity of the
    Appellant.  The judge accepted that the Appellant had placed  posts  on
    Facebook, and found that the posts may have been seen  by  the  Iranian
    authorities.

27. It is clear, as accepted by both representatives  who  appeared  before
    me, that the posts are public as opposed to private.  In  my  view  the
    judge has not made an irrational finding, but has erred in law  by  not
    providing adequate reasons to explain why the posts would not  put  the
    Appellant at risk.

28. It appears to be accepted that the Appellant left Iran illegally.  This
    without more would not put him at risk.  It is also accepted that he is
    of Kurdish  ethnicity.   There  was  considerable  background  evidence
    before   the   FTT   to   indicate   that   the   Iranian    government
    disproportionately  target  minority  groups  including  Kurds.    This
    information is included  in  the  United  States  Department  of  State
    Country Report on Human Rights Practices in Iran at  page  B41  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  The Respondent's Country Information and  Guidance
    on Kurds and Kurdish political groups in Iran published in July 2016 is
    included in the Appellant's bundle.  At paragraph  2.3.3  the  guidance
    states  that  the  Iranian  authorities  have  no  tolerance  for   any
    activities connected to Kurdish political groups and those involved are
    targeted for arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention and physical abuse.
     Even those who express peaceful dissent are at risk of  being  accused
    of being a member of a banned Kurdish political group.

29. There is no doubt that the  Facebook  posts  express  support  for  the
    Kurdish minority, and opposition to the Iranian government.   What  was
    not before the judge was any reference to AB Iran which although not  a
    country guidance decision, is a comprehensive  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal running to 472 paragraphs over 78 pages.  At paragraph 457 the
    Upper Tribunal accepted that some returned Iranians would be questioned
    and confirmed that such a person could  not  be  expected  to  lie  and
    found;

         "We find that the act of returning someone creates a 'pinch  point'
         so  that  returnees  are  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the
         authorities in Iran who have  both  the  time  and  inclination  to
         interrogate them.  We think it likely that they will be asked about
         their internet activity  and  likely  if  they  have  any  internet
         activity for that to be exposed and if it is less  than  flattering
         of the government to lead to a real risk of persecution."

30. In view of the guidance in AB  Iran,  which  was  not  brought  to  the
    attention of the judge, and the fact  that  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is an Iranian Kurd who left Iran illegally and who  has  made
    anti-regime postings on Facebook, indicating  strong  support  for  the
    Kurdish minority, it is my view that the judge  erred  in  law  by  not
    adequately explaining why this would not put him at risk, and  why  the
    authorities would simply regard  the  posts  as  opportunistic  and  an
    attempt to bolster a fabricated asylum claim.

31. In my view this error suffices to make the decision unsafe.  So far  as
    the second ground is concerned, the Respondent accepts that  the  judge
    speculated without  making  reference  to  background  evidence.   With
    reference to the third ground of appeal, my view is that the judge  was
    entitled to make the findings that  he  did  in  paragraph  38  of  his
    decision.

32. However as I conclude that the first two grounds contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal do display  a  material  error  of
    law, I find that the decision of the FTT must  be  set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved.  Both representatives submitted that if an error of
    law was found as contended by the  Appellant,  the  appropriate  course
    would be to set aside the decision in its entirety and remit the appeal
    back to the FTT to be heard afresh.  Having considered paragraph  7  of
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements,  I  find  that  it   is
    appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FTT, because of the  nature
    and extent of judicial fact-finding that will be necessary in order for
    this decision to be remade.  No findings of fact are preserved.

33. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FTT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    O'Hagan.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3rd December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed                              Date 3rd December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
