
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00577/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 07 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    T.H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Young, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Wilson (the Judge) issued on 18 March 2019 by which the appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant him
    international protection was dismissed.

2.   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Mailer granted permission on all
    grounds by way of a decision dated 13 June 2019.


Anonymity Order

3.   The Judge did not issue an anonymity order.  This is a matter in which
    the appellant has sought asylum.  I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No
    1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe that the starting point
    for consideration of anonymity orders in this Chamber of the Upper
    Tribunal as in all courts and Tribunals is open justice.  However, I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this Tribunal
    that an anonymity order is made in all appeals raising asylum or other
    international protection claims.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an anonymity order:

         'Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no reports
         of these proceedings of any form of publication thereof shall
         directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt
         of court proceedings.  I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of
         serious harm arising to the appellant from the content of the
         protection claim.'


Background

4.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He states that he was
    born in the province of Nangahar, which is situated in the east of the
    country and was accepted by the respondent before the First-tier
    Tribunal to be a province with a high level of Taliban activity.  In
    seeking international protection, the appellant asserts that his father
    and also his maternal and paternal uncles were members of the Taliban.
    They asked him to join.  His father, a Taliban commander, was killed
    some five or six months before his asylum interview.  Soon after his
    father's death the appellant was required to undertake three weeks of
    training and he did so because he was fearful for his life.  He
    subsequently managed to leave the country with the support of a
    maternal uncle.

5.   The appeal came before the Judge on 20 February 2019.  A request for
    an adjournment to secure a psychiatric report and a country expert's
    opinion was refused.  The Judge accepted that the appellant suffered
    from PTSD and treated him as a vulnerable witness.  He proceeded at
    paragraph 8 of the decision to determine:

         "When it was put to him that when he made his solicitors' statement
         in 2018 that he was able to give all the names of all the countries
         through which he had travelled he states that he had had the
         opportunity of talking with people with whom he had travelled and
         thus knew the detail.  One of the difficulties the appellant faces
         is that the overriding impression given by the variations in his
         history that indeed this is what has happened; namely that he has
         based his request for international protection on a number of
         accounts he has heard from his fellow nationals who have left
         Afghanistan rather than what has actually occurred to him.  I make
         that finding after reminding myself the appellant is young, suffers
         from PTSD and may have difficulty in giving coherent replies. After
         carefully considering the number and degree of the discrepancies I
         do not find the appellant to be credible.

6.   The appellant's grounds identified three separate challenges of points
    of law.  The first ground asserts that the Judge erred in law in
    refusing the application for an adjournment made in the morning of the
    hearing.  Ground 2 alleges that the Judge erred in his assessments of
    credibility and ground 3 complains that the Judge failed to lawfully
    take into account a relevant country guidance decision.

7.   In granting permission to appeal, Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
    Mailer granted permission on all three grounds, observing:

"It is arguable that the refusal of his application for an adjournment to
obtain the reports may have deprived the appellant of a fair hearing.  It
was asserted that the country expert report addressing the respondent's
challenges to the appellant's claim might have cast light on the
credibility of his claim.  It is asserted that given that it was accepted
that he was suffering from PTSD, the psychiatric report was necessary to
consider the impact, if any, that his PTSD had on his memory and ability to
concentrate and whether in the circumstances relocation to Kabul would be
unduly harsh."

8.   No Rule 24 response was received from the respondent.


Decision on error of law

9.   Both representatives at the hearing before me considered the Judge's
    decision to be flawed by legal error such that it should be set aside.

10.  The respondent's decision was issued on 8 January 2019.  The appellant
    filed a notice of appeal with the First-tier Tribunal on 22 January
    2019.  By way of a notice dated 23 January 2019 the First-tier Tribunal
    listed the substantive hearing of this appeal on 20 February 2019.  On
    1 February 2019 the appellant's legal representatives, Wimbledon
    Solicitors, wrote to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross and
    requested an adjournment of the substantive hearing so that a
    psychiatric report and a country expert's opinion could be obtained.
    This cannot be considered to be a last-minute application for an
    adjournment.  The application was refused by a Tribunal caseworker on 6
    February 2019.  The reasons are curt, simply observing:

         'The appellant/rep has not explained how an expert report will
         assist the Tribunal.  There is ample objective evidence in the
         public domain.  Furthermore, the appellant/rep has not provided a
         copy of the GP's reports identifying the medical issues of concern
         that would form the subject of an expert psychiatric report.'

11.  I note at this juncture that the request for an adjournment had
    observed that the appellant suffered from depression and had mental
    health problems and that an expert psychiatric report was being sought.
     The decision of the Tribunal caseworker wholly failed to engage with
    the fact that the legal representative had identified a concern as to
    mental health, that there had only been a very short period from the
    issuing of the decision to the proposed hearing date in which to secure
    relevant medical evidence for the hearing and that the requested
    adjournment of eight weeks was not excessive in nature.  Further, the
    decision wholly failed to engage with the benefit the Tribunal would
    have in undertaking its assessment by being in receipt of relevant
    medical evidence, particularly as medical evidence could be critical in
    explaining why an account might be incoherent or inconsistent: AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA
    Civ 1123, [2018] 4 WLR 78, at 21.

12.  The application to adjourn was renewed before the Judge.  Again, in
    the refusal to adjourn there was a failure to appropriately weigh
    within the assessment the overriding objective, the very limited time
    enjoyed by the appellant to secure relevant medical evidence consequent
    to the adverse decision of the Home Office some six weeks previously
    and also the confirmation that legal aid been recently secured so as to
    secure such evidence.  The provision of legal aid is a relevant factor
    in assessing the likelihood of a medical report being secured and
    identifying a time limit in which such a report and a country expert's
    opinion would be ready.

13.  I observe that when considering the adjournment request the Judge had
    before him evidence that the appellant was on a waiting list for
    talking therapy due to depression, nightmares and difficulties in
    sleeping.  He is described by way of a GP referral as suffering from
    PTSD in relation to events experienced in Afghanistan and I observe
    that the Judge subsequently accepted that the appellant suffers from
    PTSD.  In such circumstances the seeking of medical evidence was not
    speculative in nature.

14.  On the facts arising in this appeal and when assessing the duty to act
    fairly the First-tier Tribunal would reasonably expect to be aided by
    medical evidence addressing whether the appellant's mental health
    concerns impacted upon his ability to provide cogent evidence,
    particularly in circumstances where inconsistency in evidence is an
    issue to be considered.  It is clearly apparent that when considering
    the adjournment application, the Judge ought properly to have had in
    mind that such evidence could make a material difference to an
    assessment of the evidence already before the Tribunal. In the
    circumstances, the refusal to adjourn the hearing for eight weeks was
    not in the interests of justice and so was a material error of law.

15.  Having found a material error of law as to ground 1, I do not proceed
    to consider grounds 2 and 3.  As the error of law significantly and
    adversely infects the findings of fact and analysis of evidence I set
    aside the decision and do not preserve any of the findings.  As to
    remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors, I accept the
    submissions made by both Mr Walker and Ms Young that clear findings
    will have to be made on the evidence presented.  Both advocates submit
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:

         "7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:

             (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding
             which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to
             be remade is such that, having regard to the overriding
             objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
             the First-tier Tribunal."

17.  I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of his asylum claim
    to date.



Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
    error on a point of law and is therefore set aside.

19.  This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
    before any judge other than JFtT Wilson

20.  No findings of fact are preserved.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 18 July 2019



