
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00718/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2016                           |On 7 November 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    [A J]
                         (anonymity directioN made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal arising out of the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Troup promulgated on 8 August 2016.  The appellant is  an  Afghan
    citizen born on 1 March 2001 who was  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    child, and I renew the  anonymity  direction  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The appellant's immigration history was  recited  by  the  judge  along
    with the law as it applies to asylum, humanitarian protection and human
    rights claims.  In paragraphs 14 to 21 the judge recited the background
    to the appellant's  claim,  in  paragraphs  22  to  24  summarised  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal and in paragraphs 25 to 31 set out the
    oral evidence given by the appellant.

3.   The judge's findings are to be found in paragraphs 32 to  41  including
    by  cross-reference  the  submissions  which  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and the appellant.

4.   The conclusions the judge came to based on  the  evidence  and  country
    material was that the asylum  claim  was  not  made  out  nor  was  the
    humanitarian protection claim, and the freestanding human rights appeal
    was similarly dismissed.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on three  discrete  bases.  The  first
    was the apparent lack of any credibility findings. The second  was  the
    failure  to  have  regard  to  more  up-to-date  country  guidance  and
    background information and the third was a  failure  to  make  findings
    under Article 15 of the Qualification Directive.

6.   Mr Dieu for the appellant abandoned the first ground because the  judge
    had dealt with the matter taking the appellant's case  at  its  highest
    and nonetheless rejecting it. Accordingly the absence  of  any  express
    finding on credibility was not material to the outcome.

7.   There was however more force in the second  point  concerning  evidence
    seemingly overlooked by the judge.  In  paragraph  41  when  the  judge
    stated: "Although those volunteers may include  the  gullible  and  the
    brainwashed there is no evidence before me of forced recruitment".

8.   The grounds of appeal drew attention to material which was  before  the
    judge which expressly addressed the issue of  forced  recruitment.   In
    paragraph 40 the judge cites extensively from  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information  Report  for  Afghanistan  dated  15  February  2013  which
    incorporates sections of a 2012 report.

9.   One item in the bundle of documentation  which  was  before  the  judge
    (and which the judge expressly refers  to  in  paragraph  35),  is  the
    United Nations High Commission for Refugees Eligibility Guidelines  for
    Assessing the International Protection Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from
    Afghanistan dated April 2006 (page 11 to page  55  of  the  appellant's
    bundle).

10.  Paragraph 3 of this document, under a subheading "Men of  Fighting  Age
    and Children in the Context of Under Age and Forced Recruitment" reads:

         "Incidents of forced recruitment of children are said to be subject
         to widespread under-reporting. However the recruitment and  use  of
         children by all parties to the conflict both in support and  combat
         roles is reported to be observed throughout the country."

11.  The section continues over the page by indicating that  anti-government
    elements (AGEs)

         "are reported to continue to recruit children, both boys and girls,
         to carry out suicide attacks and as human shields  as  well  as  to
         participate in active combat to plant IEDs, to smuggle weapons  and
         uniforms and to act as spies, guards or scouts for reconnaissance".



12.  Mr Dieu referred me to other documentation which had  been  before  the
    judge, the detail of which I need not  rehearse.  For  the  purpose  of
    making good his submission on the second ground he needs go no further.
    It is plain that the judge wrongly stated that there  was  no  evidence
    before him of forced recruitment.  At the very  least  there  was  some
    evidence before him, and he did not deal with it.

13.  Since the judge misrepresented  the  existence  and  extent  of  highly
    material evidence, this appeal must succeed and Miss Brocklesby-Weller,
    for the Respondent, properly concedes that this must be the case.  This
    is a material error of law and the matter must be remitted and heard de
    novo by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. Whether a full review
    of all the evidence will result in a  different  determination  of  the
    matter is entirely speculative.

14.  Strictly speaking it is unnecessary for me to address the third  ground
    upon which permission was granted although it was developed briefly  by
    Mr Dieu before me. It  relates  to  Article  15  of  the  Qualification
    Directive which is referred to in paragraph 35 but not addressed in the
    course of the decision nor are the fact-specific elements of this  case
    considered within the context of  the  Directive.  This  is  a  further
    material error of law in the decision.

15.  I cannot be satisfied that the  judge  gave  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
    issues before him, and  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  preserve  any
    findings  of  fact.  Another  judge  must  consider,  and  assess   the
    credibility  of,  all  the  evidence  including   up-to-date   material
    concerning the situation in  Afghanistan.  For  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal, however, I need say no more on any of these matters.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is
remitted to be decided  afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Troup.  No
findings of fact are preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         4 November 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

