
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00421/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 October 2017                    |On 01 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [a r]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Soltani, Iris Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal). The appellant, [AR], was born on 21 January 1989  and  is  a
    male citizen of Somalia.  He entered the  United  Kingdom  on  a  false
    French identity document in February 2007.  He claimed  asylum  in  the
    same month but his claim was refused and an appeal was dismissed  in  a
    decision of the Tribunal promulgated on  4  April  2008.   In  February
    2007, the appellant also pleaded guilty to a charge of use of  a  false
    instrument and was sentenced  to  eight  months'  youth  custody.   His
    deportation was recommended by the trial judge.  In September 2014, the
    appellant was interviewed  in  connection  with  fresh  submissions  in
    respect of asylum and human rights.  By a decision  dated  15  December
    2016, the appellant was refused asylum and the decision was also  taken
    to refuse to revoke his  deportation  order.   The  appellant  appealed
    against those decisions to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Rosemary
    Bradshaw) which, in a decision which is dated 3 May 2017,  allowed  the
    appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  (Articles  2/3)  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. The appeal turns on a relatively narrow ground.  The Secretary of State
    argues that, notwithstanding  having  claimed  to  apply  the  case  of
    Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702, the judge had failed to give reasons for
    finding the appellant's most recent claim  for  asylum  credible.   The
    appellant's previous claim  for  asylum  had  been  dismissed  and  the
    appellant had not been found credible by the Tribunal  as  regards  his
    age, place of birth and his clan membership.  The previous Tribunal had
    found that the appellant is an economic migrant.  The latest appeal had
    arisen from the appellant's claim to have become a genuine  convert  to
    Christianity.  Judge Bradshaw found that claim  to  be  truthful.   The
    respondent had not argued that, if the appellant is a  genuine  convert
    to Christianity, he would face a real risk of persecution in Somalia if
    he were to practise  his  religion  and/or  evangelise.   Further,  the
    Secretary of State noted that the appellant had failed  to  attend  his
    first asylum appeal hearing because  he  claimed  to  be  unwell.   The
    respondent challenges the judge's assessment of that fact.

 3. In her submissions, Mrs Pettersen referred to the judge's findings [54]
    as to whether or not the appellant would practise his faith  openly  on
    return to Somalia.  The judge had found that the appellant  would  "not
    be able to practise his religion otherwise than  openly."   Whether  or
    not the judge erred in respect of this aspect of the case, I accept  Ms
    Soltani's submission that the judge's assessment of how  the  appellant
    is likely to behave as regards his religion upon return to Somalia  was
    not challenged  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Accordingly, I have not examined the judge's finding as to whether  the
    appellant would "not be able to practise  his  religion  otherwise  and
    openly."  I have proceeded on the basis that, if the judge was  correct
    to find  as  a  fact  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity, he faces risk on return.

 4. The judge does not appear to have placed significant weight on the fact
    that the appellant failed to attend his  first  Tribunal  hearing.   At
    [49], the judge accepted that the Tribunal was "entitled to proceed  in
    his absence when he failed to attend previously and produced no medical
    evidence to support his claimed ill-health."  She also  observed  that,
    when cross-examined by the Presenting Officer,  he  gave  contradictory
    evidence.  The judge recorded [49] that "the findings from the  hearing
    on 6 March 2008 are my  starting  point."  She  accepted  the  previous
    Tribunal's findings of fact regarding the  appellant's  age,  place  of
    birth and his claim  for  asylum  overall  including  that  he  was  an
    economic  migrant.   Further,  the  judge  makes  the  point  that  the
    appellant's claim in respect of Christianity had not formed any part of
    the claim considered by the previous Tribunal:

         "... the fact that his previous claim was disbelieved and he  acted
         wrongly and dishonestly does not necessarily mean that he cannot be
         found to be credible in this completely different claim."

 5. At [53],  the  judge  found  that  "the  appellant's  evidence  of  his
    conversion to and continued practise of his Christian faith overall  is
    detailed largely consistent and broadly credible."   In  that  finding,
    the judge had regard to the witnesses from the church who attended  and
    gave evidence which the judge found "compelling".

 6. The question in this appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  is  essentially
    whether the judge erred in law by finding that the appellant's claim of
    having converted to Christianity is capable of being believed.  I  find
    that the judge did not depart from the  principle  in  Devaseelan;  she
    accepted that the appellant's credibility overall had been  damaged  by
    the previous Tribunal's findings but she was considering evidence which
    was wholly different from that previously  rejected.  The  respondent's
    argument borders on suggesting that, having been found  to  have  given
    untruthful evidence in the past, the appellant's evidence on any matter
    could never be believed again. That is not what  Devaseelan  propounds.
    Quite properly, the judge approached the evidence of the appellant with
    caution but it was open to her to accept it as truthful. Significantly,
    her finding that the appellant's conversion is genuine  was  based  not
    just on the appellant's testimony but also on the 'compelling' evidence
    of third parties. In the circumstances, I find that the  appeal  should
    be dismissed.

 7. Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 30 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 30 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

