
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00240/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2017                         |On 21st December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    b s h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge  Wedderspoon  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal ( the FTT) promulgated on 21st March 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen born [ ] 1997.  He arrived  in  the
    UK on 26th June 2016 and claimed asylum on the  basis  of  his  imputed
    political opinion.

 3. His asylum and human rights application was refused  on  16th  December
    2016 and his appeal was heard and dismissed by the FTT on 16th February
    2017.

 4. The FTT heard evidence from the Appellant's brother and uncle, both  of
    whom had been granted refugee status in the UK.  The FTT noted that the
    Appellant's case was that he had no political involvement in Iran until
    his brother requested him  to  deliver  a  package.   This  caused  the
    Iranian authorities to raid the Appellant's home and  in  his  absence,
    arrest his father.  This caused the Appellant to flee from Iran.

 5. The FTT was not satisfied that the Appellant had any political  profile
    and was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  delivery  of  a  package
    provided him with any political standing, and was not satisfied that as
    a result of this he came to the knowledge of the authorities.  The  FTT
    was not satisfied that such a package actually existed.   The  FTT  did
    not find that the Appellant had given a credible account  and  rejected
    his evidence.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that  the  FTT  had  erred  by  failing  to
    provide sufficient  or  sustainable  reasons  for  adverse  credibility
    findings,  and  had  failed  to  make  any  findings   on   compelling,
    corroborative evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Adio of the FTT who noted the
    absence in the FTT's decision, of any analysis of the evidence given by
    the Appellant's two witnesses.

 8. Following the grant of permission to appeal the Respondent submitted  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, contending that the FTT  was  aware  that  the  Appellant's
    brother had been granted refugee status, and that the grounds  did  not
    show that a different decision could have been reached by the FTT,  and
    the FTT directed itself appropriately.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

10. At the hearing before me Mr Gayle relied  upon  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to  appeal  submitting  that  the
    credibility findings of the FTT were flawed for the  reasons  given  in
    those grounds.  In addition the FTT had erred by failing to assess risk
    on return, in the light  of  the  accepted  political  profile  of  the
    Appellant's family in opposition to the Iranian regime.

11. Mr Diwncyz did not concede an error of law, but indicated that  he  had
    no oral submissions to make in opposition to the Appellant's claim that
    an error of law existed within the FTT decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

12. In my view the FTT materially erred in law for the following reasons.

13. The FTT acknowledged that the  Appellant's  brother  had  been  granted
    refugee status on the basis of his political opinion  and  stated  that
    this in itself did not establish  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim,  and
    there is no error of law in that  finding.   However,  the  Appellant's
    brother had provided a witness statement and given oral evidence to the
    FTT, and the oral evidence is summarised at paragraphs 32 -  33.   That
    evidence corroborated the Appellant's account as to being asked by  his
    brother to deliver a package.  There is no analysis  of  the  brother's
    evidence.   Failure  to  consider  and  analyse  potentially   material
    evidence amounts to an error of law.

14. Evidence was also given by the Appellant's  uncle,  also  a  recognised
    refugee.  There was no analysis of this evidence by the FTT, although I
    find that  this  evidence  was  not  potentially  as  relevant  as  the
    brother's evidence, in that the uncle gave evidence in relation to  the
    political profile of the  family,  rather  than  the  delivery  of  the
    package which is said to have caused the Iranian authorities to have an
    adverse interest in the Appellant.

15. The findings of fact made by the FTT are set out in paragraphs 45 - 52.
     Linked to the failure to analyse potentially relevant evidence,  is  a
    failure to provide adequate reasons for finding the Appellant  had  not
    given a credible account.

16. The Upper Tribunal in Budhathoki (reasons for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC) stated in the headnote:

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

17. I find that the FTT did not resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  in
    this case, as there is  no  analysis  of  the  evidence  given  by  two
    witnesses, one of whom gave evidence that corroborated the  Appellant's
    account.  It is not clear from reading the FTT decision why  no  weight
    has been given to the evidence of the two witnesses.

18. Credibility was a core feature of this  appeal.   The  FTT  credibility
    findings are flawed for the reasons  given  above,  and  therefore  the
    decision is unsafe and is set aside.

19. Both representatives suggested that it would be  appropriate  to  remit
    this appeal to the FTT to be heard afresh.  I have considered paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements,  and  find  it  is
    appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FTT  with  no  findings  of
    fact preserved.  This is because credibility is a  central  issue,  and
    there is  a  substantial  fact-finding  exercise  to  be  carried  out.
    Because of the nature of the fact-finding it is more  appropriate  that
    this is carried out by the FTT rather than the Upper Tribunal.

20. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FTT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Wedderspoon.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th December 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th December 2017
