


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/00743/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 13th December 2016                   |On: 04th January 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     LN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
                       and Canter
For the Respondent:           Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Cameroon who is now  aged  41.   He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Siddiqi) to dismiss his appeal on protection grounds.




    Anonymity Order

 2. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not consider it necessary to  make
    an order protecting the  Appellant's  identity,  this  is  a  published
    decision, and this case concerns a claim for  international  protection
    which includes claims of sexual violence. Having had regard to Rule  14
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and   the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum shortly after his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2015. He told UKVI officials that he was gay,  and  that  he
    had suffered persecution in Cameroon as a result.  He  had  twice  been
    arrested and detained; during one detention he had been gang  raped  by
    other prisoners.  His sexual orientation was the core of his claim, but
    here was an additional matter for consideration. The Appellant  entered
    the country using a valid business visitor's visa  which  he  had  been
    given by the agents who  organised  his  departure  from  Cameroon.  He
    claimed that after his arrival he had been put to work by these  agents
    who had told him that he  owed  them  the  debt  of  his  passage.  The
    Appellant was therefore treated as a potential  victim  of  trafficking
    and a referral was made to the Competent Authority.


 4. In her refusal letter dated 4th August 2015 the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department rejected the claim in its entirety. She found there
    to be a number of discrepancies in the account. For  instance,  central
    to the Appellant's account was his claim that he had worked as a DJ  in
    Cameroon. This had enabled him to meet other  men  with  whom  to  have
    relationships. The Secretary  of  State  noted  that  during  the  visa
    application process the Appellant had provided credible  evidence  that
    he in fact worked for the Ministry of Economics, Planning and  Regional
    Development as a  Project  Manager.  He  had  also  given  inconsistent
    evidence about his relationships with other family  members,  including
    his wife.  It was not accepted that he was gay, or that he had suffered
    any persecution in Cameroon. As  to  the  trafficking  element  of  the
    claim, the Secretary of State adopted the conclusions of the  Competent
    Authority that the Appellant was  not  a  victim  of  trafficking.  The
    Competent Authority decision was based on what  were  perceived  to  be
    fundamental discrepancies in the evidence: the Appellant  claimed  that
    he was being forced to work in a container park in Manchester,  whereas
    on the Respondent's evidence officers had apprehended  him  dressed  in
    smart clothing in a WH Smiths in Birmingham.

 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the parties were in
    agreement that credibility was the central issue  in  respect  of  both
    limbs of the claim.  The burden of proof lay on the Appellant  and  the
    standard was the relatively low one of "real risk".

 6. The Tribunal did not find the burden to be discharged, even to that low
    standard.  The determination gives several reasons for disbelieving the
    entire account and the appeal was dismissed. The Appellant now  appeals
    on the following grounds:

              i) Failure to make findings


                 The Appellant had given detailed evidence about his  sexual
                 relationships  in  Cameroon  and  had  named  four  men  in
                 particular. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  rejects  the
                 evidence in respect of one of these men,  no  findings  are
                 made about the other three. In focusing at it  did  on  the
                 account of arrest and ill-treatment, the Tribunal failed to
                 make a clear finding on the central matter  in  issue:  was
                 the Appellant gay?


             ii)  Failure  to  take  material  matters  into   account,   or
                 alternatively to give appropriate weight to such matters.


                 a) In making its findings the Tribunal  placed  significant
                    weight on discrepancies in the evidence arising from the
                    'screening' and  substantive  asylum  interview  records
                    produced  by  the  Respondent.  From  the   outset   the
                    Appellant  had  challenged   the   accuracy   of   these
                    transcripts. It was  pointed  out  on  his  behalf  that
                    neither interview had been recorded, despite a  specific
                    request from his solicitors to that effect (due to  lack
                    of funding to  pay  for  a  representative  to  attend).
                    Within a week of the  substantive  interview  transcript
                    being made available the Appellant had raised  a  number
                    of objections and sought to correct the record by way of
                    a lengthy and detailed letter from his solicitor. Whilst
                    it is not contended that the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
                    exclude the interview notes altogether, it is  submitted
                    that it failed to consider, or give due weight  to,  the
                    fact that this evidence had been  produced  without  the
                    legal safeguard of  recording,  and  that  it  had  been
                    contested from the outset.


                 b) The Tribunal finds that the Appellant's ability to leave
                    Cameroon without any  difficulty  undermines  his  claim
                    that he was on temporary  release  from  prison  at  the
                    time. It is submitted that the Tribunal has here  failed
                    to take into account the evidence that  the  Appellant's
                    departure was organised by agents.

                 c) It is further submitted that in its  assessment  of  the
                    Appellant's evidence the Tribunal failed to consider  or
                    give due weight to the possibility that his  ability  to
                    give clear evidence was clouded by his  experiences.  If
                    he had indeed been raped, imprisoned and beaten, it  was
                    possible  (indeed  medical  opinion  would  consider  it
                    likely) that this would have an impact on his ability to
                    give an entirely consistent account.


 7. In his oral submissions Mr Schwenk expanded on ground (ii)(b) above  to
    submit that there was in fact no evidential  basis  for  the  Judge  to
    conclude that Cameroon border officials would have  the  capability  to
    detect that someone boarding a flight was  on  temporary  release  from
    detention.  He  further  sought  to  expand  his  written  grounds   by
    challenging the overall findings on trafficking. He submitted that  the
    errors in approach made by the First-tier Tribunal had also  been  made
    by the Respondent and Competent Authority, all of these decision makers
    placing undue weight on evidential  discrepancies  without  considering
    the procedural concerns about the interview record, or the  possibility
    that the Appellant was traumatised.




    My Findings

      The Interviews


 8. I deal with this ground first since it assumed a  central  role  in  Mr
    Schwenk's submissions.   He accepts, in light of the decision  of  then
    President Mr  Justice  Blake  in  MB  (admissible  evidence,  interview
    records) [2012] UKUT 00119 (IAC) that  he  could  not  argue  that  the
    interview record should have been excluded. He submitted  however  that
    where there is no legal representative, recording provides an important
    procedural safeguard against the possibility of  poor  interpreting  or
    transcription, or against the Appellant becoming  confused.  That  much
    was recognised by the Court of Appeal in  R  (Dirshe)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 421.  In Dirshe the Court
    of Appeal departed from earlier authority to hold that it was  unlawful
    for the Secretary of State to refuse to record an interview where there
    was no funding for a representative  to  be  present,  for  those  very
    reasons.  In this case the Tribunal had been placed on notice that this
    had not happened, despite a specific request from the  solicitors.  The
    Appellant had subsequently  identified  a  number  of  defects  in  the
    interview records, and the Tribunal should  therefore  have  approached
    the records with caution, carefully weighing  any  alleged  discrepancy
    arising against the Appellant's explanation for it.  The error,  it  is
    submitted, is that in making its findings the  Tribunal  failed  to  do
    this, and did not apparently take into  account  the  letter  from  the
    solicitor, sent on the 23rd June 2015 (only six days after  the  asylum
    interview) and listing in some detail the problems with it:


        . The Appellant disputes the assertion that he  did  not  want  the
          asylum interview recorded. He says that he told the officer  that
          it was up to him, and it was the officer who  made  the  decision
          not to record
        . The interpreter at the asylum  interview  appeared  to  be  "half
          asleep" at times and it is not clear how much of the  Appellant's
          evidence was communicated to the officer
        . The interpreter had to correct the officer's record on  a  number
          of occasions
        . The records contain several spelling mistakes (which are listed)
        . The records contain incorrect dates (which are listed)
        . The records contain inaccuracies (which are listed)

 9. It is evident from  the  level  of  detail  in  this  letter  that  the
    Appellant and his representative had  gone  through  the  records  very
    carefully.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  letter  contained   important
    information and it was incumbent  on  the  Tribunal,  as  a  matter  of
    fairness, to have regard to it.   The question is therefore whether the
    representations of the 23rd June were properly weighed in the balance.


10.  At  paragraph  44  the  determination  identified  "one  of  the  most
    significant discrepancies" as arising from the dates that the Appellant
    gave for his detention.  In his screening interview he had said that he
    had been imprisoned on the 9th September 2014 and  again  on  the  11th
    November 2015; at substantive interview he had said that the dates were
    the 6th October 2014 and the 8th  November  2014.   This  is  a  matter
    raised in the representations of the 23rd June. There is it  said  that
    the dates given at substantive interview were the correct ones and that
    the dates recorded at  the  screening  interview  were  incorrect.  The
    Appellant's witness statement reflects  that  position.   Further,  the
    notes of the substantive interview record the Appellant as having  said
    that police had visited his workplace at the end of February, but  this
    was amended in the 23rd June letter so that the visit took place at the
    end of March.

11. It is quite clear in drawing the negative inferences that it  did  from
    these  matters  the  Tribunal  did   not   overlook   the   solicitors'
    representations.  The letter is acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal
    at paragraphs 11, 21, 25 and 52 of the determination.   The  fact  that
    the discrepancies are attributed  to  errors  by  the  interpreter  and
    interviewing officer is recorded at paragraph 44 itself.  It  is  plain
    that the explanation for those discrepancies was therefore  weighed  in
    the balance.   What the Tribunal does is reject the explanation because
    of other inconsistencies, arising inter alia from the oral evidence: at
    the hearing the Appellant deviated from  his  witness  statement  about
    when he was asked to attend at a police station, introduced  a  further
    police visit that had not been mentioned  previously  and  was  "vague"
    when asked to clarify. The conclusion is reached at paragraph 45: "I am
    not persuaded that the many  discrepancies  that  occurred  during  the
    screening and asylum interview are due to errors on  the  part  of  the
    interviewing officer and interpreter, as the Appellant has continued to
    give an inconsistent account...I find that the Appellant has repeatedly
    failed to provide a consistent account of when he was detained and when
    his workplace was searched by the authorities  in  Cameroon".   Similar
    findings are reached at paragraph  52  where  the  Tribunal  notes  the
    disparity in the evidence, across the  interviews,  oral  evidence  and
    witness statements, in respect of the  Appellant's  relationships  with
    other family members.    I am unable to accept that the Tribunal failed
    to  consider  the  possibility  that  the  discrepancies   arose   from
    interpreter/interviewing error. Judge Siddiqi obviously  did,  but  for
    the reasons that she gives, rejects this as an explanation.



    Trauma and Credibility

12. The Appellant's representative had included in the bundle of  documents
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010  (child,  vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellant guidance), an article about how survivors
    of sexual violence will very commonly find  it  difficult  to  disclose
    their experiences (particularly in a non-therapeutic  environment  such
    as a Home Office interview) and an academic review of the literature on
    how PTSD affects the memory. Submissions were made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant's  ability  to  give  a
    consistent and coherent account may have been influenced by the  trauma
    that he had suffered, in particular having  been  raped  in  prison  in
    Cameroon.  Before me it  is  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take these submissions into account.


13. This argument is  unsustainable.  First  of  all,  it  is  recorded  at
    paragraph 17 of the determination that the submissions made as  to  the
    Presidential Guidance and the reports mentioned above were  considered.
    Secondly, and more importantly, there was no medical  evidence  from  a
    mental health professional to support the assertion that the  Appellant
    was traumatised, or suffering from any kind of mental health  complaint
    such that his ability to tell his story might be compromised.   In  his
    submissions Mr Bates asked me to consider the situation had the  First-
    tier Tribunal made the alternative finding asked of it by  Mr  Schwenk.
    He was in effect asking the Tribunal to excuse  a  wholly  inconsistent
    account on the basis that the Appellant might have  been  raped,  might
    therefore be traumatised and that this might have affected his  memory.
    Mr Bates submitted, with good reason, that to accept this  approach  as
    rational would be to reduce the already low  standard  of  proof  to  a
    negligible level.  Had the account been accepted on that basis, I  have
    little doubt that it would be a Home Office appeal now before me.

14. Had there been a psychological assessment of the  Appellant  supporting
    the contention that he has memory  problems  because  of  trauma,  this
    ground of appeal may have had merit.  In the absence of  such  evidence
    it has none.


    Failure to Make Findings


15. At paragraph 56 of the determination the First-tier  Tribunal  rejects,
    with reasons, the evidence that the Appellant  was  in  a  relationship
    with a man named Joseph. At paragraph 43  the  Tribunal  rejects,  with
    reasons, the evidence that the Appellant worked as a DJ and so was able
    to easily meet men. At paragraphs  44-51  the  Tribunal  rejects,  with
    reasons, the evidence that the Appellant came to the adverse  attention
    of the authorities in Cameroon. At paragraph 52 the  Tribunal  rejects,
    with reasons, the conflicting  evidence  about  the  breakdown  of  the
    Appellant's  relationships  with  his  sisters  as  a  result  of   his
    sexuality, concluding "I find the lack of consistency  in  his  account
    undermines the credibility of his account to be gay".  At paragraph  55
    the Tribunal  specifically  directs  itself  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant might be gay, notwithstanding the rejection of his historical
    account, but having considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round,
    concludes [at 61] that he has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof.
    Having had regard to all  of  this  careful  and  detailed  analysis  I
    conclude that it cannot sensibly be suggested  that  the  Tribunal  has
    failed to make findings on whether the Appellant is in fact gay.


16. The grounds complain that there was  a  failure  to  make  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant's claims to have had relationships with  three
    men other than Joseph.   In  granting  permission  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Landes did not consider  this  ground  to  be  arguable,  and  Mr
    Schwenk  did  not  pursue  the  matter  before  me.  For  the  sake  of
    completeness I agree with Judge Landes that the absence of findings  on
    these three other relationships cannot be material.  As  Judge  Siddiqi
    herself makes clear, Joseph was the central figure in  the  Appellant's
    account, and  the  only  person  in  respect  of  whom  there  was  any
    corroborative evidence (a photograph). The evidence about the other men
    came only from the Appellant  himself,  whose  evidence  on  all  other
    matters had been comprehensively disbelieved.



    Prison and Departure

17. There may be some merit in Mr Schwenk's submission  that  there  was  a
    lack of evidence to justify the Tribunal's conclusion that  a  man  who
    had been released  from  detention  in  the  manner  described  by  the
    Appellant would have any difficulty leaving Cameroon.   I agree that in
    making that adverse finding the Tribunal did not  have  regard  to  the
    evidence that the exit was arranged by agents, a matter  which  appears
    to have been accepted at paragraph 42.  I am not however satisfied that
    this error could be  said  to  be  material.  The  finding  as  to  the
    Appellant's exit from Cameroon is one negative  finding  amongst  many,
    and there can be no doubt at all that the conclusion  would  have  been
    the  same  even  if  paragraph  47  were  to  be   removed   from   the
    determination.




    Trafficking


18. The Competent Authority did not accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked. I am told that  this  was  a  conclusion  reached  in  part
    because of the inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence, and in part
    because of the Respondent's evidence as to  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's discovery by immigration officials -  in  a  newsagents  in
    Birmingham as opposed  to  a  container  park  in  Manchester.   It  is
    submitted that applying AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1469  the  Tribunal  should   have
    considered for itself whether the decision of the  Competent  Authority
    was rational, and gone on to make its own findings  about  whether  the
    Appellant was a victim of trafficking.  I  reject  this  ground.    The
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal makes  no  mention  at
    all of the trafficking issue.   Although a copy of AS (Afghanistan) was
    included in the bundle it is not at all clear  that  the  Tribunal  was
    asked to make such findings. Secondly it is perfectly  clear  what  the
    conclusions would have been had such an analysis been  conducted:   the
    Tribunal accepted and adopted the analysis of the Competent  Authority.
    Thirdly it is apparent from the  reasoning  above  that  the  Appellant
    would have found it very difficult, if not impossible,  to  demonstrate
    that the decision  of  the  Competent  Authority  was  irrational.   Mr
    Schwenk submitted that the report was flawed for the  same  reasons  as
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.  The  circularity  of  that
    argument  is  evident:    the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reach   the
    conclusions that it did for the reasons that it gives, and so  too  was
    the Competent Authority.














    Decisions


19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside.

20. There is a direction for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            20th December
                                    2016




