

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
pa/00392/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 August 2018                      |On 20 December 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

            LORD BECKETT SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H M S
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Stefan Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Ellis Wilford, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co,
                  solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless  the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
publication thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
   decision  to  refuse  international  protection.   The  claimant   is   a
   Palestinian from the Occupied Palestinian Territories but  before  coming
   to the United Kingdom he was  ordinarily  resident  in  Lebanon.   It  is
   accepted that he is stateless and both of his areas  of  former  habitual
   residence, the state of Lebanon and the Occupied Palestinian Territories,
   have refused to readmit him.

2. The claimant is the son of a refugee protected by United  Nations  Relief
   and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA), and  it
   is accepted that he is named as such on his father's  UNWRA  registration
   card. He has supplied to the Secretary of State  a  number  of  documents
   giving him two different dates of birth in March 1975,  alternatively  in
   April 1979.  It is not  now  disputed  that  he  is  stateless,  but  the
   Secretary of State  considers  that  the  claimant  is  not  entitled  to
   international protection in the United Kingdom.

3. This is the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  which  we  have  both
   contributed.  Its promulgation has been delayed, for which we  apologise.
    No oral evidence was taken at the hearing.

Basis of claim

4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  Secretary
   of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain as a  stateless  person
   and/or   international   protection   under   the   Refugee   Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.

5. He also challenged the Secretary of State's decision to  serve  him  with
   an automatic deportation order pursuant to section  32  of  the  Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  which  he  resists  under  section
   33(2) (Exception 1) on the basis that his removal to Lebanon  and/or  the
   Occupied Palestinian Territories, if it were possible to effect it, would
   put him at risk of an Article 3  ECHR  breach  alternatively  breach  the
   United Kingdom's international obligations under the Refugee  Convention.
   The Secretary of State relied only on removal to Lebanon before us.

6. The Secretary of State certified his decision to refuse leave  to  remain
   pursuant to section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002 (as amended), as the claimant was convicted in the United Kingdom of
   an offence for which he was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  2
   years (section 72(2)), raising a presumption that he is a danger  to  the
   community.  That certificate  is  rebuttable  under  section  72(6),  the
   burden being upon the claimant to show that he is not  a  danger  to  the
   community.

Background

7. The claimant was born in Bint  Jlal,  a  refugee  camp  in  Lebanon,  his
   parents having fled Palestine before he was born. He has three  brothers,
   two of whom now live in Brazil and one in Abu Dhabi.  His sisters live in
   Gaza, as far as he knows, as does his mother.  He lost contact with  them
   after the last war in that area, some years ago, and he is unsure whether
   his mother is still alive.  His father, his paternal uncle, and  all  his
   grandparents are dead.

8. While the claimant was growing up, his  family  lived  in  three  refugee
   camps in Lebanon:  first Bint Jlal, then Rashidieh, until that  camp  was
   destroyed by Israeli missiles, while they were living there. The claimant
   was a young child and found the air attacks on the camp very frightening.



9. The third camp the family lived in was in Sida.  His father taught  maths
   there, informally as Palestinians in Lebanon have no  right  to  work  as
   teachers.

10. When the claimant was about 7 years old (so in 1982  or  perhaps  1986),
   the family returned to live in Gaza  and  remained  there  until  he  was
   approximately 15 years old (1990 or 1994).  They lived in another refugee
   camp there, Jbalia. The claimant was able to attend school in  Gaza,  but
   Gaza was occupied by Israeli forces and again, he saw a lot  of  violence
   and suffering.

11. When the claimant was about 15 years old, his father  decided  that  the
   family should return to Lebanon.  The claimant's father did  not  survive
   to make the journey, but the rest of the family  did  return  to  Lebanon
   where they stayed with one of his father's brothers.

12. Palestinians in Lebanese refugee camps were not allowed  to  own  homes,
   nor even to make basic repairs to their accommodation to keep them  safe.
   The claimant got into trouble in the refugee camp for bringing in  cement
   during  a  very  cold  winter,  to  undertake  urgent  repairs  to  their
   accommodation, which had a leaking ceiling such that water came in to the
   living quarters.  The Lebanese authorities arrested and detained him:  he
   was beaten in detention.  The claimant's  unchallenged  account  is  that
   such beatings were the norm during detention by the Lebanese authorities.

13. In Lebanon, the claimant  studied  information  technology  at  college:
   his studies were not UNWRA funded (although they provided some  food  and
   cooking utensils).  His studies  were  suspended  when  a  photograph  of
   Yasser Arafat was found on his desk at college.  Even if he had been able
   to complete his studies, the claimant would not have been able to work in
   IT as Palestinian refugees were excluded from working in  professions  in
   Lebanon.

14. The claimant became a member of the pro-Fatah movement  in  Lebanon  and
   expressed support for Yasser Arafat, becoming a member of  the  Palestine
   Liberation Organisation (PLO), attending Arafat-supporting meetings,  and
   guarding their offices at night.  People from Hamas and Jihad  approached
   him many times to tell him to work for them instead, threatening to  kill
   the claimant if he did not comply, but although frightened, he  stuck  to
   his beliefs.

15. When he was about 17 years old (so in 1992 or 1996)  the  claimant  left
   Lebanon for good. He did so because of the ill treatment he was receiving
   in Lebanon and because he had neither rights nor any future  in  Lebanon.
   The claimant went to Brazil, travelling through and spending time on  the
   way in Syria, Turkey and Italy, using a false Brazilian passport obtained
   for him by the agent. Two of his  brothers  had  already  reached  Brazil
   where they were living without status.    The  claimant  made  no  asylum
   claim in Brazil as his understanding was that there was no  international
   protection system there.

16. The claimant then travelled to the United Kingdom on a  French  passport
   to which he was not entitled.  He claimed asylum on arrival, but  without
   disclosing his travels through  Syria,  Turkey,  Italy  and  Brazil.  The
   claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on  13  March  2001.   Asylum  was
   refused and he was appeal rights  exhausted  on  18  April  2003,  having
   failed to attend his asylum hearing or arrange representation, through  a
   combination  of  speaking  no  English  and  being   unable   to   afford
   representation.  The claimant wrote to the Secretary of State asking  for
   permission to work, a  number  of  times,  but  the  Secretary  of  State
   refused.

17.  The  claimant  did  not  embark,  remaining  in  the   United   Kingdom
   unlawfully, using various identities. To survive, he used false documents
   to work as an office cleaner and  a  kitchen  porter,  paying  taxes  and
   making national insurance contributions in the false  name  on  a  forged
   passport he had obtained to  facilitate  working.  The  claimant  used  a
   Greek, a Lebanese, and two Palestinian identities, in  one  of  which  he
   worked, and another, the identity in which this appeal proceeds.

18. The claimant was required to report weekly to the Immigration  Officers,
   beginning when he entered the United Kingdom in 2001.  He  did  so  until
   2007, when he stopped reporting for fear of losing the job he  then  had:
   his employer would not give him permission to  be  absent  from  work  to
   comply with his reporting conditions.

19. The claimant was stopped by the police and arrested,  initially  in  his
   second Palestinian identity, on 5 June 2008.  The claimant later gave the
   name he now says is his correct identity.  The police searched  his  home
   and found 8 forged passports and a number of credit and debit cards.  The
   claimant took responsibility for the  passports  but  as  it  was  shared
   accommodation, he denied any responsibility  for  the  credit  and  debit
   cards, which seems to have been accepted.

20. On 27 August 2008 and 19 November 2008, the claimant  was  convicted  of
   possession of false documents with  intent  and  sentenced  to  2  years'
   imprisonment.  He did not appeal against either  the  conviction  or  the
   sentence.  The claimant served half of his sentence and was then detained
   in immigration detention for a time.  The Secretary  of  State  served  a
   notice of liability to  deportation:  the  claimant  responded,  but  the
   Secretary of State has lost his response.

21. On 25 June 2009, the Secretary of  State  signed  a  deportation  notice
   which was served the following day.  The  decision  was  certified  under
   section 94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
   amended), giving him an out of country right of appeal. That decision was
   revoked on 17 March 2016.

22. On 8 September  2009,  the  claimant  applied  to  be  returned  to  the
   Occupied Palestinian Territories (Gaza  Strip)  under  the  Secretary  of
   State's Facilitated Returns Scheme (FRS).  During investigations ahead of
   a request for an emergency travel document from the Lebanese Embassy, and
   then from the Palestinian General Delegation (PGD), language analysis was
   conducted and it was concluded that the claimant spoke the type of Arabic
   found among Palestinians in Lebanon and  Galilee.  The  Lebanese  Embassy
   refused to issue an emergency travel document.  The  claimant  cooperated
   fully with attempts to redocument him for return.

23. The Secretary of State approved the FRS application on  5  January  2010
   but on 26 March 2010, following further  submissions,  the  Secretary  of
   State treated the application as withdrawn.  On 21  September  2011,  the
   Palestinian Diplomatic Mission stated that  they  could  not  assist  the
   claimant to return to Gaza.

24. On 5 March 2010, the  claimant's  representatives  submitted  a  further
   asylum, human rights and compassionate grounds application for  leave  to
   remain. On 11 April 2012, the  claimant's  further  representations  were
   refused, with an out of country right of appeal.  The claimant sought  to
   appeal in-country, but unsuccessfully.  That decision was withdrawn on 17
   March 2016.

25. On 28 September 2011, the Secretary of State issued a further  liability
   to deport notice.  Again, the claimant responded  but  the  Secretary  of
   State has lost his response.

26. On 4 April 2013, the claimant submitted further  representations,  which
   were refused with an in-country right of appeal: the  claimant  exercised
   that right and on 22 October 2015 his appeal was allowed  to  the  extent
   that the original decision was not in accordance with law  and  that  his
   application remained before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.
    The Secretary of State withdrew the  underlying  decision  on  17  March
   2016.

27.  On  7  January  2016,  the  claimant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
   Secretary of State enclosing a completed UNHCR form and an application to
   remain in the United Kingdom as a  stateless  person.  The  Secretary  of
   State began the process of verifying the  claimant's  UNWRA  status  with
   UNHCR.

28. On 17 March 2016, all previous decisions and the FRS application  having
   been withdrawn, the Secretary of State issued a  notice  of  decision  to
   deport.  On 13 December 2016, UNHCR confirmed that the claimant was named
   as a dependant on his father's UNWRA registration card.

29. On 21 December 2016, the claimant's protection and human  rights  claims
   were refused, and the Secretary of State signed a deportation order.  His
   application for leave to remain on the grounds of statelessness was  also
   refused, citing paragraph 322 (1B) of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as
   amended) which provides for mandatory refusal of a statelessness leave to
   remain application when an applicant 'is at the date of  application  the
   subject of a deportation order  or  a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
   order'.

30. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Procedural history

First-tier Tribunal decisions

2003 decision

31. The 2003 decision dismissing the  claimant's  first  asylum  application
   reached no credibility conclusions on the claimant's  core  account,  but
   dismissed the appeal following a hearing at which the  claimant  was  not
   present.  We  have the advantage of  a  copy  of  the  2003  decision  of
   Adjudicator Nicholls sitting at Hatton Cross.  That decision records that
   there was no appearance or representation either for  the  claimant  (the
   claimant here) or the respondent (the Secretary of State).

32. The material passage in that decision is this:

         "11. The [claimant's] claim for asylum must fail on two  particular
         grounds, accepting that he is a credible witness.  He  claims  that
         he was the subject of some  harassment  by  Hamas  because  of  his
         support of the Arafat organisation.  The conduct he alleges is of a
         relatively  minor  nature  and  although  there   may   have   been
         restrictions on his freedom of movement because of the Rules,  both
         formal and informal, of the refugee camps in Lebanon,  the  conduct
         he describes does not in my judgment reach the  severity  necessary
         to cross the threshold to become persecution.   The  incident  with
         the smuggling of cement into the  refugee  camp  appears  to  be  a
         straightforward breach of the rules which, I assume, the [claimant]
         would have known.  Any reasonable sanction for breach of that  rule
         would constitute a legitimate punishment and I find that a fine  or
         similar penalty would be proportionate. I cannot see in his account
         of  that  event  any  sight  that  this  would  constitute  conduct
         sufficiently severe to either itself amount to  persecution  or  to
         amount to inhuman or degrading treatment under  Article  3  of  the
         ECHR. The incident regarding the visit to his aunt is  of  a  minor
         detention and the careful checking of his identity card.  Again,  I
         see nothing in  his  claim  regarding  this  incident  of  anything
         serious  enough  to  amount  to  persecution.   Finally,   as   the
         [Secretary of State]  noted,  the  [claimant]  was  able  to  leave
         Lebanon using his own travel document which quite clearly indicates
         that he was not of serious interest to the Lebanese authorities.

         12.  The second significant ground on which his claim fails is that
         the reason why the [claimant], on his own account, has come to  the
         notice of the authorities do not disclose one of the  five  reasons
         under Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.  Although there  are
         political elements involved, the only clear political aspect is the
         [claimant's] claim that Hamas wished to recruit him to their  cause
         rather than leave  him  to  support  Arafat.   The  fact  that  the
         [claimant] is a young Palestinian man may well have much more to do
         with this than any political motive.   The  complicated  nature  of
         relationships within the Palestinian political movements  are  such
         that I do not find that this attempt at recruitment, even including
         intimidation,  constitutes  persecution  on  account  of  political
         opinions. "

33. The appeal was dismissed on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  on  20
   January 2003.

2015 decision

34. No copy of that decision was before  First-tier  Judge  Chana  when  she
   considered the claimant's second appeal in 2015, deducing the contents of
   the earlier decision from quotations in the  Secretary  of  State's  2014
   refusal letter.

35. Judge Chana treated the 2003 decision as her Devaseelan  starting  point
   in 2015, but having seen the claimant give evidence, found him neither  a
   truthful nor a credible witness.  In so  doing,  she  departed  from  the
   Devaseelan starting point.  She was entitled to do so as  Judge  Nicholls
   had not heard oral evidence from the claimant, but Judge Chana had.

36. The claimant told Judge Chana that he could not now return  to  Lebanon:
   to do so he would have to  use  more  false  documents  as  the  Lebanese
   authorities had indicated that he would not be readmitted lawfully.   His
   parents had split up, his father remaining in  Lebanon  and  his  mother,
   originally a Lebanese citizen, now living in Gaza.  Judge Chana  did  not
   find the claimant to be stateless, nor was she satisfied  that  he  could
   not return to Lebanon or would face persecution if he did.

37. The claimant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, and permission was  granted
   on the basis, inter alia, that Judge Chana  had  not  placed  appropriate
   weight on the express  refusal  by  both  the  Lebanese  and  Palestinian
   authorities to allow the claimant to return to either country.

2015 Upper Tribunal decision

38. On 22 October 2015, the claimant's previous  appeal  was  heard  in  the
   Upper Tribunal before Lord  Burns,  sitting  as  a  judge  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal, and Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson.  There has  been  no  request
   for Judge Gleeson to recuse herself from hearing the present appeal.  The
   Upper Tribunal decided as follows:

         "The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.   We  remake  the
         decision by allowing the appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  remains
         before the [Secretary of State] for a lawful decision as to whether
         the [claimant] is stateless  or  whether  there  is  a  country  or
         countries of which he is a national, or  [where  he]  was  formerly
         habitually resident, and in which  he  is  not  at  risk  of  being
         persecuted,  nor  of  treatment  entitling  him   to   humanitarian
         protection pursuant to the Qualification Directive or of  a  breach
         of Article 3 ECHR."

39. The decision  of  Judge  Chana  having  been  set  aside  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal, it is not a Devaseelan starting point in the assessment of  the
   present appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision (2018)

40. First-tier Judge Cockrill  heard  the  present  appeal  in  March  2018.
   Erroneously, he did not anonymise the claimant in his decision: there  is
   clear Presidential Guidance given by the President of the FtTIAC in  2011
   that all asylum appeals should be anonymised at case creation.   We  have
   therefore made an anonymity order.

41. The Secretary of State did not cross-examine the claimant,  nor  any  of
   his witnesses, at the hearing  before  Judge  Cockrill.   The  claimant's
   witness statement of  20  February  2018  therefore  stood  unchallenged,
   including the description therein that the claimant had been detained and
   beaten by the Lebanese authorities and threatened by Hamas and Jihad when
   he would not join them and cease supporting  Yasser Arafat.

42. The First-tier Judge began by considering the  section  72  certificate.
   The claimant had been imprisoned for having in his possession 8 passports
   and using multiple identities to evade removal, at least one of which  he
   used in order to work.  The claimant had served his sentence in 2008-2009
   and had not re-offended.  He had shown contrition The  Judge  found  that
   the claimant had no  lawful  means  of  supporting  himself  and  it  was
   'perfectly easy to see how he could succumb to  that  temptation  to  use
   false documents to try to facilitate the gaining  of  work'.   The  Judge
   found that the claimant had  successfully  rebutted  the  presumption  in
   section 72(2) that he was  a  danger  to  the  community  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

43. The First-tier Tribunal noted Judge  Chana's  decision,  but  found  the
   claimant's core account to be perfectly credible and reliable and that he
   had cooperated properly with the attempts  made  by  the  United  Kingdom
   authorities  to  procure  an  emergency  travel  document  for  him.   In
   particular, the Judge noted that the claimant had lived in Gaza with  his
   family between the ages of 7 and 15, which did not appear  to  have  been
   taken into account by the Secretary of State in his decision.

44. The Judge considered all the evidence,  noting  that  the  claimant  had
   provided his  birth  certificate,  that  of  his  father,  his  Palestine
   Liberation Organisation (PLO) membership card and  his  Blue  Palestinian
   card, and that the  Secretary  of  State  had  accepted  that  he  was  a
   stateless person.  It was not suggested that the  claimant  could  go  to
   Palestine now.  The Judge noted that the Lebanese  authorities  were  not
   prepared to re-admit  the  claimant,  a  stateless  person  who  was  now
   unwelcome there.  The claimant, therefore, was no  longer  excluded  from
   protection because he was under UN  protection  as  an  UNWRA  dependent,
   because he could not reach Lebanon to access that protection.  The  Judge
   found that the claimant had an automatic right to refugee status.

45. As regards human rights, the claimant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom
   now for about 17 years, and is now  either  43  or  39  years  old.   The
   claimant had some limited mental health difficulties but the major  point
   was that he could not in practice be removed anywhere  and  that  he  was
   stateless.  The section 72 presumption was rebutted.

46. The First-tier  Judge  allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
   appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

47. The Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  noted  the  basis  of  the
   claimant's subjective fear as his claimed  membership  of  the  pro-Fatah
   movement and his having previously  'got  into  trouble'  for  possessing
   cement in a refugee camp in Lebanon.  The Secretary  of  State  contended
   that the decision failed to take account of earlier  First-tier  Tribunal
   decisions which were a relevant Devaseelan starting point and 'failed  to
   engage with the reliability of the [claimant's] narrative'.

48. The Secretary of State contended that  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
   Justice of the European Union in Abed El  Karem  El  Kott  and  others  v
   Bevandorlasi   es   Allampolgarsagi   Hivatal   [2012]   EUECJ   C-364/11
   (inadequately and erroneously cited in the grounds of appeal simply as El
   Knott Case C-364/11) was not dispositive of the appeal because the First-
   tier Judge had not found  that  UNWRA  assistance  to  the  claimant  had
   ceased, nor that it was impossible for  that  agency  to  carry  out  its
   mission.  The First-tier Judge's conclusion that the claimant remained at
   risk of serious harm was challenged on the  basis  of  the  Secretary  of
   State's challenge to the claimant's narrative, on which the  Home  Office
   Presenting Officer had not cross-examined at the hearing.

49. Finally, the Secretary of State contended, in  reliance  on  MM  and  FH
   (Stateless Palestinians, KK, IH, HE reaffirmed) Lebanon CG  [2008]  UKAIT
   00014 (again,  inadequately  cited  in  the  grounds)  that  differential
   treatment of Palestinians by the Lebanese authorities did not  reach  the
   level of persecution or an Article 3 ECHR breach; the Secretary of  State
   argued that if  in  possession  of  an  emergency  travel  document,  the
   claimant as a Palestinian formerly habitually resident in  Lebanon  would
   be able to return there without a real risk of serious harm, and that the
   First-tier Tribunal's reasoning to the contrary was materially flawed.

50. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguably
   wrong in law for the First-tier Tribunal to have accepted as credible the
   claimant's account, which had been rejected in the  Chana  decision,  and
   that in general, the evidence 'did not  show  that  the  UN  mission  was
   unable to carry out its function and evidence showed that  a  Palestinian
   habitually resident in  Lebanon  could  return  on  an  emergency  travel
   document'. The grant of permission continued:

         "4.  The failure to  engage  with  the  previous  decision  and  to
         explain what led to a different conclusion  is  arguably  an  error
         affecting the whole decision.  The findings of  the  Judge  involve
         virtually no discussion of the evidence or an explanation  for  the
         findings made and do not show an engagement with the case  law  and
         the [claimant's] history. ..."

51. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

52. At the Upper Tribunal we heard oral submissions  and  received  skeleton
   arguments, which are recorded in our notes of the hearing.  The  parties'
   arguments have been set out in the recital above.

Analysis

53. The first question for the Upper Tribunal is  what  was  the  Devaseelan
   starting point in this  appeal,  and  secondly,  whether  the  Judge  was
   entitled to depart from such Devaseelan starting point.   Beginning  with
   the Devaseelan starting point, the only decision left unchallenged  after
   the Chana decision was  set  aside  on  22  October  2015  was  the  2003
   decision, made in the absence of the claimant and Secretary of State,  in
   which the claimant's account was taken at its highest and no  credibility
   finding made.

54. The 2003 decision dismissed the appeal for two  reasons,  first  because
   the two detentions relied upon (one over the  cement  incident,  and  one
   because he tried to visit a prohibited area to see his aunt)  were  brief
   and did not involve any physical abuse. The unchallenged evidence  before
   the First-tier Tribunal in the present appeal differs from  that  account
   in that the claimant says he was ill-treated  in  the  cement  detention.
   That is a proper basis for Devaseelan divergence.

55. The second reason why  the  2003  appeal  failed  was  that  Adjudicator
   Nicholls did not consider that Hamas trying to recruit  the  claimant,  a
   supporter of Arafat, even using intimidation, was capable of engaging the
   political  reason  in  Article  1A(2).   We  find  that  conclusion  very
   difficult to understand and to the extent that First-tier Judge  Cockrill
   diverged from the 2003 reasoning in this respect, we consider that he was
   entitled so to do.

56. We are satisfied that Judge Cockrill gave proper  reasons  for  reaching
   positive conclusions as to fact and law: he weighed all the evidence with
   care and reached proper, intelligible and adequately reasoned conclusions
   on credibility and fact.

Statelessness

57. The statelessness provisions in the Immigration Rules relevant  to  this
   appeal are at paragraphs 401- 404 with paragraph  322(1B)  thereof.   The
   definition of a stateless person is at paragraph 401:

         "401. For the purposes of this Part a stateless person is a  person
         who:
             (a) satisfies the requirements of Article  1(1)  of  the  1954
             United Nations Convention relating to the Status of  Stateless
             Persons, as a person who is not considered as  a  national  by
             any State under the operation of its law;
             (b) is in the United Kingdom; and
             (c) is not excluded from recognition  as  a  Stateless  person
             under paragraph 402."

    It is not now contended that any of the paragraph 402 exclusions  apply
    to this claimant.

58. The requirements for limited leave to remain as a stateless person  are
    set out at paragraphs 403 and 404:

         "403. The requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
         a stateless person are that the applicant:
         (a) has made a valid application to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
         limited leave to remain as a stateless person;
         (b) is recognised as a stateless person by the Secretary  of  State
         in accordance with paragraph 401;
         (c) is not admissible to their country of former habitual residence
         or any other country; and
         (d) has obtained and submitted all reasonably available evidence to
         enable the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine  whether  they  are
         stateless.

         404. An applicant will be refused leave to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom as stateless person if: ...  (c)  their  application  would
         fall to be refused under any of the grounds set  out  in  paragraph
         322 of these Rules."

59. The First-tier Judge correctly held that the claimant  could  not  avail
   himself of the  provisions  of  the  Rules  regarding  stateless  persons
   because his circumstances brought him within  paragraph  322(1B)  of  the
   Rules, one of  the  mandatory  grounds  on  which  leave  to  remain  and
   variation of leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  to  be
   refused:

         "(1B) the applicant is, at the date of application, the subject  of
         a deportation order or a decision to make a deportation order;"

   Accordingly, although stateless, the  claimant  is  not  entitled  to  be
   granted limited leave to remain under the Rules.

60. The Secretary of State having accepted that the claimant  is  stateless,
   the First-tier Judge found as a fact that he had obtained  and  submitted
   all reasonably obtainable evidence to assist the Secretary  of  State  in
   making  that  assessment.  The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Judge,
   consistently since 2014, was that neither  Lebanon  nor  the  Palestinian
   Authority were prepared to readmit him.  The decision  of  the  Court  of
   Justice of the European Union in El Kott is binding on this Tribunal.  In
   that decision, the Court held as follows:

         "1. The second sentence of Article 12(1)(a)  of  Council  Directive
         2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 ... must be interpreted as meaning that
         the cessation of protection or assistance from organs  or  agencies
         of the United Nations other than the High Commission  for  Refugees
         (HCR) - for any reason - includes the situation in which  a  person
         who,  after  actually  availing  himself  of  such  protection   or
         assistance, ceases to receive it for a reason  beyond  his  control
         and independent of his volition. It is for the  competent  national
         authorities of the  Member  State  responsible  for  examining  the
         asylum application made by such a person to ascertain, by  carrying
         out an assessment  of  the  application  on  an  individual  basis,
         whether that person was forced to leave the area of  operations  of
         such an organ or agency, which will be the case where that person's
         personal safety was at serious risk and it was impossible for  that
         organ or agency to guarantee that his  living  conditions  in  that
         area would be commensurate with the mission entrusted to that organ
         or agency.

         2. The second sentence of Article  12(1)(a)  of  Directive  2004/83
         must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that,   where   the   competent
         authorities of the  Member  State  responsible  for  examining  the
         application for asylum have established that the condition relating
         to the cessation of the protection or assistance  provided  by  the
         United Nations Relief and Works Agency for  Palestine  Refugees  in
         the Near East (UNRWA) is satisfied as regards  the  applicant,  the
         fact that that person is ipso facto entitled  to  the  benefits  of
         [the] Directive means that that Member State must recognise him  as
         a refugee within the meaning of Article 2(c) of the  Directive  and
         that person must automatically be granted refugee status,  provided
         always that he is not caught by Article 12(1)(b) or (2) and (3)  of
         the Directive."                                           [Emphasis
         added]

   The claimant's account does not engage the Article 12 exclusions.

61. The claimant relied before the First-tier Tribunal on  El  Kott  and  on
   Bolbol (Area of Freedom, Security & Justice)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-31/09  (17
   June 2010), which held that:

         "For the purposes of the first  sentence  of  Article  12(1)(a)  of
         Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 ... a person receives
         protection or assistance from an agency of the United Nations other
         than UNHCR, when that person has actually availed himself  of  that
         protection or assistance."

62.  The First-tier Judge found as  a  fact  that  this  claimant  left  the
   protection of UNWRA in Lebanon because of the  cement  incident  and  the
   harassment by Hamas and Jihad, and that he could,  therefore,  no  longer
   benefit from UNWRA protection or assistance and was entitled  to  refugee
   status.  That finding was open to the Judge on the unchallenged  evidence
   before him.

63. Even if that finding were erroneous, the appeal  would  have  succeeded.
   The claimant cannot be deported if there is no country which will  accept
   him, and that is not in dispute in this appeal. The  Secretary  of  State
   has tried both Lebanon and Palestine, and both have refused to  issue  an
   emergency travel document.  The contentions  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
   about what might happen, if an emergency travel document were  available,
   are immaterial on the facts of this appeal.

64. There is no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, which we uphold.

DECISION

65. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   We do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         13 December 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson





