
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/00376/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 March 2018                            |On 4 April 2018                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Hoshi, Counsel instructed by BHT Immigration
Service


Anonymity:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the respondent is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State is appealing against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart - Stewart promulgated on 15 December 2017 to allow
    the respondent's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
    made on 12 June 2015 to refuse his application for asylum.

 2. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the respondent,
    who was born on 21 April 1982 and claims to be of mixed Eritrean and
    Ethiopian heritage, would be at risk of persecution if removed to
    Ethiopia.

 3. A core aspect of the respondent's case, which was accepted and relied
    upon by the judge when allowing the appeal, was that there was an
    outstanding Ethiopian arrest warrant which accused the respondent of
    being an Eritrean spy. A copy of the arrest warrant, along with a
    translation, was submitted to the First-tier Tribunal by the
    respondent.

 4. The translation of the arrest warrant is a single page in length. At
    the top of the translation it states:

         "Date: 16th March 1992 [equivalent to 25th March 2000 in Gregorian
         calendar]"

 5. At the bottom of the translation it states:

         "Translator's note: the dates in the original document are in the
         Ethiopian calendar. The Ethiopian calendar is eight years behind
         the Gregorian calendar. The days also vary. The translation
         presents the Ethiopian dates and their corresponding dates in the
         Gregorian calendar.


   6. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal on a single ground of appeal. The ground is that the judge
      erred in law by failing to question the veracity of the arrest warrant
      given that the translation shows an eighteen year difference between
      the Julian and Gregorian calendar when there should only be a thirteen
      day difference between the calendars.


   7. In the second paragraph of the grounds of appeal it is stated that the
      officer lodging the grounds had not had sight of the file.


   8. On 8 February 2018, the respondent lodged a comprehensive response to
      the appeal under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 ("The Rule 24 Response"). The Rule 24 Response drew
      attention, inter alia, to the translator's note explaining that the
      date comparison in the translation was between the Ethiopian and
      Gregorian calendar, not the Julian and Gregorian Calendar.


   9. Before me, Ms Aboni acknowledged that the grounds of appeal were
      misconceived and that the appeal should never have been brought. She
      noted that she had only had sight of the papers that day.


  10. I have no hesitation in dismissing the appeal on the basis that the
      single ground of appeal is based on a fundamental misapprehension of
      fact and is entirely without merit. As is made very clear in the
      translator's note quoted above at paragraph 5, the date in the
      original document is from the Ethiopian calendar and the comparison of
      dates is between the Ethiopian and Gregorian calendars. There is
      nothing in the arrest warrant - nor, indeed, is there anything in the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal - to suggest that the Julian
      calendar has any relevance whatsoever to the appeal.

  11. Mr Hoshi stated that he was reserving his position in respect of
      costs. I have considered whether to make an order on my own initiative
      pursuant to rule 10(4) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 ("the Procedure Rules") given my preliminary view (as
      explained below) that the Secretary of State's conduct of the
      proceedings may have been unreasonable under rule 10(3)(d) of the
      Procedure Rules. However, as I did not hear submissions from the
      parties and Mr Hoshi stated that his position was reserved, I do not
      consider it appropriate in this case to make an order on my own
      initiative and it will therefore be for the respondent to decide if he
      wishes to make an application.


  12. My preliminary observations in respect of the reasonableness of the
      Secretary of State's conduct, which are made having had regard to the
      recent Upper Tribunal decision Thapa & Ors (costs: general principles;
      s 9 review) [2018] UKUT 00054 (IAC), and which the Secretary of State
      will need to address if an application for costs is made by the
      respondent, are as follows:


   a) The contention made in the ground of appeal was that there was a flaw
      in the translator's conversion between the Julian and Gregorian
      calendar, even though this appears to not have been raised previously
      by the Secretary of State (at the hearing or elsewhere) and there was
      nothing in the decision which would indicate the Julian calendar had
      any relevance to the arrest warrant. In these circumstances, where an
      argument concerning a document is being raised in the grounds of
      appeal for the first time, it seems plain that the officer drafting
      the grounds ought, at the very minimum, to review the document in
      question. Had the officer taken even the most cursory of glances at
      the translation, it would have been readily apparent that the ground
      was misconceived.


   b) The Rule 24 Response, which was lodged almost a month before the
      hearing, explained in clear terms why the ground of appeal was based
      on a fundamental misapprehension of fact. It appears that no steps
      were taken between receipt of the Rule 24 Response and the hearing to
      withdraw or concede the appeal. Ms Aboni's explanation for this was
      that she had not seen the Rule 24 Response until the day of the
      hearing. Whilst no criticism of Ms Aboni is intended, my preliminary
      view is that it is not reasonable to leave a Rule 24 Response unread
      until the morning of the hearing. Had the Rule 24 Response been
      considered earlier, the Secretary of State could have taken steps to
      obviate the need for the respondent to incur the costs of the hearing
      in the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

  13. The appeal is dismissed.


  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  25 March 2018        |

