
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00348/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2019                |On 9th January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     LR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
  (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
  Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
  publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
  in this determination  identified  as  LR.  This  direction  applies  to,
  amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
  could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For the following reasons, I set aside the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal dismissing LR's appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
         claim for international protection and his human rights claim.

             "1.   In  a  decision  promulgated  on  17th  May  2019,   the
                  appellant's appeal against the refusal of  his  claim  for
                  international  protection  was  dismissed  by   First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge Fenoughty. On 14th  June  2019,  Designated
                  First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted permission  to
                  appeal on all grounds pleaded. In a  Rule  24  respondent,
                  the respondent submitted essentially that the grounds  had
                  no merit but merely disagreed with the adverse outcome  of
                  the appeal.

             2.   The appellant relied upon  two  grounds,  ground  1  -  a
                  flawed assessment of credibility -  being  composed  of  8
                  elements. Ground 2  relied  upon  two  separate  elements;
                  firstly, that if the appeal succeeded under ground 1, then
                  the assessment of risk was legally flawed and secondly the
                  assessment of risk was in any event legally flawed.

                  Error of law

               3. There are 8 headings under which the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge's assessment of credibility is alleged to be legally
                  flawed. I have  considered  these  in  the  round  in  the
                  context of the  decision  as  a  whole  and  the  positive
                  credibility findings made by the judge, such as they are.

               4.  The  judge's  credibility  findings  are   difficult   to
                  ascertain.  The  judge  sets  out  matters  that  he  does
                  considers do not undermine the appellant's credibility:

                   i) It is plausible he would not have been able  to  join
                      the LTTE when he was aged 15 or 16  when  he  started
                      helping his father;

                  ii) It does not detract  from  the  plausibility  of  his
                      account that he and two  friends  were  beginning  to
                      help his father who was involved in illicit activity;

                 iii) His 'comments' that he did not identify other  people
                      involved in  the  work  but  did  reveal  details  of
                      everything  he  had   done   'are   not   necessarily
                      contradictory';

                  iv) It is plausible  that,  even  if  the  appellant  was
                      living in Colombo at the time, his mother would  have
                      been alerted that something was amiss if she had been
                      unable to contact her husband;  if  the  husband  and
                      uncle worked together it is 'feasible' she  would  be
                      concerned and make enquiries;

                   v) It is not implausible that the  appellant  would  not
                      know the name of the Minister for whom his uncle  was
                      a driver

                  vi) It was not unreasonable for  the  appellant  to  have
                      omitted mention of his uncle's membership of the EPDP
                      at the screening interview.

               5. The judge found that the  appellant's  evidence  regarding
                  Deepam  TV  to  be  not  'wholly  consistent'   with   the
                  background evidence.

               6. The judge appears to accept the appellant participated  as
                  an interviewer at a number  of  events  but  considers  it
                  would be  unusual  for  a  TV  host  to  express  his  own
                  political opinions on screen, that there was  no  evidence
                  of what he actually  said  on  screen  and  there  was  no
                  independent evidence of openly  expressed  anti-government
                  sentiment.

               7.  The  judge  refers  to  evidence  showing  the  appellant
                  attending events 'at most 4 or five times a year'.

               8. The judge refers to many  of  the  appellant's  statements
                  being 'not coherent or plausible, although some were'.  He
                  gives an example of his father's detention and release  by
                  the authorities on payment of a bribe.

               9. In his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge finds:

                      "76. Taking all the evidence in the round, I consider
                      it plausible that the appellant's father was involved
                      in arranging for people to obtain  student  visas  to
                      leave  the  country  using  false  documents.  It  is
                      plausible  that  he  and  his  four  colleagues  were
                      apprehended and detained in June 2011, and  that  the
                      appellant's uncle had to pay a bribe for his release.
                      If the appellant and his two friends had been helping
                      his father,  by  assisting  with  the  completion  of
                      documents, it is plausible that the authorities would
                      have discovered this, and arrested them as described.

                      77.  Taking into account the significant omissions in
                      the appellant's screening interview, I take the  view
                      that, had he been  subjected  to  the  extensive  ill
                      treatment he describes, it  would  be  reasonable  to
                      assume he would have provided this information at the
                      earliest  opportunity,  and  to  have  obtained  some
                      medical evidence to support his claim. Failure to do,
                      and the improbable explanations he has  provided  for
                      these omissions, damage his credibility.

                      78.  The evidence from the  appellant's  father,  and
                      the mother of one of his friends, supports the  claim
                      that the appellant's father  was  detained,  and  the
                      claim that his friend was killed  in  2016.  It  also
                      supports the appellant's claim to have been  detained
                      in 2011 along with his two  friends.  However,  there
                      were no identity documents with these statements, and
                      in  the  circumstances  I  accept  the   respondent's
                      submissions that the documents are self-serving,  and
                      I place little weight on them.

                      79.  The appellant  said  that  neither  he  nor  his
                      father had been a member of the LTTE and he  did  not
                      start working for Deepam TV until 2014. He said  that
                      prior to this he was disengaged, but I do not  accept
                      that this would prevent him  from  being  politically
                      active, if he were so minded, as  he  has  also  said
                      that  he  was  attending  college  and  had   a   90%
                      attendance rate. Even accepting he took  a  voluntary
                      post  as  a  production  assistant,   there   is   no
                      independent evidence of the duration  of  this  role,
                      the number of hours worked,  or  the  duties  he  was
                      carrying out, and attendance at four or five events a
                      year  does  not  amount  to   significant   political
                      activism.

                      80.  ...in the appellant's circumstances there was no
                      suggestion that he needed to use bribery [  to  leave
                      the country]. He said he was not on any Stop List  or
                      Watch List, because his  case  had  been  dealt  with
                      unofficially, and no questions had been asked because
                      he had a student visa. He also said he  was  able  to
                      leave the country because his father was still in Sri
                      Lanka. It is not consistent, that  if  the  appellant
                      were genuinely at risk from the authorities, he would
                      have been able to leave using his own passport.

                      81.  Even if I accept that the appellant and his  two
                      friends were detained for three days  in  June  2011,
                      having been identified from his father's mobile phone
                      records, I do not accept that he has  shown  that  he
                      was ill-treated in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent
                      claimed. He said there were no conditions attached to
                      his release in June 2011, and that  his  two  friends
                      were at lower risk than  him,  because  he  told  the
                      authorities they  were  just  helping  him.  This  is
                      contradicted by  his  friend's  mother's  letter,  in
                      which she  stated  that  the  two  friends  had  been
                      reporting to Jaffna police station every month  since
                      2012. It is inconsistent that the appellant would not
                      be required to report if he were at risk as  claimed.
                      I accept the  appellant's  father  was  detained  and
                      questioned, and that his family secured  his  release
                      from detention on payment of a bribe. The discrepancy
                      in the amount paid  for  the  bribe  to  release  the
                      appellant further undermines his claim to  have  been
                      detained as described."

              10. The eight headings relied upon by the appellant take issue
                  with the reliance by the First-tier Tribunal judge on  the
                  failure of the appellant to refer  to  his  detention  and
                  mistreatment when screened; take issue with  the  reliance
                  by the First-tier Tribunal judge on the  lack  of  medical
                  evidence despite the appellant being unrepresented and not
                  having had appropriate  legal  advice  and  the  costs  of
                  obtaining  medical  evidence;    submit   the   First-tier
                  Tribunal judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  objective
                  evidence that if detained in Sri Lanka  there  is  a  real
                  risk of ill treatment or serious harm;  takes  issue  with
                  the assertion that evidence was self-serving; takes  issue
                  with alleged inconsistencies in that the appellant claimed
                  not to know where he was detained; that the  judge  failed
                  to factor into  his  decision  the  detail  given  by  the
                  appellant of his interrogation,  the explanation given why
                  he had not claimed asylum  earlier  and  placed  incorrect
                  weight  upon  the  fact  that  he  was  assisting  in  the
                  production of false documents in Sri  Lanka  when  he  was
                  still a child.

              11. It is notable in the First-tier Tribunal decision that the
                  judge refers to issues being  'plausible'  or  'feasible'.
                  The judge appears to make findings  that  the  appellant's
                  father was detained and yet does not make a finding on the
                  appellant  being  traced  through  mobile  phone  records,
                  referring only  to  plausibility.   The  judge  places  no
                  weight upon 'self-serving' evidence where it supports  the
                  appellant's claim but places weight upon  it  when  it  is
                  averse to the appellant's claim - although  in  any  event
                  the judge does not explain what  is  'self-serving'  about
                  evidence which by its very nature is produced in order  to
                  'serve' an appellant when it is produced in an appeal.  It
                  is  unclear  whether  the  judge,   despite   finding   it
                  'plausible' that the appellant was detained,  is  in  fact
                  rejecting  that  claim  because  of  a  lack  of   medical
                  evidence, delay in claiming  asylum,  discrepancy  in  the
                  bribe paid or for what reason. A failure to  refer  to  an
                  issue in a screening interview may be  of  relevance.  But
                  such a failure has to be considered in the context of  the
                  claim overall and the detail subsequently given, including
                  the lack of challenge in a substantive  interview  for  an
                  explanation as to why it was not said earlier.

              12. Although quoting from country guidance, the judge has  not
                  considered  the  appellant's  claim   in   that   context,
                  particularly  considering  the  reasons  given   for   the
                  father's detention which seem to have been accepted.

              13. Overall the judge has failed to make clear findings on the
                  appellant's  claim  in  the  context  of  the   background
                  evidence. The labelling of evidence as 'self-serving' does
                  not assist in terms of the weight to be attributed to that
                  evidence, particularly where it appears to have been given
                  some weight in some respects.

              14. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in  law
                  in failing to make findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
                  appellant's claim for international protection. It follows
                  this has infected the assessment of risk  on  return.  The
                  legal errors are such that I set aside the decision to  be
                  remade.

              15. The First-tier Tribunal judge  considered  Article  8  and
                  reached an adverse decision.  The  setting  aside  of  the
                  international protection decision of itself  impacts  upon
                  the Article 8 decision and I set that aside likewise."

      2. I adjourned the resumed hearing listed on 16th  September  2019  to
         enable the appellant to obtain legal representation[1] and for  him
         to obtain death certificates of two friends with whom he  had  been
         active and a witness statement from his father who  was  living  in
         India.  The appellant moved address in October  2019  and  notified
         the Tribunal of his new address. The Notice of  Hearing  for  today
         was sent to that address on 7th November  2019  and  has  not  been
         returned to the Tribunal undelivered. I am satisfied the  appellant
         is aware of the hearing today. The appellant did not attend  either
         in person or through  legal  representatives.  There  has  been  no
         request for an adjournment. I am satisfied the appellant  has,  for
         some unknown reason, chosen not to attend  the  hearing  today  and
         there is no reason why I could not proceed in his absence.

      3. The appellant has not filed any further documents. He has not filed
         a witness statement from his father - as he said he would; nor  has
         he filed copy death certificates of those individuals with whom  he
         claims to have been active.

      4. I heard submissions from  Mr  Melvin  that  the  appeal  should  be
         dismissed. He relied upon a skeleton argument he had  submitted  at
         the hearing on 16th September.

         Remaking the decision

      5. The failure  of  the  appellant  to  attend  indicates  a  lack  of
         willingness on his part to pursue his appeal which in turn reflects
         adversely upon the credibility of his claims.

      6. The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  were,  as  shown  above,
         difficult to establish  and  were  little  more  than  findings  of
         plausibility which are not the same as findings of credibility. The
         appellant is aware, from that decision, of the  areas  where  there
         are significant problems with his evidence notably:

           . There was no evidence in connection with his involvement  with
             Deepam other than his evidence; transcripts  could  have  been
             provided or at the very least evidence from other  individuals
             whom he claims were aware of his activity;

           . There is no significant evidence of any diaspora  activity  or
             involvement in sur place activities;

           . There is no evidence from individuals who  could  support  his
             account that he had attended demonstrations;

           . There was no medical evidence to support his claim  to  having
             been mistreated in 2011;

           . There was no evidence from his uncle with whom  he  claims  to
             have been living who could potentially have provided  evidence
             to support his claims;

           . There was no significant evidence from his  Sri  Lankan  based
             relatives or friends who could have  supported  his  claim  of
             continuing interest in him;

      7. The appellant does not claim to have been able to leave  Sri  Lanka
         because of payment of a bribe.  Nor  does  he  claim  that  he  was
         released from his claimed detention because of a bribe. He does not
         claim to be on a Watch list or a Stop list.

      8. On the basis of the evidence before me taking full account  of  the
         evidence he is  recorded  as  having  provided  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, at most this appellant would be a Tamil returning to  Sri
         Lanka after an absence of some 7 years. Although there has  been  a
         change in government in Sri Lanka since his last  hearing there was
         no significant evidence before me that the change in government had
         placed individuals such as this  appellant  -  young  men  with  no
         diaspora activity and no political involvement - at risk  of  being
         persecuted on return to Sri Lanka.

      9. I am satisfied the appellant is not at risk of being persecuted for
         a Convention reason and I dismiss his appeal.

     10. There is no significant  evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant
         requires humanitarian protection.

     11. In terms of Article 8 this appellant will have established  private
         life since his arrival in 2012. He was lawfully  in  the  UK  until
         April  2013.  He  does  not  speak  English  -  he  has  needed  an
         interpreter at each hearing and interview he has undergone. He  has
         not filed any credible information as to what he has been doing  in
         the UK since 2013. There is a complete dearth of  information  that
         could lead to a finding that the refusal of  his  Article  8  human
         rights claim was disproportionate. There is nothing in  the  papers
         before me that could be said to balance in his  favour  other  than
         his length of residence; even that has been mainly unlawful with no
         attempt to regularise his stay until he made his  asylum  claim  in
         2018. I dismiss his Article 8 human rights claim appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remake it dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the decision refusing his claim for  international  protection  and  on
    human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 20th December 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] He said that a friend of his had confirmed he would assist him in
paying legal fees in 3 weeks' time and that his father would assist him
financially

