
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/00418/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decisions & Reason Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |                                     |
|On 28 October 2020                   |On 04 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            AKAM RASOUL RADOMANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as Akam  Rasool  Radomani,  a  Kurdish
    citizen of Iran, born on 8 April 1994.  He sought asylum in the  UK  on
    21 January 2016, claiming to be at risk by association with  the  KDPI.
    He has since claimed also to be at risk from  the  Iranian  authorities
    though his activities in the UK.

 2. On 23 June 2016, the respondent found his claim not to be credible, and
    declined to accept that his identity and nationality  are  as  claimed.
    FtT Judge Mackenzie dismissed his appeal by a decision promulgated on 7
    February 2017, PA/06857/16.  She found the appellant an incredible  and
    unreliable witness, and also declined to accept that he is a citizen of
    Iran.

 3. The appellant made further representations  to  the  SSHD,  which  were
    refused on 19 December 2019.  He appealed again to the FtT.  Judge  Fox
    dismissed his appeal by a decision promulgated on 24 April  2020.   His
    application to the FtT for permission to appeal was refused.

 4. The appellant applied to  the  UT  for  permission,  through  different
    representatives and on different grounds.

 5. On 30 July 2020, UT Judge Pitt granted permission,  on  the  view  that
    there was arguable error in "the FtT's approach to the court  documents
    where the nature of the case was  explained  in  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's cousin and where the photographs  do  appear  to  show  the
    appellant outside the Iranian Embassy in London".

 6. I  conducted  the  hearing  on  28  October  2020  from  George  House.
    Representatives attended remotely. No members of the  public  attended,
    either in person or remotely.   The  technology  enabled  an  effective
    hearing.

 7. The grounds are rather lengthy, repetitive, and intermingled.  Much  of
    what they contain is recital of uncontentious matters, insistence,  and
    disagreement with the FtT's weighing of the  evidence.   Mr  Martin  in
    submissions presented the case more clearly and in  better  order,  but
    much of that was only re-presentation of the case as it was, or  should
    have been, put to the FtT.

 8. It was common ground that if there is no error in the  conclusion  that
    the appellant has failed to establish that he is Iranian, the  rest  of
    the grounds are irrelevant, so I deal with that issue first.

 9.  The  appellant  says  that  production  of  his  shenasnameh  identity
    document, with a translation, proof of postage, and evidence  from  his
    cousin of sending from Iran, should have been accepted as  establishing
    his nationality and identity, and that the judge's reasons for  holding
    otherwise did not meet the legal standard.

10. These are the reasons which I detect in the decision:

      i) at [21], the previous adverse decision was  the  (agreed)  starting
         point;

     ii) at [22], the previous tribunal did not accept that the appellant is
         Iranian, or a Kurd;

    iii) at [23], the respondent had asked to see the original documents  in
         advance, but they were produced only at the hearing;

     iv) at [25], the respondent was deprived of the opportunity  to  assess
         the originality and validity of the documents;

      v) at [26], the appellant was vague about how  he  came  to  have  the
         documents (although he was clear that they  were  provided  by  the
         same cousin who provided copy documents for the earlier appeal);

     vi) at [27, 29 & 47], the claimed original documents were  supplied  by
         the same cousin who provided copies for the first appeal,  with  no
         explanation for not producing originals in the first place;

    vii) at [28 & 32], no additional evidence to support the authenticity of
         the documents;

   viii) at [30], variation in dating of documents  -  appellant's  evidence
         that documents required to be updated and renewed, but no reference
         to background evidence to that effect;

     ix) at [32], discrepancy  in  naming  of  appellant  on  the  document,
         perhaps subtle, but lacking explanation;

      x) at [33], discrepancy in address of appellant on court document  and
         in his statement;

     xi) at [33],  summons  regarding  case  of  "Sirvan  Ja'fari",  but  no
         additional detail;

    xii) at [33], appellant claimed to arrive in UK on 20 January  2016,  no
         explanation for summons having no date of issue and seeking a court
         appearance on 2 December 2017, some two years later;

   xiii) at [35], above summons, dated 8 February 2017, different  from  the
         one produced with the  further  representations,  dated  24  August
         2017; and

    xiv) at [35], absence of any formal or officially headed notepaper.

11. The grounds show that Judge Fox erred by finding that the appellant  is
    not  a  Kurd.   Neither  the  respondent  not  Judge  Mackenzie   found
    otherwise, and he has expressed himself in Kurdish  Sorani  throughout.
    I find this slip to be  insignificant.   The  judge  has  recorded  the
    appellant's case as being that he  is  Iranian  and  Kurdish,  and  has
    unfortunately expressed rejection on both elements, when only one is in
    issue.  The substance of the  decision  and  of  the  reasons  are  all
    concerned with the appellant not being Iranian, and not with him  being
    anything but Kurdish.

12. The grounds found on the reference to there being no additional details
    about Sirvan Ja'afari, and point to information  from  the  appellant's
    cousin that this individual was calling daily at the appellant's  house
    with a warrant for his arrest.  Mr Martin did not seek to make any more
    of this  ground  in  submissions.   It  is  not  a  matter  which  adds
    significantly to the credibility of the court document.  At best,  this
    passage in the grounds identifies a trivial oversight.

13. It appears that, unsurprisingly enough, identity documents in Iran  are
    updated from time to time.

14. The appellant founds upon the respondent not  having  objected  at  the
    hearing to admission of the documents into evidence.  There is  nothing
    in that to show error by the judge.  It was pragmatic to agree to  them
    being considered for what they were worth.  (They  were  likely  to  be
    admitted anyway, and if not, were likely to multiply future procedure.)



15. The grounds quote authority that "a bare statement that a document  was
    afforded no weight is unlikely  to  satisfy  the  requirement  to  give
    reasons", but that mispresents the decision; see (i) - (xiv) above.

16. The grounds are correct in saying that the appellant is not obliged  to
    have his documentation authenticated, and not  obliged  to  corroborate
    his case, but those truisms take his case nowhere.  The judge  did  not
    say  that  cases  cannot  be  established  without  authentication   of
    documents and without corroboration, and is to be taken as knowing  the
    law of the jurisdiction.  He was entitled to observe that the appellant
    had not provided  authentication,  as  he  might  have  done,  and  had
    deprived the respondent of the chance to have the documents examined.

17. The grounds identify  a  slip  in  reason  (ii)  and  an  insignificant
    oversight in reason (xi).  Reason (viii) is insubstantial.  The grounds
    do  not  show,  or  even  suggest,  error  in  the  remaining  reasons.
    Naturally enough,  some  are  much  stronger  than  others;  but  taken
    together, they are a more than legally adequate explanation of why  the
    FtT found that the appellant had not established his case.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      30 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


 3.   Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




