
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00401/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 22 January 2019                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     P R
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co, Solicitors (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing  on  asylum  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  make  a  conducive
    deportation order against him pursuant to sections 3(5)(a) and 5 of the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 2. As set out in the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  this  is  not  an
    automatic deportation appeal under sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.

 3. An  anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
    maintained.

Background

 4. It is unarguable that the claimant is a persistent  offender.   Between
    March 2003 and 21  August  2017,  he  accrued  41  convictions  for  53
    offences, including driving with  excess  alcohol,  driving  a  vehicle
    whilst uninsured, being drunk and disorderly, committing  theft,  using
    disorderly behaviour or threatening abusive or insulting words, causing
    harassment, alarm and distress,  battery  and  destroying  or  damaging
    property.  It is unsurprising that the Secretary of State  should  seek
    to remove him.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The claimant made an international protection  claim,  which  succeeded
    before the First-tier Tribunal  based  on  the  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility made at paragraphs 72 to  79  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, with particular regard to the fact that  the  claimant  is  a
    vulnerable person because he has significant mental health difficulties
    and alcoholism.  The core of the judge's findings is at paragraph 72:

         "72. I reiterate that I have taken into  account  the  [claimant]'s
             vulnerability and mental health problems  when  assessing  his
             credibility.   I  find  his  account  of  attending   numerous
             diaspora activities in  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  credible
             bearing in  mind  the  photographic  and  other  evidence  now
             available which evidence was not available to  Judge  Malcolm.
             Consequently, I consider that I am entitled and indeed obliged
             by that evidence to depart from those particular findings.   I
             find as a fact that the [claimant]  has  participated  in  the
             activities claimed by him in his statement which statement  is
             detailed and persuasive and which bears broad consistency with
             the [claimant]'s oral evidence.

         73.  Bearing in mind the totality of the available evidence as  set
             out above and the low standard  of  proof  applicable  I  also
             accept that the Sri Lankan authorities have shown  an  adverse
             interest in the [claimant]  certainly  in  2016  and  possibly
             thereafter, by seeking him at his parental home in Sri  Lanka.
             I find such, in itself to be sufficient for the [claimant]  to
             be entitled to the grant of asylum both with reference to  the
             country material set out above and also applying the  relevant
             country guidance."

 6. At paragraph 74, the judge went on to identify additional risk  factors
    concerning the claimant's unchallenged account: that his brother fought
    for the LTTE and disappeared in 2011; that there are informers  in  the
    diaspora; that London is a diaspora hotspot; and that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government monitors  protests,  take  photographs  and  employs  facial
    recognition programming.

 7. At paragraph 75 the judge  noted  the  similarity  of  this  claimant's
    family name to that of Prabhakaran, the former leader of the LTTE.   In
    the light of the  anonymity  order,  I  simply  record  here  that  the
    claimant's family name is not identical to that of Prabhakaran and that
    it is not apparent to me that it is similar, though I  appreciate  that
    transcription  from  Tamil  to  English  may  have  resulted  in   that
    similarity being lost in translation.

 8. The judge takes as part of his Devaseelan starting point the finding by
    Adjudicator Martin that it  was  likely  that  the  claimant  would  be
    detained at the airport and enquiries made resulting in his past coming
    to light including  the  fact  that  he  was  previously  detained  and
    tortured albeit he was released and that his brother was  killed  as  a
    fighting member of the LTTE.

 9. The judge explained carefully why he was departing from the conclusions
    of Adjudicator Martin in  relation  to  the  claimant's  detention  and
    release in Sri Lanka before he came to the United Kingdom.

10. At paragraph 77 there is an alternative finding:

         "77. However, and in any event, even if the [claimant]  was  of  no
             adverse interest when he previously escaped from detention, or
             because of his escape from detention, I have already indicated
             that I have considered his diaspora activities in  the  United
             Kingdom for the TGTE a proscribed terrorist organisation which
             is deemed by the Sri Lankan authorities to be associated  with
             the LTTE would in itself result in adverse  interest  in  him.
             There is now significantly more evidence before  me  than  was
             before Judge Malcolm in December 2016.

         78.  I reiterate that the available country material,  to  elements
             to which I have referred above, indicates that  returnees  who
             participate   in   TGTE   activities   abroad   e.g.   protest
             demonstrations and commemoration days  are  monitored  in  the
             United Kingdom and are liable to be arrested  under  terrorism
             laws.  Such arrest gives rise  to  a  real  risk  of  torture,
             applying GJ."

11. At paragraph 79 the judge said this:

         "79. In all  the  circumstances,  I  find  the  available  evidence
             overwhelmingly establishes that there is a real  risk  to  the
             [claimant] of detention and consequent ill-treatment should he
             be removed to Sri Lanka.  Whilst it is certainly arguable that
             the [claimant] is not a high profile participant  in  diaspora
             activities, although the photographic evidence  suggests  that
             is not necessarily so, it is clearly the perception of the Sri
             Lankan authorities which is relevant to the question of  risk.
             I  accept  that  the  decision  in  GJ  would  indicate   that
             attendance at demonstrations in the United Kingdom per  se  is
             insufficient to create a real risk that a Tamil  person  would
             be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  However, in this  instance
             I bear in  mind  my  finding  that  the  [claimant]  has  been
             actively involved with the  TGTE,  together  with  his  entire
             history as referred to, coupled with my finding  that  adverse
             interest has been shown in him recently in Sri  Lanka  by  the
             authorities there."

    The passage in italics is the only part  of  that  paragraph  which  is
    quoted in the grounds of appeal and is clearly taken out of context.

Grounds of appeal

12. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are difficult to follow  and
    consist principally of various prepared standard paragraphs.  Paragraph
    1 of the grounds notes that the claimant is a foreign criminal and that
    Section 117D(2) is applicable.  It notes the First-tier Judge's finding
    that the claimant is  entitled  to  refugee  status  as  a  member  and
    activist  in  the  TGTE.   The  Secretary  of  State  submits,  without
    particulars, that GJ and Others (Sri Lanka) CG [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC)
    has not been properly applied.

13. At paragraph 2 of the grounds the Secretary of  State  notes  that  the
    claimant's appeal has already failed twice in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    At paragraph 3, the grounds misstate the test in GJ and at paragraph 4,
    they misstate the effect of paragraph 79 thereof, quite  significantly.
    At paragraph 5, they note that the claimant appeared to have posed  for
    some of the photographs relied upon and at paragraph 6 they  appear  to
    suggest that his brother's  previous  involvement  with  the  LTTE  was
    insufficient on its own and again appeared to misstate or  misrepresent
    the test in GJ.

14. Finally, at paragraph 7, the Secretary of State  questions  the  First-
    tier Judge's finding of fact that the claimant's  name  is  similar  to
    that of a famous LTTE leader (Prabhakaran) and argues that even if  the
    name is similar it is unlikely to lead to a risk on return today, given
    the sophistication of the Sri Lankan intelligence-led approach  to  the
    return of Sri Lankan citizens from abroad.

Permission to appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett
    in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in his assessment of the  risk
         to the claimant from his TGTE activities at paragraph 78  in  light
         of the requirement in GJ CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) that  a  claimant
         show a significant role.  All grounds may be argued."

Rule 24 Reply

16. There was no Rule 24 reply by the claimant's representatives.

Analysis and decision

17. It is unclear from the grounds  whether  they  are  intended  to  be  a
    challenge to the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal,  but
    even if they were, such challenge is unarguable. The First-tier Judge's
    reasoning  in  this  40-page  decision  is  proper,  intelligible,  and
    adequate to support his findings  of  fact  and  credibility,  and  the
    conclusions he drew therefrom.

18. Nothing in these grounds of appeal amounts to a material error  of  law
    by the First-tier Judge who plainly did apply GJ properly when reaching
    his conclusion.  The R (Iran) standard of perversity is not met.

19. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

20.      For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      10 January 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson















