
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00569/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2019                   |On 11 February 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               TAHSEEN LIAQUAT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Bradshaw promulgated on the 6 June 2018 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.
     2. Neither the appellant nor her representative attended the  hearing.
        A final tannoy call was made at 11 AM  by  the  Tribunal  Clerk  to
        which there was no response. No explanation  for  the  absence  was
        provided and no application for an adjournment or  explanation  for
        why the hearing should not proceed was  received.  Notice  of  date
        time and venue of the hearing was sent by  first-class  post  on  7
        December 2018 and I am satisfied that there has been proper service
        in accordance with the procedure rules. There was  no  evidence  of
        adverse  weather  conditions  preventing   either   the   appellant
        travelling from Dewsbury in  West  Yorkshire  to  Bradford  or  her
        London based representative or locally instructed agent  attending.
        In all the circumstances, I  am  satisfied  it  is  appropriate  to
        proceed to hear the appeal in the appellant's absence.



Background


     3. The appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 15 April 1986
        who entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a student  with  a  Visa
        valid to 30 January 2016. On 13 July  2017  the  appellant  claimed
        asylum which was refused by the respondent on  28th  December  2017
        against which the appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
        The Judge notes the appellant fears a  nonstate  actor  namely  her
        husband if she is returned to Pakistan.
     4. The Judge sets out details  of  the  appellant's  claim  from  [16]
        before setting out findings of fact from [39]. The Judge finds that
        the appellant's credibility is damaged for the reasons set out from
        [44]. At [51] the Judge records she did not  find  the  appellant's
        explanation for giving misleading information to the respondent  to
        be reasonable. The appellant is  an  educated  woman,  to  master's
        degree  level.  At  [54]  the  Judge  refers   to   a   number   of
        inconsistencies detailed in the refusal letter  which  it  was  not
        found necessary to  repeat  and  expresses  disagreement  with  the
        submission of the appellant's advocate that the appellant has  been
        open and honest in her evidence. The Judge records deficiencies and
        inconsistencies in documents relied upon. At [71] the Judge writes:

             "71.      There  is  no   requirement   that   the   appellant
                  corroborates  her  own  evidence,  but  I   find   it   is
                  significant that she has produced no written  evidence  at
                  all about the threats made to her family  when  she  could
                  nor  has  she,  as  already  mentioned,  produced  written
                  evidence of her marriage. She has merely asserted that her
                  father cannot continue to support her as he had previously
                  done, that her old job is no longer available; she  cannot
                  transfer; she cannot as a highly educated and a woman with
                  experience of work, get a job in the  private  sector  and
                  that private sector jobs are not well paid.  I  note  that
                  despite the threats made to the family, no harm  has  been
                  carried out to her parents."

     5.  The  Judge  considers  the  respondent's  country  information  of
        guidance of Pakistan "Women fearing gender-based harm/violence" and
        the country guidance case of SM. At [74] the Judge agrees with  the
        respondent's submissions that the  alleged  abuse  upon  which  the
        appellant based the claim did not  happen  and  that  there  is  no
        genuine subjective fear of her husband.
     6. From [65] the Judge considers the claim in the  alternative  as  if
        the claim was accepted. The primary finding of the  Judge  is  that
        the claim is not accepted making this  section  obiter.  The  Judge
        considers  evidence  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
        relocation not finding the appellant's claim her husband would find
        her if she did relocate to be credible.
     7. At [81 - 84] the Judge finds as follows:

             "81.     Having considered the evidence in the round and given
                  the large measure of inconsistencies,  contradictions  and
                  general lack of credibility in the appellant's  account  I
                  find that she has not established that  there  is  a  real
                  risk of persecution for a Convention reason. I do not find
                  that the appellant is a refugee.


             82.  I do not find that the appellant  has  demonstrated  that
                  she is at risk of serious harm on return to Pakistan  such
                  that she qualifies for humanitarian protection.


             83.  In light of the above findings I do not find  that  there
                  is a real risk that there will be a breach of  Articles  2
                  or 3 if the appellant is returned to Pakistan.


             84.  So far as Article 8 private  life  rights  are  concerned
                  whether under the Rules or outside the Rules, there is  no
                  cogent evidence to suggest that  the  decision  to  remove
                  would undermine her physical and moral integrity. Contacts
                  made in the UK can be continued using  modern  methods  of
                  communication. She  has  provided  scant  details  of  any
                  private life in the UK save for her studies not (sic)  has
                  she adduced any cogent evidence that there would  be  very
                  significant obstacles to her integration into Pakistan  on
                  return; quite the reverse."

     8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a  number  of  grounds
        which was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal
        in the following terms:

             "The Appellant, a Pakistani born on 15 April  1986,  seeks  in
             time permission to appeal the decision of Judge of the  First-
             Tier Tribunal Bradshaw promulgated on 6 June  2018  dismissing
             her appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  28  December
             2017  to  refuse  her  claim   for   international   surrogacy
             protection based on her fear of domestic violence.


             The grounds are perhaps unnecessarily lengthy. Those asserting
             the Judge failed to apply the appropriate  standard  of  proof
             are misconceived: see paragraphs 9 and 10 of her decision.


             The Respondent's  decision  has  been  based  on  finding  the
             Appellant's account of domestic violence not credible but  had
             not challenged the existence  of  her  marriage.  The  Judge's
             decision does not take this into account and does not refer to
             any specific submission for  the  Respondent  at  the  hearing
             withdrawing this concession: see for instance paragraph 57 and
             71. The  Respondent  did  not  raise  the  issue  of  internal
             relocation in the reasons for refusal. There is no  indication
             that  internal  relocation  was  raised  in  the   course   of
             submissions  for  the  Respondent.  Properly   speaking,   the
             Respondent should raise the issue, at least put the  Appellant
             on  notice.  The  grounds  assert  the   Judge   failed   when
             considering relocation to take account of the  fact  that  she
             and her husband are cousins and so relocation to her  parental
             home would still leave her at risk from her estranged  husband
             and his family.


             Paragraph 54 refers to inconsistencies alleged in the  reasons
             for refusal but  the  Judge  expressly  states  she  will  not
             address them. The decision does not disclose whether  and  how
             the Appellant sought to address them, if at all.  The  grounds
             assert that at paragraph 65 the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
             account that the document mentioned was  a  draft  and  indeed
             other than it being a poor copy fails to give any  reason  for
             giving little or no weight to it is mentioned in paragraph 70.
             In giving little weight to  the  wage  slips  referred  to  at
             paragraph 67, the Judge acknowledges that they  are  full  and
             complete and makes a finding  that  they  may  not  have  been
             lawfully obtained but these are not reasons to give little  or
             no weight to them.


             At  paragraph  72  and  73  the  Judge   notes   the   various
             difficulties which women face in Pakistan  identified  by  the
             respondent's country information  Guidance  and  in  SM  (lone
             women-ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 0067 (IAC). Paragraph
             74 she states she agrees with the  Respondent  which  she  was
             required to remake the decision under appeal and give  reasons
             for her conclusion, not simply to agree or disagree  with  the
             Respondent.


             At  paragraph  76  she  finds  that  there  is  a  sufficiency
             protection for in Pakistan and  then  details  the  background
             evidence which the Appellant has produced.  The  only  reasons
             for dismissing it as appear to be those at paragraph 77 and 78
             which simply referred generically to external evidence without
             any sources being given. There is no explanation why the  area
             of concern for women in Pakistan identified  in  paragraph  72
             and 73 are not applicable to the Appellant circumstances.


             In summary many of the grounds amount to a claim the Judge has
             failed to give due consideration to the  evidence  and  proper
             reasons for her treatment of it, as for instance identified in
             ground 17. Most of  the  specific  grounds  disclose  arguable
             errors of law or arguable unfairness and permission to  appeal
             is granted.


             I should add the grant of permission is no  indicator  of  the
             eventual success of the application or appeal."

     9. The Secretary of State  has  filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  6
        September 2018, the relevant parts of which are  in  the  following
        terms:

             "3.  It is submitted that the Judge has made findings  on  the
                  credibility/return   issues    from    p39-84    of    the
                  determination.


             4.   It is submitted that clear reasons have been given on the
                  relevant issues including the finding that  the  appellant
                  misled the respondent (p 51).


             5.   Clear reasons are given at p70 of  the  determination  in
                  relation  to  the   documents.   Internal   relocation   a
                  sufficiency protection was considered by the Respondent in
                  the RFRL "in the alternative". (p75).


             6.   Read holistically this determination makes complete sense
                  the Judge considered all of the relevant issues in  coming
                  to his conclusions. Thus any errors are  not  material  to
                  the outcome.


             7.    The  respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal.   In
                  summary, the respondent will submit inter  alia  that  the
                  Judge   the   First-Tier   Tribunal    directed    himself
                  appropriately."


Error of law


    10. The Judge sets out the core findings between [39 -  74]  where  the
        Judge, having considered the evidence with the required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny, sets out  adequate  reasons  in  support  of  the
        findings made leading to that at [74]  that  insufficient  evidence
        had been provided to establish that the alleged abuse  occurred  by
        the appellant of her husband. This finding has not been shown to be
        infected by arguable legal error.
    11. From [75] the Judge sets out findings in the alternative as if  the
        appellant's claim had been accepted. As the primary finding is that
        the claim was not accepted this section must be obiter in  that  it
        is the Judge's  expression  of  opinion  set  out  in  the  written
        judgement, but not essential to  the  decision  and  therefore  not
        legally binding as  a  precedent.  The  challenge  in  the  grounds
        therefore to the issue a  sufficiency  protection  and/or  internal
        relocation and the grant of permission to  appeal  in  relation  to
        both aspects has no arguable merit for the Judge's primary  finding
        is that the core claim is not credible and there  is  therefore  no
        reason why the appellant cannot return to her home.
    12. The Judge considered relevant case law and it has not been made out
        the findings are outside the range of those reasonably available to
        the Judge on the evidence. In particular it is not made out that is
        appropriate for this determination to be set aside or for the Upper
        Tribunal to interfere any further in relation to this matter.
    13. The burden of establishing any material legal error falls upon  the
        appellant and she has failed to discharge the same.


Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30 January 2019

