
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00085/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Vernon Street, Liverpool    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 05 January 2017                   |On 10 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between

                                 HAMZEH [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr G Brown, of Counsel, instructed by Broudie  Jackson  Canter
                    Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. Having regard to the standard of proof applicable to all asylum  claims
    and the omnipresent requirement of anxious scrutiny, I  have  concluded
    that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  cannot  be
    sustained, on two grounds.

 2. The first concerns the treatment by the FtT  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Reverend McIntyre.  On this issue, the gist of the grant of  permission
    to appeal was that the FtT mischaracterised and understated the  thrust
    and scope of this evidence. I concur with this criticism.  The reach of
    this witness's evidence, which is recorded in writing, was considerably
    greater than the FtT acknowledged.  The duty  in  play  was  to  engage
    fully  with  this  evidence  and  to  make  appropriate   consequential
    findings. There was a failure to do so.

 3. Secondly, the  FtT  failed  to  balance  the  undisputed  fact  of  the
    Appellant's previous arrest, documented in questions/answers numbers 12
    - 14 of his Asylum interview.  This was  a  significant  issue,  having
    regard to [11] of SSH and HR Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308.   The  Tribunal
    should have juxtaposed this fact  with  the  fact  of  the  Appellant's
    illegal departure from Iran and made appropriate findings.  There was a
    failure to do so.

 4. The materiality of these failures cannot, in my judgement, be plausibly
    disputed.

 5. Permission to appeal was also granted on the issue of whether  the  FtT
    had made a concrete finding issue of the Appellant's asserted  baptism.
    I find no merit in this ground, having regard to [34] -  [35]  and,  in
    particular, [42] of the Tribunal's  decision.   The  Judge  did  indeed
    highlight certain conflicting evidence relating to  the  date  of  this
    undeniably  important  event.   However,  a  clear  finding  that   the
    Appellant was baptised was duly made.



Decision

 6. Giving effect to the above:

      i) The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside.

     ii) I remit the appeal to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  fresh
         decision.

    iii) I preserve no findings of fact.












                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date:  05 January 2017
