
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/00340/2016
                                                               PA/00566/2016
                                                               PA/00567/2016
                                                               PA/00568/2016
                                                               PA/00569/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 June 2017                       |On 21 June 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    H M A
                                   A E S S
                                    M E S
                                   K E S S
                                   S E S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify  the  appellants  because  four  of  the  appellants  are
children.

2.    These are cross appeals.  In order to  avoid  confusion,  the  parties
are referred to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal. These  are  appeals
by all parties  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moran
promulgated on 29 December 2016.

Background

3.    The first appellant is the mother of the remaining appellants. All  of
the appellants are Libyan nationals.  On 30 December 2015, the Secretary  of
State refused the Appellants' protection claims.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Moran  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against   the
Respondent's  decision  on  article  8  ECHR  Grounds,  finding   that   the
appellants met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the  rules,  but
dismissed the appeals on all other grounds. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged
by both the appellants and the respondent and, on 20  February  2017,  Upper
Tribunal Judge Kebede gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    There is arguable merit in  the  assertion  in  the  appellant's
    grounds that the Judge arguably erred in  his  assessment  of  risk  in
    light of the positive findings made. Arguably, furthermore, the context
    in which the Judge considered risks to family members differed from the
    circumstances in this case, but it was found that  the  father  of  the
    family was at risk and where the respondent would  be  considering  the
    return of the family together as a unit.

    3.     It seems to me that the respondent's grounds in relation to  the
    Judge's findings  on  "very  significant  obstacles"  are  inextricably
    linked to the assessment of the appellant's grounds  of  challenge  and
    therefore, in granting permission  to  the  appellant's  I  also  grant
    permission to the respondent. There is, in any event, arguable merit in
    the assertion in the  grounds  that  the  Judge  has  arguably  treated
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) as a lower threshold article 15(c) test."

The Hearing

5.    (a) Mr Whitwell moved the respondent's grounds of appeal. He  told  me
that he would be relying on SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and  referring
to  the  respondent's  own  immigration  directorate  instructions  on   the
interpretation of appendix FM of the immigration rules.

    (b)    Mr Whitwell told me that the Judge took an incorrect approach to
paragraph 276 ADE(vi) of the immigration rules.  He  reminded  me  that  the
second, third, fourth  and  fifth  appellants  are  all  children,  so  that
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph 276 ADE(1) cannot apply to them. Their  cases
should have been considered under 276 ADE(1) (iv). He told me that that,  in
itself, is undoubtedly an error of law.

    (c)    He took me to [40] of the decision, where  the  Judge  makes  it
clear that no submissions were made in relation to article 8 ECHR.  He  told
me that the Judge embarked on his own assessment of  article  8,  which  was
not a ground of appeal relied on by the appellant's. He  told  me  that  the
Judge's reasoning is flawed and  that  the  Judge  has  not  considered  the
relevant factors which make up article 8 private life. He told me that  what
the Judge considered at [40] of the decision mitigates against a  breach  of
article 8 private life and referred me to SSHD v Kamara at paragraph 14.

    (d)    Mr Whitwell then took me to [41] of the decision, where, he told
me, the Judge specifically records that he  has  not  considered  article  8
outside the rules, but argued that the Judge's finding at  [43]  appears  to
be a finding that the appellants will succeed  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds
outside the rules even though the five step test set out in Razgar  has  not
been followed by the Judge and no consideration is given to section 117B  of
the 2002 Act.

    (e)    Mr Whitwell told me that these are material errors  of  law  and
urged me to set the decision aside.

6.    (a) For the appellants, Ms Brakaj told me that the decision  does  not
contain errors in relation to the article 8 ECHR  assessment.  She  told  me
that [41] contains a finding which  corrects  any  potential  error  in  the
Judge's treatment of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules. She  told
with is at [40] the Judge took account of all relevant  factors  in  finding
that article 8 private life exists, and that as the Judge finds  that  there
are insurmountable obstacles to the first appellant returning to Libya,  and
it is a matter of concession that the father of the  children  (the  husband
of the  first  appellant)  is  present  in  the  UK,  then  the  four  minor
appellants cannot be expected to return to Libya alone.  She  told  me  that
the factors considered by the Judge at [40]  are  entirely  consistent  with
what is said at paragraph 14 of SSHD v Kamara

    (b)    Ms Brakaj reminded me that at [20] the Judge sets out  the  five
stage test of Razgar, and told me that the Judge followed those  steps.  She
urged me to dismiss the respondent's appeal and allow the decision to  stand
insofar as it relates to article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal.

7.     (a)  Ms  Brakaj  opposed  the  respondent's  appeal  and  moved   the
appellant's grounds of appeal. She told me that the Judge finds  as  a  fact
that the first appellant's husband would be at risk on return to Libya,  and
that the Judge found  the  appellants  to  be  credible.  Having  found  the
appellant's to be credible, (Ms Brakaj argued that) the Judge did  not  give
adequate consideration to the effect of return of this  family  as  a  unit.
She told me that that the Judge had incorrectly interpreted the evidence  of
the confiscation of each appellants' passport, and that although  the  Judge
finds at [33] the first appellant's  husband  would  be  perceived  to  have
links to the former Gaddafi regime, the Judge has not adequately  considered
the impact of that finding on the profile of each of the appellants.

    (b)    Ms Brakaj took me to [34] where the Judge sets out his  findings
of fact. She told me that the fact finding made by the Judge is  inadequate.
She told me that there were matters put in evidence  from  which  the  Judge
has not made findings of fact despite finding the appellant's credible.  She
told me that the Judge's findings at [40] are an indication that there is  a
risk to each of the appellants on return to Libya and that the finding  that
the risk exists is  not  reflected  in  the  conclusion  that  none  of  the
appellants are entitled to refugee status.

    (c)    Ms Brakaj took me to [38] and [39] of the decision and  told  me
that there the Judge makes generic findings in relation to article 15(c)  of
the Qualification Directive, but does not consider the individual facts  and
circumstances of each appellant. She  told  me  that  the  lack  of  focused
findings demonstrates that the Judge's decision in relation to  the  refugee
Convention and article 15 (c) are flawed.

8.    Mr Whitwell relied on the rule 24 notice  and  told  me  that  between
[37] and [39] the Judge makes adequate findings of fact.  He  told  me  that
there is no criticism of the guidance in law taken by  the  Judge  and  that
the Judge reach conclusions which were well within the range  of  reasonable
conclusions available to  the  Judge.  He  took  me  to  the  terms  of  the
appellant's witness statement and argued that some of the matters which  are
put to me now are not  matters  which  were  argued  before  the  First-tier
tribunal. He urged me to allow the  decision  in  relation  to  the  refugee
Convention and article 15(c) to stand.

Analysis

9.    Between [1] and [3] the Judge sets out the background to these  cases.
Between [4] and [7] he summarises the respondent's reasons  for  refusal  of
the appellant's protection claims. Between [8] and [10]  he  summarises  the
grounds of appeal. The first sentence of [10] of the decision  records  that
the Judge was told that no submissions would  be  made  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds.

10.   Between [11] and [22] the Judge sets out the  law.  Between  [23]  and
[30] the Judge summarises the evidence. The Judge's  findings  of  fact  are
contained at [33] and [34] of the decision only.

11.   Despite the fact that the Judge records at [10] of the  decision  that
none of the appellants rely on article 8 ECHR grounds, and despite the  fact
that the notice of appeal to the First-tier did not  raise  article  8  ECHR
grounds of appeal, the Judge states at [36] of the decision that the  issues
before him are

    (i)    Risk on return to Tripoli

    (ii)   Whether or not article 15(c) or article 3 ECHR are engaged

    (iii)  Whether there are very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant
    integrating on return to Libya and

    (iv)   Whether there are  compelling  circumstances  for  allowing  the
    appeals on article 8 ECHR grounds outside the rules.

12.   At [33] and [34] the Judge finds that the  first  appellant's  husband
is perceived to have links to the former Gaddafi regime. At [37]  the  Judge
finds that the first appellant's husband's profile is such that he would  be
at risk on return and  he  has  been  sought.  Relying  on   AT  and  Others
(Article 15c; risk categories) Libya (no longer a CG case)  [2014] UKUT  318
(IAC) the Judge finds the none of these appellants face  the  same  risk  as
the first appellant's husband. At [38] and [39]  the  Judge  considers  both
article 3 ECHR grounds and article 15(c) of the qualification directive.

13.   In FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413 (IAC)  it  was  held
that the question of whether a person is at art 15(c) risk in Libya  should,
until  further  Country  Guidance,  be  determined  on  the  basis  of   the
individual evidence in the case. This decision replaces AT and Others  Libya
CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) in respect of assessment of  the  art  15(c)  risk.
The Tribunal explained that there had been "been numerous changes  in  Libya
since November 2013, and that they are sufficient to render  unreliable  the
guidance on art 15(c) given in AT. Amongst those changes are  the  cessation
of direct flights from the United Kingdom, the ebb and flow of  fighting  in
Libya, the rise of Daesh, and the issue of numerous reports and advice,  not
least by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office".

14.   Although the Judge reaches his conclusions between [37]  and  [39]  of
the decision, his conclusion  is  not  adequately  supported  by  the  brief
findings of fact contained at [33] and [34]. Although  the  Judge  finds  at
[34] that the first appellant encountered "problems" along with her  husband
in Libya, and although he finds that all  five  appellants  no  longer  have
their passports, those findings of fact are not factored into any  reasoning
to support the conclusions that the Judge reaches. The Judge makes  a  clear
finding that the first appellant's husband  (the  father  of  the  remaining
appellants) would be at risk if returned to Libya, but he makes no  findings
about what would happen if this family were returned as a  unit.  The  Judge
appears not to consider the impact of separating this family.

15.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

16.   I therefore find that because of inadequacy of findings  of  fact  and
because of the absence of reasoning to  support  the  conclusions  that  the
Judge reaches, the decision in relation to the protection  claim  appeal  is
tainted by material errors of law and must be set aside.

17.   The Judge carried out his own assessment of article 8 ECHR grounds  of
appeal. He found that  all  five  appellants  succeed  under  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(vi). In order to meet the  requirements  of  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
the appellant must meet the following requirement,

    (vi)   subject to paragraph 276ADE(2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
    lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into the country to which he would  have
    to go if required to leave the UK.

18.   None of the second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  appellants  have  yet
reached  their  18th  birthday.  They   cannot   succeed   under   paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi). The Judge's conclusion at [43] is clearly wrong.

19.   It is at [40] that the Judge sets out his  reasons  for  finding  that
there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Libya.  His
findings there cannot have relevance to the second, third, fourth and  fifth
appellants and can only be relevant to the  first  appellant.  At  [41]  the
Judge makes findings that the first appellant's  husband  cannot  return  to
Libya, and touches on the separation which would be forced  on  this  family
by the respondent's decision in one sentence only. A fair  reading  of  [37]
to [41] of the decision makes it clear  that  the  Judge  applies  different
thresholds to each of article 3 and article 8 ECHR  grounds  of  appeal  and
15(c) of the qualification directive.

20.   Paragraph 276 ADE(1) relates to article  8  private  life.  The  "very
significant obstacles... to integration" test relates to an ability  to  re-
establish and then maintain private life in the country of return.  At  [48]
the Judge confuses the test for article 3 ECHR  and  article  15(c)  of  the
qualification  directive  with  the  very  significant  obstacles  test.  In
Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -  compelling  circumstances  test)
[2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) it was held that mere hardship, mere  difficulty,  mere
hurdles, mere upheaval and mere inconvenience, even  where  multiplied,  are
unlikely to satisfy the test of "very significant hurdles" in paragraph  276
ADE of the Immigration Rules.

21.   Four  of  the  appellants  are  children.  In  Kaur  (children's  best
interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT  14  (IAC)  it  was  held
that in every balancing exercise, the scales must be  properly  prepared  by
the Judge, followed by all necessary findings  and  conclusions,  buttressed
by adequate reasoning.

22.   I have to find that the entire decision is tainted by material  errors
of law. There is an inadequacy of fact finding at [33]  and  [34],  and,  to
the impartial objective reader, it is not entirely clear what test has  been
applied by the Judge, nor what standard  of  proof  has  been  applied,  nor
where the threshold lies each of the  legal  tests.  A  fuller  fact-finding
exercise might have resulted in a different outcome to this appeal. I  must,
therefore, set the decision promulgated on 29 December 2016 aside.

23.   I have already found  material  errors  of  law  in  the  fact-finding
process carried out by the First-tier in  the  decision  promulgated  on  29
December 2016. I therefore find that I cannot  substitute  my  own  decision
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach a  just
decision in this appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

24.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

25.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

26.   I remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  North
Shields to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Moran.

Decision

27.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

28.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 29 December 2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Paul Doyle Date 18 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

