
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00201/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss h S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clarke, Counsel instructed by the Home Office
                           Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The  appellant,  the  Secretary  of  State  (hereafter  the  SSHD)  has
    permission to challenge the decision of Judge Walker of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) sent on 25 September 2018 allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) on protection grounds.

2.   The SSHD's grounds allege that the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to
    take into account the fact that the claimant  had  remarried  following
    her divorce from her first husband.  It was stated that this error  led
    the judge to assess risk to the claimant on a false basis, namely as  a
    lone woman lacking a husband able to provide protection  and  financial
    support.

3.   I heard submissions from both representatives.

4.   I have no hesitation in concluding that the judge  erred  in  law.   On
    the claimant's own evidence  she  had  been  divorced  from  her  first
    husband since March 2013 and had remarried on 11 December 2016.

5.   The judge found the claimant's account credible.  At paragraph  71  the
    judge referred to the guidance given in the UT case SM  (lone  woman  -
    ostracism) CG [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC) February 2016.  At paragraphs  72-75
    he referred to  other  sources  identifying  difficulties  facing  lone
    women.  At paragraph 76 he referred to the expert report  by  Mrs  Uzma
    Moeen which concluded that the police would not be able to protect  her
    against her first husband's family who would  be  highly  motivated  to
    track her down.  At paragraphs 77-8 the judge stated:

         "77. The appellant will not have anyone to support her in  Pakistan
             which will make her  more  than  usually  vulnerable  and  her
             fragile mental health will  add  to  her  vulnerability.   The
             availability of shelters is extremely limited and not suitable
             as described in the COIR.  She will be an easy target.   As  a
             single woman living alone she would be the subject of constant
             comment and scrutiny and that will enhance the risk to her  of
             her family finding her.  I am satisfied by what I  have  heard
             and the objective evidence that I have read that the appellant
             will be the subject of  an  honour  killing  or  very  violent
             assault if she were to be returned to Pakistan  and  that  she
             will not be able to obtain the necessary protection  from  the
             state authorities.  Her fragile mental  health  also  enhances
             her vulnerability.  The fact that she has previously worked in
             Pakistan and has some educational achievement will not  in  my
             view allow her to set herself  as  an  independent  woman  and
             again in reaching that conclusion  I  take  into  account  her
             mental health and the extreme fear that she has of  living  in
             Pakistan.  I consider that her fear is well founded.


         78.  Given my findings above  it  follows  that  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has discharged the burden of proof of having a well-
             founded fear of persecution and that is sufficient to  dispose
             of the appellant's case."

6.   From the  above  it  is  plain  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    claimant's case was heavily focused on her  likely  plight  as  a  lone
    woman.  However, given the judge's finding  that  the  claimant  had  a
    second husband, it was incumbent on him to consider whether the fact of
    this relationship would mean that she would not be in the  position  of
    having to return to Pakistan alone.

7.   Mr Clarke submitted that  the  claimant  had  given  written  and  oral
    evidence to show that her second husband was a vulnerable  person  with
    his own mental health  problems  and  that  the  country  guidance  and
    background evidence before the  judge  identified  risks  to  women  in
    Pakistan, not just lone women. He submitted that even if  the  claimant
    were to be accompanied on return by her second husband, the degree  and
    extent of her and his vulnerability would be sufficient to sustain  the
    finding on insufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation.   The
    SSHD's grounds were, therefore. speculative.

8.   I cannot agree with this  submission.   Plainly  the  judge  failed  to
    engage with the likelihood  or  otherwise  of  whether  the  claimant's
    second husband would (or could) accompany her and it cannot be excluded
    that if he had  engaged  with  this  issue  he  would  have  reached  a
    different conclusion.  It was not a case where  this  issue  could  not
    have had a possible effect on outcome.  Accordingly  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the judge for material error of law.

9.   It is unavoidable that the case should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT.   I
    discussed with the parties what should be the basis  of  the  remittal.
    They agreed with me that I should  direct  that  the  judge's  positive
    credibility findings on the claimant  and  her  account  should  stand.
    There will remain, however, a significant degree of fact-finding to  be
    made by the FtT judge concerning:

    (1)  whether (if it is found her second husband can  accompany  her  to
         Pakistan) his presence would mean she  would  have  sufficiency  of
         protection in Lahore;


    (2)  even if it is found she would not, whether  she  could  achieve  a
         viable internal relocation together with her husband, i.e. one that
         is both safe and reasonable.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
