
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00059/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th August 2017                      |On 19th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                           Mrs Sarah Tegha Haftie
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin of Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    On  23rd  June  2015  the  appellant  entered   the   United   Kingdom
    clandestinely and claimed asylum.  Essentially such was  on  the  basis
    that she was from Eritrea and  would  suffer  violence  or/and  adverse
    treatment on account of her Pentecostal  faith  and  because  she  left
    illegally  would be regarded as having been a draft evader.

2.   The appellant was  interviewed  in  connection  with  her  claim.   The
    respondent refused her claim by a decision of 17th December 2015.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 6th January 2017.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 10th January 2017 her claim was  dismissed
    in all respects including her claim to be Eritrean.

4.   The appellant seeks to challenge that decision.

5.   Permission to do so before the Upper Tribunal  was  given,  essentially
    on the basis that the Judge had failed to consider risk  on  return  to
    Eritrea or indeed to Ethiopia.

6.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine  the  issues  under
    challenge.

7.   The Judge at paragraph 50 of the determination  highlights  the  issues
    with which he is concerned, namely:-

    (1)  Was she Eritrean?


    (2)  Was she a Pentecostal Christian?


    (3)  If she was Eritrean was she exempt from military service?


    (4)  Had she left the country illegally?


    In essence the Judge found that she was not from Eritrea  nor  was  she
    Eritrean and consequently the risk factors did not apply to her.


8.   The determination  is  a  detailed  one.   The  appellant  adopted  her
    witness statements and gave oral evidence.  She claimed  to  have  been
    born in Ethiopia to Eritrean parents and to be a Pentecostal Christian.
     She said her language is Amharic but her parents  spoke  both  Amharic
    and Tigrinya.  They did not teach her Tigrinya nor did  they  tell  her
    anything about her Eritrean roots other than to tell her that  she  was
    Eritrean.  In 1999/2000 they were deported  to  Eritrea  and  lived  in
    Campo Sudan with her uncle.  In 2003 her father was caught praying at a
    house and taken away never to be seen again.  In 2004  a  decision  was
    made for her to leave Eritrea back to Ethiopia.  In 2011 the  appellant
    was kidnapped and taken to Sudan in 2012 and from there  she  made  her
    way eventually to the United Kingdom.

9.   The Judge at paragraph 34  of  the  determination  notes  a  number  of
    matters which did not support her account of being Eritrean.  Not least
    that she was unable to answer questions about  Eritrea  and  had  given
    contradictory accounts as to when she left Eritrea and when her  father
    was taken away.  The Judge also noted the conflict of evidence  between
    the appellant and her witness Dawit as to the claimed accommodation  in
    Eritrea and also marked inconsistency as to the date at which  she  was
    baptised into the Pentecostal faith.  At the interview  she  stated  it
    was 2000 but in evidence she stated it was 2013.

10.  In respect to some of the criticisms  made  as  to  her  evidence,  the
    appellant sought to indicate that she was  unable  to  explain  herself
    because she was uneducated.  The Judge did not accept that  explanation
    for the reasons given, particularly in paragraphs  54  and  55  of  the
    determination.

11.  The Judge looked closely at the claim she  made  to  be  a  Pentecostal
    Christian and noted matters in paragraph 39 which raised concerns about
    that claim.  Although Pastor Beyene had attended and indicated that she
    was part of the Pentecostal Community in the United Kingdom, he did not
    have detailed knowledge or direct knowledge of her because he  did  not
    deal with her in that church.

12.  The fact that the appellant did  not  speak  Tigrinya  was  one  factor
    among a number that was considered as was her inconsistent  account  as
    to baptism and indeed the conflicting evidence as to  how  many  people
    attend services at her neighbour's home.  The Judge considered that the
    disagreement in evidence between the appellant and her witness was also
    of importance.

13.  The Judge considered a letter from the Eritrean  Community  in  Lambeth
    and for reasons set out in paragraph 60 gave it little weight.   Little
    weight was given to the evidence of the pastor as to her faith.

14.  The appellant sought to indicate that she had been  trying  to  clarify
    her status and situation with the Ethiopian Embassy.  The Judge for the
    reasons,  particularly  set  out  in  paragraphs  63  and  65  of   the
    determination, did not find that the relevant issues had been raised by
    her with that particular embassy, such as to show that she had made all
    reasonable efforts to clarify her situation and circumstances.

15.  Mr Martin relies  upon  the  general  grounds  of  challenge  to  those
    findings.  For my part I find little merit in such challenges.  For the
    most part they cite general principles.  It is clear that the Judge had
    looked at all relevant matters and made clear findings  upon  them.   I
    find no error of approach.

16.  As to the issue of return to Eritrea or Ethiopia it is  said  that  the
    Judge failed to take account matters in relation to return.  It is said
    that if the appellant were to be returned to Eritrea then she would  be
    treated as an Eritrean and that would subject her to  ill-treatment  in
    any event.  Reliance is placed upon the original decision in  which  it
    had been indicated that because she had claimed to be from Eritrea  she
    would be returned there.

17.  Mr Kotas, on behalf of the respondent, submits that that  challenge  is
    not well-founded.  He invites my attention to the  decision  to  remove
    made under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  following
    the refusal of asylum.  It is dated 17th December  2015  and  indicates
    that if the appellant does not leave  voluntarily  direction  would  be
    given for her removal from the United Kingdom to Eritrea  or  Ethiopia.
    The Judge has found that the appellant is not from Eritrea.   There  is
    no reason why in commonsense she would be returned there but rather the
    focus is upon return to Ethiopia.  In that connection my attention  was
    invited to paragraphs 64 and 65  of  the  determination.   Clearly  the
    Judge had in mind that she would be returned to Ethiopia and had regard
    to MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289  and  to  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean  -
    nationality  -  return)  Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00252  (IAC).   As
    recognised pursuant to MA (Ethiopia)  the  appellant  must  demonstrate
    that he or she has done  all  that  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    facilitate return as  a  national  of  Ethiopia.   The  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had taken any basic steps to achieve  this
    and provided little of the details that  were  required  to  facilitate
    their recognition.  The Judge did not accept  that  she  would  not  be
    accepted as an Ethiopian national if she cooperated with the process.

18.  Clearly in assessing the issues that had  been  highlighted,  the  fact
    that the appellant is not Eritrean  disposes in practical terms of  the
    issues under consideration.  There was nothing advanced in the  grounds
    of appeal or before me to indicate that even if she were Ethiopian  she
    would suffer any hardship in being returned.

19.  As Mr Kotas indicated, the function of the Judge is  to  determine  the
    issues in the case.  Those issues were determined on the basis  of  the
    finding that whatever nationality the appellant may be she was not from
    Eritrea The probability  being that she is from Ethiopia and the  Judge
    understandably based certain of his remarks upon that assumption.

20.  Looking at the matter overall I find that the Judge has  been  detailed
    in the analysis of the issues, that no significant consideration as  to
    removal has been omitted.  In fact I  do  not  find  there  to  be  any
    material error of law.

Decision

The  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  claim  for  asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights stands dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 18 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

