

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00417/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12 June 2017                        |On 13 June 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr M Schwenk, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He claims that he is  gay
          and faces a real risk of persecution in Pakistan for this reason.

Procedural history

       3. In a decision dated 9 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ian
          Howard did not find the appellant  to  have  provided  a  credible
          account of events in Pakistan.  The First-tier  Tribunal  rejected
          the appellant's claim to be gay and dismissed his appeal.

       4. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  granted  permission  to  appeal
          observing that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
          to give adequate reasons for the findings  he  made  on  the  core
          aspects of the appellant's claim.

       5. The SSHD submitted a rule 24 notice in which  she  submitted  that
          the findings of fact were open to the First-tier Tribunal.

Hearing

       6. After hearing from  Mr  Schwenk,  Mr  McVeety  conceded  that  the
          factual finding at [28] contains an error of  law  such  that  the
          decision needs  to  be  remade  completely,  with  entirely  fresh
          findings of fact.

       7. I had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  indicated  at
          the hearing that I agreed with both representatives that  this  is
          an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of law discussion

       8. I can state my reasons briefly given the respondent's  concession.




       9. The First-tier Tribunal gave five  specific  reasons  for  finding
          the appellant not to be credible [26-30].  At [28] the  First-tier
          Tribunal said this in relation to the third reason:


                 "The appellant implies that his uncle was bisexual, yet  it
                 is only when the uncle learns of Rashid that he attempts to
                 seduce the appellant.  Given he is said to have known about
                 the appellant's sexuality from the outset  his  attractions
                 would have manifested themselves earlier."


      10. This misunderstands and misconstrues the appellant's  claim.   His
          clear evidence within the asylum interview and  his  statement  is
          that his uncle attempted to rape him.  There  was  no  attempt  at
          seduction.  As acknowledged by Mr McVeety, the claimed act was  an
          attempted rape, and  the  issue  of  the  uncle's  attentions  not
          having manifested themselves  earlier  does  not  arise  in  these
          circumstances.   This  was  an  irrelevant  factor  to  take  into
          account and the finding at [28] is irrational.


      11. Mr McVeety accepted that this finding  cannot  be  separated  from
          the other factual findings and it is therefore unnecessary for  me
          to address the other  grounds  of  appeal.   Both  representatives
          agree that the decision contains a material error of law  and  the
          decision must be remade de novo.

Decision

      12. The First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and I do  set  it
          aside.





Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
12 June 2017

