
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00164/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2017                     |On 17th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  [  ]  1982.  Her  appeal
    against the refusal of her protection claim was dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds on 15th February 2017.

2.   The Appellant appealed on the grounds that the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility was flawed and this had affected the assessment of risk  on
    return. Further, the judge had failed to  take  into  account  relevant
    material in assessing risk on return.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on 7th June 2017 on the following grounds:  "Without  restricting  this
    grant, I record my suspicion that there is little substance in at least
    some of  the  complaints  made  in  the  grounds.   For  instance,  the
    Appellant  was  apparently  a  financial  manager  with  a  TV  company
    (paragraph 1 of the decision under  consideration).  If  the  Appellant
    genuinely intended a touristic visit to the UK, it is  surprising  that
    she had not sought out more accurate information as to the  attractions
    that she would be able to visit in the UK with her 6 year old son  (cp,
    for example, the judge's paragraph 17).  In addition the  judge  points
    to evidence indicating that GEM TV has relatively close ties  with  the
    Iranian government (paragraph 22),  and  really  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest why the Appellant might  attract  adverse  attention  from  the
    Iranian authorities. But in my assessment it may be that the judge  did
    err in some of the ways alleged.  For instance, as the  grounds  argue,
    the fact of the 'dismissal letter' being  dated  two  days  before  the
    claimed call to terminate the Appellant's employment with GEM  TV  does
    not necessarily cast doubt on the  Appellant's  core  account  (cp  the
    judge's paragraph 18).   Overall,  there  is  just  sufficient  in  the
    grounds to make a grant of permission appropriate at  this  stage.  But
    the Appellant should not take this grant of permission as an indication
    that the appeal will ultimately be successful."

The Appellant's Claim

4.   The Appellant applied for a UK multi-visit visa on 30th March 2016  and
    she arrived in the UK on 26th May 2016. Her visa was valid  until  13th
    October 2016. On 15th June 2016 she claimed asylum.

5.   When she arrived in the UK, the Appellant was a  director  of  GEM  TV,
    which was an Iranian TV satellite channel. During  the  course  of  her
    employment she moved to Dubai in 2006 and Malaysia in  2010  where  she
    was promoted to financial manager. She claimed that, in November  2012,
    employees of GEM TV known as the "dubbed group", who provided  dubbings
    for foreign language programmes, were arrested in Iran and suspected of
    being  involved  with  the  Mujahedeen  in  trying  to  overthrow   the
    government. GEM TV offices were raided and the  founder's  family  were
    arrested.  She claimed that her parents were  threatened  in  Iran  and
    their home was raided at that time.

6.   The Appellant claimed that after her arrival in the  UK  in  June  2016
    she received a telephone call from the human  resources  department  of
    GEM TV telling her that her contract had been terminated and  that  she
    now had no right to live in Malaysia. The Appellant claimed  that  this
    was followed by an email. She now fears that if she  returned  to  Iran
    she would be arrested. She also claimed that  a  colleague,  [PZ],  was
    arrested in December 2016 in Iran and she also worked for GEM TV.



Submissions

7.   Ms Harris submitted that, since it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    worked for GEM TV and that she could not return to Malaysia, the  issue
    that should have been at the forefront of the judge's mind was  whether
    the Appellant would be at risk on return as a result of her position as
    a director of GEM TV. There was evidence in the Appellant's  bundle  of
    her connection to PZ and also of the view of the Iranian authorities to
    those who are disrespectful to the regime. The judge  had  ignored  key
    aspects to the Appellant's  claim  and  had  instead  focussed  on  the
    credibility of her visa application.

8.   The judge's findings on the Appellant's reasons for coming  to  the  UK
    did not affect the assessment of risk on return. The  judge  found  the
    Appellant came here to claim asylum. Even if that was her intention, it
    did not undermine her claim. The Appellant's connection to GEM TV as  a
    director was sufficient to put her at  risk.  The  background  evidence
    supported the Appellant's claim that those working for GEM TV  were  at
    risk in Iran.

9.   The Appellant claimed in her substantive interview  that  many  GEM  TV
    employees had been  arrested  and  her  name  had  been  given  to  the
    authorities. The arrests and raids on GEM TV employees  were  supported
    by the background material. There was also new evidence,  on  which  Ms
    Harris sought to rely, that GEM TV were spreading  propaganda  and  had
    come to the adverse attention of the authorities.

10.  Ms Harris submitted that the judge had applied  a  higher  standard  of
    proof and her credibility findings had affected the assessment  of  the
    risk on return. The judge had failed to  deal  with  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim and had not addressed the points raised at  paragraph
    13 of the grounds, which stated:

         "At paragraphs 20 and 21 the judge purports to set out the evidence
         relied on by the Appellant to show that those associated  with  GEM
         TV are at risk from the Iranian authorities. The  judge  materially
         errs by failing to mention  the  evidence  of  arrests  of  GEM  TV
         employees, which were closely followed by raids on the  Appellant's
         family home in Tehran. The Appellant refers to these  incidents  in
         her AIR at questions 36, 38, 40, 63, 66, 78, 79, 80,  83,  84,  91,
         92, 95, 96, 99, 102 and paragraph 3 of her appeal statement.   This
         was a core element of the Appellant's case that has been ignored by
         the judge. Accordingly, the judge's assertions were unsustainable."


11.  Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response, which  stated:  "The  grounds
    take issue with the findings made  by  Judge  Beg  in  considering  the
    assertions made in the VAF pointing out that the judge did not consider
    the Appellant's responses to these points in her appeal  statement.  It
    is submitted that the issues raised in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    and the Tribunal decision  form  part  of  the  overall  assessment  of
    credibility and risk that it is incumbent on the judge to make and  are
    individually not determinative of the appeal. The  judge  also  clearly
    states that she has fully considered all of the documents of the  file,
    had the benefit of hearing the questions posed about her credibility to
    the Appellant and hearing her answers to those which will be borne  out
    by the Record of Proceedings.  It was open to the judge  to  find  that
    the Appellant was not a genuine tourist given amongst other things  the
    fact that she  reported  that  she  was  coming  to  the  UK  to  visit
    Disneyland and Universal Studios. It is submitted that the  credibility
    aspects relating to the VAF have  been  fully  reasoned  by  the  judge
    revealing no material error of law. The grounds further  challenge  the
    findings in relation to the dismissal of the Appellant from her job  as
    a director of GEM TV. It is submitted that the judge fully reasons this
    credibility finding at paragraphs 18 and 19 and the finding,  that  the
    fact that the Appellant did not  query  whether  as  a  director  of  a
    company her contract could be legally terminated  counted  against  the
    credibility of the  account,  was  open  to  the  judge  to  make.  The
    Respondent also argues that the judge is entitled to conclude that  the
    Appellant has given no credible reason why her contract as  a  director
    of the company would be terminated.  The judge notes that the Appellant
    provided no evidence that she was involved  in  anything  that  GEM  TV
    disapproved of. All of the grounds are challenged."

12.  Mr Melvin submitted that  the  raid  on  the  Appellant's  family  home
    related to a time in 2012 and 2013  and  the  judge  made  findings  in
    respect of those events that took place  in  the  past.  There  was  no
    evidence to show that the Appellant would now be  at  risk  on  return.
    She was in contact with her parents and there was no  current  interest
    in her and no outstanding arrest warrants.

13.  Looking at the points referred to at paragraph 13 of  the  grounds,  in
    the context of the judge's findings, they were not  material.   GEM  TV
    was not anti-regime and the judge dealt with this at paragraph 22.  The
    CEO of GEM TV had links  with  a  Mujahedeen  group.  It  was  not  his
    relationship with GEM TV that brought  him  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, but his support for the  Mujahedeen  and  his  anti-regime
    sympathies.  The Appellant had no current links  with  GEM  TV,  having
    been dismissed by them.  She was the ex-director of a company providing
    satellite services for dubbed programmes. There was no link between the
    Appellant and the Mujahedeen. The judge's finding that she  was  of  no
    interest to the Iranian authorities and would not be at risk on  return
    was open to the judge on the evidence before her. There was no material
    error of law.

Discussion and Conclusions

14.  The judge's finding that the Appellant was not  a  genuine  visitor  to
    the UK was one which was open to the judge on the evidence  before  her
    and she  gave  adequate  reasons  for  coming  to  that  conclusion  at
    paragraphs 15 to 17. Her finding that the Appellant had come to the  UK
    to seek asylum was not relevant to the assessment of risk on return.




15.  It was accepted that the Appellant  was  a  director  of  GEM  TV.  The
    judge's doubt as to the order in which the Appellant received an  email
    or a telephone call was not material to the judge's  decision.  Neither
    was the judge's finding that the Appellant's failure to make  enquiries
    about whether her contract could be terminated was  one  which  damaged
    her credibility.

16.  The judge's findings at paragraph 14 to 19 were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence before her and she gave cogent reasons for her conclusion that
    the Appellant had come to the UK in  order  to  claim  asylum  and  had
    orchestrated her dismissal from her place of  employment  in  order  to
    support her claim that she was unable to return to Malaysia  and  would
    be at risk on return to Iran.

17.  At paragraph 20 the judge stated: "The appellant relies upon a  history
    of  difficulties  that  GEM  TV  faced  allegedly  with   the   Iranian
    authorities." The judge dealt with the Appellant's claim  to  have  had
    difficulties in the past because of her employment with GEM  TV,  which
    the Appellant set out in her substantive interview at questions  38  to
    102. The Appellant claimed that in 2012 to 2013  a  number  of  GEM  TV
    employees were arrested and their homes raided. The  newspaper  article
    showed that the managing  director  had  been  arrested  in  Dubai  for
    allegedly having links to the Mujahedeen. The  Appellant  claimed  that
    her house in Tehran had also  been  raided  at  that  time.  The  judge
    considered this historic claim and concluded that the Appellant herself
    had never been accused of supporting the Mujahedeen.

18.   The  judge  also  considered  the  photographs  and  the   Appellant's
    association with PZ, who had been arrested  and  detained  in  December
    2016. The evidence of PZ's arrest appeared in the Appellant's bundle at
    page 20. The report, dated 21st December 2016, stated that an  employee
    of GEM TV network, PZ, had been arrested. The judge concluded that  the
    fact that the Appellant knew PZ and had photographs taken with her  was
    insufficient to show that the authorities were now  interested  in  the
    Appellant given that she had contact with family in Iran and there  had
    been no subsequent interest in her after 2012/2013. The father  of  her
    child, who also worked for GEM TV and ran a travel agency in Iran,  had
    never been arrested.

19.  The judge dealt with the core aspect of the Appellant's claim and  took
    into account the evidence and  background  material  in  the  Appellant
    bundle. The judge's finding that there was no  credible  evidence  that
    the Appellant was wanted by the Iranian authorities for her  work  with
    GEM TV was one which was open to the judge on the evidence before  her.
    The matters referred to in 2012 and 2013 did not put the  Appellant  at
    risk on return in 2017 for the reasons given by the judge at paragraphs
    20 and 21.

20.  It was submitted by Ms Harris that the mere  fact  that  the  Appellant
    had been a director of GEM TV was sufficient to put her at risk.  I  am
    not persuaded by this submission. The arrests of GEM  TV  employees  in
    2012/2013 were as a result of their proposed links with the Mujahedeen.
    There was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  any  links  to  the
    Mujahedeen or that the Iranian authorities suspected her of having such
    links. The report of the arrest of PZ in December 2016 was  very  short
    report and the reason for  her  arrest  was  unknown.  The  Appellant's
    association with PZ was limited. The judge took this into  account  and
    concluded that  the  authorities  did  not  have  an  interest  in  the
    Appellant. If the arrest of PZ was in some way linked to the  Appellant
    then the authorities had shown no interest in the Appellant's  parents,
    sister, father of her child, or his family, all of whom lived in Iran.

21.  Taking the  Appellant's  claim  at  its  highest,  she  was  no  longer
    employed by GEM TV. Her past association with GEM TV  had  not  brought
    her to the attention of the authorities and  there  was  no  reason  to
    suppose that it would do so in the future given that the arrest  of  PZ
    had not generated any interest in the Appellant in Iran.

22.  The judge found that the Appellant's work for GEM TV would not put  her
    at risk on return to Iran. The judge's findings were open to her on the
    evidence before her. She clearly assessed the core of  the  Appellant's
    claim, which were the events in 2012/2013 and the arrest of PZ in 2016.
    The judge gave adequate reasons for why the Appellant would  be  of  no
    interest to the authorities on return to Iran. There was  no  error  of
    law in the judge's decision and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 7th August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

