








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00150/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 11 February 2019              |On: 25 February 2019                     |


                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between
                                Mr Jawad [H]

                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms E Mitchell, counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1  July  1999.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge promulgated on 14 November 2018, dismissing his  appeal
      against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  application  for
      international protection.

   2. He found that the appellant's account of having been abducted,  driven
      to the mountains and then after five days required to dig a hole in  a
      mountain with other boys, was false and manufactured  solely  for  the
      purpose of seeking  to  procure  his  desired  outcome,  that  is  his
      continued residence in the UK. He set out his reasons for that finding
      at [42(iii)]. He dismissed his  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
      human rights claims.

   3. In granting permission to  appeal  on  10  December  2018,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lambert found that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
      arguably fundamentally misunderstood the  nature  of  the  appellant's
      case, thereby attributing inconsistency to his account where there was
      none, so that the claimed error, if made out, is clearly  material  to
      the overall outcome.

   4. At the commencement of the hearing, Ms Mitchell, who did not represent
      the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal,  produced  a  statement
      from Ms  Zoe  McCallum,  who  was  the  counsel  who  represented  the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Pal did not object to the
      production of this statement.

   5. In her statement, McCallum  asserts  that  the  appellant's  case  has
      consistently been that he was abducted by Daesh and not  the  Taliban.
      The only point on which his understanding of events has altered  since
      arrival in the UK relates to the letter left with the  Mullah  of  his
      local mosque shortly before he was abducted by Daesh.

   6. She stated that in the appellant's first witness  statement  dated  16
      November 2015, his evidence was that his father showed him the letter,
      when he was still a child, and that he understood  that  it  was  from
      Daesh, his subsequent abductors.

   7. In his substantive interview conducted on 12 July 2017, some 20 months
      later, the appellant affirmed his understanding that  the  letter  was
      from Daesh - Q 54. He was asked why he feared that he was at risk from
      Daesh and the Taliban. He responded that both are the same: "I do  not
      know deep into the politics what is the difference between the two" (Q
      122).

   8. She stated that a copy of the  letter  was  provided  to  the  country
      expert, Dr Giustozzi  for  verification  through  his  researcher,  Mr
      Saleem Safi.  In his verification report dated 22 January  2018,  also
      before the Tribunal, the letter was identified as emanating  from  the
      Taliban and not Daesh. The report of Dr  Giustozzi  was  read  to  the
      appellant, who produced a further witness statement dated 21  February
      2018. The witness statement recorded that the appellant accepted  that
      he may have confused the Taliban stamp with the black flag  of  Daesh.
      It is also reiterated that it was only since the appellant arrived  in
      the UK that he had learned more about the  differences  between  Daesh
      and the Taliban.

   9. In adopting the appellant's grounds of appeal  Ms  Mitchell  submitted
      that there was a fundamental error made by the Tribunal regarding  the
      nature of the appellant's case.  His  judgment  was  predicated  on  a
      fundamental misunderstanding of his case as put by  the  appellant  in
      his evidence and by counsel in her written and oral submissions.

  10. The Tribunal approached the appeal on the basis  that  the  appellant,
      having previously recounted how he was forcibly  recruited  by  Daesh,
      was now claiming that he had in fact  been  abducted  by  the  Taliban
      [42(iii)(a)]. However, Ms Mitchell submitted  that  the  appellant  in
      fact had made no such claim. His consistent evidence was that  he  was
      abducted by Daesh whose members he identified largely on the way  they
      dressed.

  11. That was the way the case was argued by counsel. Her skeleton argument
      presented relied expressly on the appellant's  having  been  taken  by
      Daesh and used for forced labour. Ms Mitchell  also  referred  to  the
      current witness statement of Ms McCallum, where she has confirmed that
      this was the basis upon which the appellant's case was argued  at  the
      time.

  12. Ms Mitchell referred  to  Ms  Mitchell's  skeleton  argument  produced
      before the First-tier Tribunal and which was  before  the  Judge.  The
      skeleton argument set out his case, namely, that he  was  abducted  by
      Daesh but that he accepted that the threat letter was from the Taliban
      - paragraphs 5-7 and 24-27.

  13. Ms Mitchell submitted that the only point  on  which  the  appellant's
      understanding of events has  altered  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK
      related to the letter left with the Mullah of his local mosque shortly
      before his abduction. He had initially understood the letter  to  come
      from Daesh, consistent with the identity of his subsequent  abductors,
      and with what he thought he had recognised as  Daesh  emblems  on  the
      letter itself. This was also referred to in the skeleton at  paragraph
      23 and the witness statement, at paragraph 1-2.

  14. However, when a copy of the letter was provided to the country  expert
      it was identified as emanating from the Taliban, as referred to in the
      skeleton of Ms McCallum at paragraphs 19-21. The  appellant  explained
      that his knowledge of the differences between the groups was  limited,
      that he had seen the letter  only  briefly  and  that  he  had  likely
      confused the Taliban stamp with  the  Daesh  flag  as  stated  in  the
      skeleton at paragraph 23.

  15. Ms Mitchell submitted that despite all of this, the Tribunal proceeded
      on the basis that the  appellant's  entire  account  of  his  forcible
      recruitment had shifted. It described his case in respect of Daesh  as
      having "substantially evaporated" [42(iii)(a-b)].

  16. She submitted that the adverse  credibility  findings  were  therefore
      based in a significant respect on the  idea  that  the  appellant  had
      altered his case so as to "dovetail" it with the documentary  evidence
      of  the  Taliban  judgment  [42(iii)(a)].  The   assessment   of   the
      appellant's evidence in respect of the letter  itself  was  thus  made
      against this background.

  17. Ms Mitchell also contended that Tribunal erred in his approach to  the
      appellant's credibility.  In that  respect,  she  submitted  that  the
      Tribunal acknowledged that the appellant was a minor at  the  relevant
      time  which  was  relevant  in  the  assessment  of  his  credibility.
      Accordingly,  the  Judge  should  have  had  regard  to  the  relevant
      paragraphs of the joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No.  2,  and  the
      decision in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1132.

  18.  Furthermore,  cases  involving  children  may  call  for  a   liberal
      application of the benefit of the doubt - UNHCR  Guidelines  on  Child
      Asylum Cases.

  19. She submitted that the First-tier Judge did not in fact  evaluate  the
      appellant's  credibility  in  accordance  with  those  principles.  He
      adopted a stringent approach which in several respects failed to  take
      into account  the  totality  of  the  appellant's  own  evidence.  The
      Tribunal drew an adverse credibility inference from his evidence that,
      when he was abducted, he was driven for 30 minutes into the  mountains
      and that when he escaped he arrived home after running for 20  minutes
      and walking for an hour. The Tribunal found this account to be "beyond
      credence" [12] and [42(d)].

  20. Ms Mitchell submitted that a child's estimates of time are unlikely to
      be especially accurate, particularly in cultures that  do  not  attach
      particular significance to time  keeping  and  in  the  context  of  a
      stressful or traumatic unfolding event. However, no allowance was made
      for that. Nor did the Tribunal take account of  the  totality  of  his
      evidence, in which he explained that the poor roads contributed to the
      initial pace of travel and that the vehicle had been stuck in mud  for
      part of the journey time.

  21. In addition, she submitted that the Tribunal drew  adverse  inferences
      from his inability to explain the  decisions  and  actions  of  adults
      around him, such as why his father told the police that he was at  his
      aunt's house and why his father directed him to return to  the  family
      home to say goodbye to his mother despite the danger  involved  before
      fleeing the country.

  22. The appellant cannot be expected to have known or understood  how  the
      police received information relating to groups such as  Daesh  or  why
      his father made the decisions that he did. To infer that there was  no
      adequate explanation and that his account was unlikely to be true, was
      inconsistent with the principles relating to the giving of evidence by
      a child.

  23. She contended that the Tribunal entirely failed to have regard to  his
      age and hence to the likelihood that he  would  do  as  an  agent  had
      directed, even when the agent was not physically present. Nor did  the
      Tribunal take account of his evidence that he was particularly  afraid
      of the agent, having been beaten on the journey  and  threatened  with
      physical violence in the event of disobedience, as was set out in  the
      skeleton at paragraph 9.

  24. In addition, the Tribunal criticised the appellant for accepting  that
      he had been mistaken as to the provenance of  the  letter  his  family
      received  before  his  abduction.  However,  as  already  noted,   the
      appellant had initially described the letter  as  coming  from  Daesh,
      having seen the words "Emirati e Islami" and what he believed was  the
      Daesh flag. However, he accepted, consistent with the country  expert,
      that he is likely to have been mistaken in this regard  and  that  the
      emblems were in fact those of the Taliban.

  25. The Judge also wrongly concluded that the  appellant  stated  for  the
      first  time  in  cross  examination  that  he  became  aware  of   the
      differences between Daesh and the Taliban via his  solicitors  whereas
      his evidence was that his solicitors showed him their different flags.

  26. Nor did the Judge recognise the consistency of his overall evidence in
      relation to the document. This included his explanation  at  interview
      that he did not know "deep into the politics what  is  the  difference
      between Daesh and the Taliban." His case accordingly should  not  have
      been approached on the basis that there was a very firm and clear case
      which became substantially different. Instead,  it  should  have  been
      assessed on the  basis  that  this  was  a  young  person's  best  and
      understandably flawed attempt to recall and make sense of past events.



  27. The refusal to accept that  the  appellant  had  not  appreciated  the
      'evidentiary value' of the letter as  well  as  another  sent  by  the
      police until prompted by his solicitors to seek evidence in support of
      his claim, was  underpinned  by  assumptions  as  to  the  appellant's
      knowledge and understanding which found  no  supporting  objective  or
      expert evidence but were instead  predicated  on  the  Tribunal's  own
      understanding  of  what  a  child  or  young  person  would  know  and
      understand. This was impermissibly shaped by the Tribunal's own socio-
      cultural context and was  not  a  safe  guide  to  the  assessment  of
      credibility.

  28. The examples thus cumulatively illustrate an approach  to  credibility
      which is inconsistent with the application of the principles  relating
      to an assessment and  appreciation  of  a  child's  evidence.  It  was
      characterised by a relatively high degree of scepticism and  rigidity,
      resulting in a failure properly to take account of the  likely  impact
      of  the  appellant's  age  on   his   knowledge,   understanding   and
      recollection. There were, she submitted, repeated failures to evaluate
      his evidence in its full context.

  29. There were also a number of issues  which  formed  the  basis  of  the
      Tribunal's adverse credibility findings which  were  not  put  to  the
      appellant in cross examination or raised by the Tribunal to  give  the
      appellant or his counsel the opportunity to respond.

  30. This included the apparent differences  between  the  original  letter
      from the Taliban  and  the  photocopy  used  for  verification  by  Dr
      Giustozzi [19]. No opportunity was given to take instructions  on  the
      point in order to clarify the matter.

  31. There was also an issue relating to the  control  exercised  over  the
      appellant by his agent whilst in Hungary. If that had  been  put,  the
      Tribunal would have been referred to his repeatedly expressed fear  of
      the agent. The finding that since the appellant had been fingerprinted
      by the authorities in Hungary, he must have been able to exercise free
      choice and hence to seek protection,  was  not  substantiated  by  the
      evidence. The failure  to  afford  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to
      respond to such points was relevant to the overall conclusions.

  32. Ms Mitchell submitted that the majority of the psychological  evidence
      from Dr Heke was essentially based upon  what  she  was  told  by  the
      appellant and that for the reasons already  given,  the  Tribunal  had
      rejected this account, and did not properly  take  into  account  that
      evidence. The Tribunal rejected the possibility that  the  appellant's
      recollection might be affected by PTSD on the basis that the diagnosis
      assumed that the appellant's account was  not  self-serving  [39].  He
      failed to take into account passages in which Dr  Heke  explained  her
      reasons  in  more  detail  and  the  Judge  treated  himself,  without
      providing reasons, as  better  placed  than  Dr  Heke  to  assess  the
      potential feigning of symptoms of mental illness.

  33. Accordingly, the Tribunal rejected Dr Heke's evidence based on its own
      prior conclusions regarding the appellant's credibility,  contrary  to
      the proper approach set out in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  367  at
      [20-26].

  34. Ms Pal submitted that there has been no material  error  of  law.  The
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  given  a   thorough   and   detailed
      assessment. He was aware of the sequence of  events  relevant  to  his
      decision. This is evident from [24].

  35. No explanation was given for the difference in the  photocopy  of  the
      letter sent to the appellant which had five more lines of writing  and
      a scribbled signature.

  36. He was highly critical of the "verification evidence" relating to that
      letter [26]. Further,  when  the  appellant  was  cross  examined,  he
      claimed for the first time that his solicitor had  informed  him  that
      Daesh is a different organisation to the Taliban.

  37. The Tribunal moreover referred to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
      previously been able to assert on several occasions  in  his  evidence
      that he had been kidnapped by Daesh [28].

  38. She submitted that when assessing the appellant's evidence, the  Judge
      considered whether the fundamental change in the appellant's case  and
      his age and other factors relevant  to  younger  witnesses  should  be
      taken into account. Although they might explain an inability to recall
      precise details or,  on  occasion,  show  a  degree  of  confusion  or
      forgetfulness, he did not accept that they have any  material  bearing
      on whether there is a very firm  and  clear  case  being  put  forward
      initially which later becomes  substantially  different,  as  in  this
      case: [42(iii)(b)].

  39. She submitted that the Tribunal did not proceed on a mistaken basis.

  40. In reply, Ms Mitchell  submitted  that  the  reliance  by  Ms  Pal  on
      paragraph [42(iii)(b)]  confirms  the  error.  The  Tribunal  did  not
      properly understand the nature of the change.

      Assessment

  41. I have also had regard  to  the  grant  of  permission  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lambert. He noted that there may be some  questions  as
      to how counsel did present the case at the hearing.

  42. Following the grant of permission Ms  McCallum  has  now  presented  a
      detailed  statement  regarding  the  way  the  appellant's  case   was
      presented. There was no objection to its production. There has been no
      challenge to its accuracy.

  43. The Tribunal considered that the appellant previously  recounted  that
      he was forcibly recruited by Daesh but subsequently  claimed  that  he
      had in fact been abducted by the Taliban.

  44. In Ms McCallum's witness statement (confirmed by her skeleton argument
      produced before the First-tier Tribunal), it does not appear  that  he
      made such claim. His consistent evidence was that he was  abducted  by
      Daesh and he identified his captors by the way they were dressed. This
      is in fact recorded by the Tribunal at [11-15] and [28]. His claim  to
      have a well founded fear of the Taliban as well  as  Daesh  arose  not
      from his abduction but from  the  receipt  of  the  letter  which  was
      identified as emanating from the Taliban.

  45. A copy of the letter was handed to  the  country  expert,  Dr  Antonio
      Giustozzi. It was identified as coming from the Taliban. This was also
      referred to in counsel's skeleton argument. The appellant claimed that
      his knowledge of the differences between the groups  was  limited  and
      that he had only seen the  letter  briefly.  He  stated  that  he  had
      probably confused the Taliban's stamp with the Daesh flag.

  46. Although it has been submitted by Ms Pal that a proper  chronology  of
      events was given, and that the findings are sustainable, the  Tribunal
      did ultimately proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  entire
      account of his forcible recruitment  had  shifted,  resulting  in  the
      finding that the appellant had altered his case so as to "dovetail" it
      with the documentary evidence of  Taliban  involvement.  His  evidence
      relating to the letter was itself assessed  against  this  background.
      The  assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility  was  based  on  an
      erroneous understanding of his evidence and his case.

  47. In addition, although having regard to the need to take  into  account
      his age when assessing his  evidence,  there  is  some  force  in  the
      submission that the Judge  adopted  a  stringent  approach  which  are
      inconsistent with the principles reflected in the  Joint  Presidential
      Guidance note No 2 of 2010 and the UNHCR guidelines  on  Child  Asylum
      Claims. The inconsistencies identified by the Judge were not  properly
      assessed in accordance with these principles.

  48. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the
      decision. Both parties agreed that if I came to that  conclusion,  the
      appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made. I am satisfied that the extent of  judicial  fact
      finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be re-made  is
      extensive. In the circumstances it is appropriate to remit the case to
      the First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. It is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 21 February 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer









