
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00035/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                             |On 08 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     ja
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. D. Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert, promulgated on 1 November  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I have made an anonymity  direction,  given  that  this  is  an  asylum
    appeal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "However it is arguable that the findings may be tainted by certain
         factual errors.


         In determining credibility the Judge relies heavily upon the  delay
         in claiming asylum.  Although the dispute arose in March 2015,  the
         threats arose in Feb/June 2016.  The appellant  is  criticised  for
         not reporting matters to the Manchester police [para  72]  when  in
         fact he had [24].  Further it is said that the Judge underestimated
         the  number  of  references  to  the  appellant  in  the  documents
         supplied."

 4. At the hearing, following brief submissions from Mr. Jarvis in which he
    accepted that the credibility findings were "extremely problematic",  I
    set aside the decision  and  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.


Error of Law


 5. Mr. Jarvis referred to section G  of  the  Respondent's  bundle,  which
    contains emails  between  the  Appellant's  witness,  Mr.  S,  and  the
    Manchester Police.  Further, he referred to paragraph 43 of the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter in which the Respondent accepted that the  documents
    showed that there was a  land  dispute  in  Bangladesh,  and  that  the
    Appellant had been threatened.  The Appellant's evidence  was  that  he
    made reports to the Manchester Police and he  provided  in  his  bundle
    emails evidencing the same.


 6. I was referred to [72] of the decision.  This states:

         "Given the fact that Mr. KA is based in Manchester one  would  have
         expected at the very least there to have  been  matters  that  were
         sufficiently serious to report to the police given  the  importance
         the Appellant says that he has to this land dispute."

 7. Mr. Jarvis accepted that at [72] the  Judge  had  mischaracterised  the
    Appellant's  claim,  given  the  documentary  evidence  found  in   the
    Respondent's bundle at section G.  This consists of emails between  Mr.
    S and the Manchester police, which mention the Appellant.   Mr.  Jarvis
    accepted that the credibility assessment was infected by this error.


 8. I find that the errors at [72] go to the heart of the Appellant's claim
    as they relate to the threat to him.  The fact that the  Appellant  and
    Mr. S had reported this to the police was evidenced in the Respondent's
    bundle as well as in evidence from the  Appellant.   To  criticise  the
    Appellant for not doing something which the evidence showed that he had
    done clearly impacted on the Judge's credibility findings.  I find that
    this is a material error of law.


 9. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  As the credibility findings are affected by  this
    error, given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding  necessary  to
    enable this appeal to  be  remade,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


10. There was a brief discussion  at  the  end  of  the  hearing  regarding
    preservation of some of the findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    witness.  I declined to do so given the problems that can be caused  by
    attempting to isolate findings  in  order  to  preserve  some  but  not
    others.  I note that the Respondent has accepted that the documents  at
    section G, the emails between the witness and the police, are  evidence
    that these threats have been reported.  There is no dispute about this.


Notice of Decision


11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


13. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Herbert.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
