
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00371/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2019                    |On 02 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MOHAMED AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors
(Sheffield)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant appeals a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hillis
       promulgated on  3  April  2019  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.






Background


    2. The appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born on 21 January  1999  who
       arrived in the UK on 29 June 2019, illegally, and claimed asylum  the
       same day. Having considered the evidence and  submissions  the  Judge
       sets out findings of fact from [27] which conclude at [43]  with  the
       finding "On the evidence  taken  as  a  whole  I  conclude  that  the
       Appellant has failed to show, to the low standard required,  that  he
       faces a risk of death, persecution or  ill-treatment  on  removal  to
       Iraq for a reason  recognised  by  the  Refugee  Convention  and,  in
       particular, being at risk of becoming a victim of an honour crime due
       to his unauthorised relationship with his girlfriend on removal  from
       the UK to Iraq."
    3. The claim pursuant to articles 2 and 3  ECHR  fell  with  the  asylum
       conclusions as did  the  claim  pursuant  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
       Qualification Directive. The Judge concludes the  appellant  had  not
       shown he can satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and
       that his removal from the United Kingdom is proportionate pursuant to
       Article 8 ECHR.
    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting  the  Judge  made
       unsafe credibility findings in an appeal in which credibility was  at
       the heart of the Judge's conclusions.
    5. The appellants pleaded grounds assert:

           "5.    The Judge at  paragraph  35  makes  reference  to  "known
                background material of the level  and  length  of  education
                that young women are permitted to undertake in Kurdish Sunni
                Muslim Families." This material has neither been  identified
                nor set out by the Judge and it is not  at  all  clear  what
                this material is and certainly the A has not been  given  an
                opportunity to comment upon it.


           6. This erroneous and impermissible approach to  the  background
                evidence is compounded by the apparent selective approach to
                the background evidence adopted by the Judge at  42  related
                to honour crimes. The Judge merely cites one passage at AB29
                which is a passage  from  the  Danish  Immigration  Service,
                Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI)  Women  and  men  in  honour-
                related conflicts, 09/11/2018. The  Judge  has  ignored  the
                following in the appellant's bundle:


                    P15  para  1.  "...  Honour  crimes  are  overwhelmingly
                    perpetrated  by  male  family  members  against   female
                    relatives, although occasionally males are also  victims
                    of such violence"


                    P22 7.1 "some years ago, a couple engaged in  premarital
                    relations managed to escape to Iran and got married with
                    approval of their families. They  returned  to  the  KRI
                    many years later with 2 children. But the conflict still
                    remained and they were both killed".


                    P32 "Men in honour conflicts 48. WEO stated that a man's
                    honour is not spotted by extramarital relationships  the
                    way a woman's honour will  be  damaged.  The  man  in  a
                    relationship will be in risk  of  being  killed  by  the
                    woman's family, who might kill the woman  but  also  the
                    man."


                The Judge at 42 clearly forms a  view  that  the  background
                material does not show that  males  are  victims  of  honour
                related harm. The above extracts shows that this is not  the
                case and the Judges failure to properly consider  the  whole
                of  the  background  evidence  properly   infects   of   the
                credibility findings which had been made. The  basic  tenant
                of the reasoning is that men cannot  be  victims  of  honour
                related harm and  therefore  any  evidence  relied  upon  to
                suggest that such a  risk  occurs  is  unreliable.  Such  an
                approach is clearly impermissible.


           7.     The Judge's findings at para 36 are not properly reasoned
                and  the  assumption  that  an  older  woman  might  not  be
                attracted to a younger man.


           8.     The A  produced  a  medical  report  from  the  Kurdistan
                Regional Government which supported the A's evidence that he
                was hospitalised on the 24/11/2017. At  para  37  the  Judge
                fails to make  it  clear  whether  he  accepts  that  A  was
                hospitalised as claimed and whether he suffered the recorded
                injuries. The evidence suggested that the A's injuries  were
                life-threatening. The Judge suggests that such evidence adds
                little weight to the A's claim. The  A  contends  that  such
                reasoning is arguably perverse given both  the  A's  account
                and the content of the report.


           9.     Similarly the way in which the Judge seemingly  dismisses
                the evidence of the Court Summons and arrest warrant [38] on
                account of the  difference  in  names,  belies  an  unlawful
                approach to a proper assessment of the evidence.


Error of law


    6.  Mr  Brown  in  his  submissions  relied  upon  his  pleaded  grounds
       challenging the style of the Judge's decision.
    7. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of
       anxious scrutiny.  The Judge is not required to  set  out  in  detail
       each and every aspect of that evidence. The Judge's findings are  set
       out in a clear and legible form supported by adequate reasoning.
    8. In relation to the assertion the Judge erred at [35],  the  Judge  in
       this paragraph writes:

           "35.   I do not find it credible that the Appellant's girlfriend
                would still being attending school at either 20 to 21  years
                of age (AI65) or 21 to 22 years of age (w/s at paragraph 4).
                Additionally,  this  is  not  consistent  with   the   known
                background material of the level  and  length  of  education
                that young women are permitted to  undertake  Kurdish  Sunni
                Muslim families."

    9. Judges in the First-Tier Tribunal  have  considerable  experience  of
       dealing with cases concerning claimants from countries such as  Iraq.
       The country material is frequently referred to in such cases  and  it
       is not arguably irrational or impermissible for a Judge to  refer  to
       such knowledge. Whilst the above paragraph does not set  out  details
       of the background evidence considered, the appellant has not provided
       with the grounds anything by way of background material to show  that
       the Judge's findings on this point are irrational or incorrect. It is
       known that the education system in Iraq is strictly controlled by the
       national government through the  Iraqi  Ministry  of  Education.  The
       official educational cycle in Iraq extends to 12 years,  including  6
       years of mandatory primary education (6 - 12) followed by 3 years  of
       intermediate school (12 - 15) and 3 years of secondary education  (15
       - 18). To complete secondary school  and  receive  a  certificate  of
       completion each student must take a Baccalaureate exam and if a pupil
       does not pass the exam on the first attempt he  or  she  is  able  to
       attend school for one more year to try to pass it but if the  student
       does not pass the exam on the second occasion he or she will  not  be
       eligible to attend any other school or college. It is argued in  some
       sources that the strict educational policy leads  to  many  teenagers
       being on the streets and  vulnerable  to  terrorist  groups  with  no
       ability to get a job or produce an income.
   10. The Judge's conclusion the  appellant's  claim  that  his  girlfriend
       remained at school, on either of the version of the ages recorded  by
       the Judge, was not credible appears to be finding within the range of
       those available to the Judge.
   11. The assertion in the grounds the Judge erred at [42] in  relation  to
       the issue of honour crimes cannot be considered without a reading  of
       the determination as a whole. At [42] the Judge finds:

           "42.   Further, the highlighted passage at page AB29,  paragraph
                21 of the report states in relation to men in honour related
                conflicts "honour crimes are only linked to women, not  men.
                Normally, men in honour related conflicts  will  not  be  in
                serious trouble. The man might even be proud of  himself  in
                the sense that  the  extramarital  relationship  proves  his
                masculinity. However it can happen that the man is  targeted
                by the woman's family out of revenge. The source never heard
                of a man being killed  without  anything  happening  to  the
                woman."

   12. This paragraph is an accurate reflection by the Judge of the  content
       of the Danish Immigration Service report. The  Judge  also  notes  at
       [41] that he has  taken  the  report  into  account  with  particular
       reference to the highlighted passages relied upon by  the  appellant.
       It is not therefore a case of the Judge only looking at one paragraph
       without giving proper consideration to the remainder of  the  report.
       The Judge notes that the honour  crimes  discussed  in  the  document
       primarily relate to premarital relationships  which  are  essentially
       sexual in nature and not the circumstances set out in the appellant's
       claim. This is an adequate explanation for the weight the Judge  gave
       to that evidence. Later  in  that  paragraph  the  Judge  also  finds
       "nevertheless, men are still under pressure to get married and  there
       are cases of killings. When a man is killed in a non-conflict, it has
       to do with revenge or a consequence of a blood feud rather  than  the
       honour of the family. Normally in these cases, both families agree to
       the killing." The assertion in  the  grounds  the  Judge  adopted  an
       erroneous and impermissible selective approach to the evidence has no
       arguable merit. The Judge  clearly  noted  that  although  women  are
       primarily the target of honour killings men can be targeted  although
       the author of the Danish Immigration Service report never heard of  a
       man being killed without anything happening to the woman. No arguable
       legal error material to the decision is established on this ground.
   13. The third aspect of the  grounds  challenges  [36]  where  the  Judge
       writes:

           "36.   I do not find it credible that the Appellant's girlfriend
                would  be  interested  in  having  a  relationship  with   a
                schoolboy  who  was  15  years  of  age  at  the  time   and
                consequently five to seven years younger than the Appellant,
                particularly in light of the  accepted  very  serious  risks
                that exist in any  secret  relationship  between  males  and
                females in their  Kurdish  community.  I  do  not  find  the
                Appellant credible in his account that he and his girlfriend
                walked hand-in-hand in public in light of his evidence  that
                he knew full well of the very serious risks involved in such
                behaviour in his own  culture  and  community,  particularly
                given that the Appellant claims his girlfriend's brother and
                father were high-ranking officials in the PDK and candidates
                for positions in the IKR Government. I note here there is no
                background or other evidence before me that the names of the
                Appellant's father  and  brother  have  been  identified  as
                influential members of the PDK who sought  election  to  the
                IKR Government."

   14. Whilst there is arguable merit in Mr Brown's submission  that  it  is
       not properly reasoned as to why an old woman would not  be  attracted
       to a younger man and that the finding in this respect appears  to  be
       based on assumption any  error  arising  is  not  material.  The  age
       difference between the appellant and his alleged  girlfriend  is  one
       issue which the Judge found undermined the appellant's claim, but the
       remainder of the paragraph focused upon country information  and  the
       cultural aspects in relation to relationships between unrelated  male
       and female members of the  Kurdish  community.  That  aspect  of  the
       decision has not been shown to be contrary to the country information
       or arguably outside the range of findings and  conclusions  available
       to the Judge on the evidence.
   15. The appellant also challenges  the  Judge's  findings  regarding  the
       medical evidence. At [37] the Judge writes:

           "37.   I have taken the medical evidence dated 24 November  2017
                into account but conclude that it adds little weight to  the
                Appellant's claim that it was his  girlfriend's  family  who
                cause the injuries to him given that he  did  not  make  any
                complaint to the police notwithstanding that his father  is,
                on his own account, a member of the Peshmerga who would,  in
                my judgement, at the very least, not take kindly to a member
                of the PDK almost killing his son by  stabbing  him  in  the
                manner alleged."

   16. The Judge does not appear to  dispute  the  fact  the  appellant  was
       hospitalised and suffered the injuries recorded in the medical report
       but was not satisfied, when considering the evidence as a whole, that
       the same was proof of  causation.  The  appellant  claimed  that  the
       injuries leading to his hospitalisation occurred as a result  of  his
       relationship with  his  girlfriend,  but  that  core  aspect  of  the
       appellant's claim was not found credible by the Judge for a number of
       reasons when considering the evidence as a whole. The  conclusion  by
       the Judge that the medical evidence added little weight to the  claim
       by the appellant that it was his girlfriend's family who  caused  the
       injuries has not been shown to be finding not  within  the  range  of
       those available to the Judge on the evidence.
   17. The final challenge is to what is described  at  [9]  of  Mr  Brown's
       grounds of challenge to be the manner in which  the  Judge  seemingly
       dismisses the evidence of the Court Summons  and  arrest  warrant  at
       [38] on account of difference in names  which  he  claims  belies  an
       unlawful approach  to  a  proper  assessment  of  the  evidence.  The
       difficulty for the appellant is that such a submission  misrepresents
       the Judge's findings at [38] which are in the following terms:

           "38.    I have assessed the authenticity of  the  Court  Summons
                and arrest warrant relied upon by the Appellant and conclude
                on the evidence taken as a whole that  I  can  place  little
                evidential weight upon them in support  of  the  Appellant's
                claim. The Summons dated 10 April 2018  and  arrest  warrant
                dated 17 April 2018 refer to  a  male  name  Muhammed  Salam
                Ahmed Hamad and not Mohammed Ahmed which  is  the  name  the
                Appellant makes his Protection Claim under. In reaching this
                conclusion I, of course, acknowledge that on many  occasions
                spellings can differ in relation to documents in the IKR but
                take into account that both documents have exactly the  same
                spelling of the accused named in them and the medical report
                is in the name under which the asylum claim is made. I  have
                also taken into account the inconsistency in the date of the
                Summons dated 10 April 2018 and the appellant's account that
                he received it two to three days prior  to  that  date.  The
                fact that the Summonses dated 10 April 2018 and yet requires
                the Appellant to attend  Court  on  that  day  at  9  AM  is
                significant evidence to  show  that  it  is  not  a  genuine
                document as it gives the Appellant no  effective  notice  to
                allow him to comply with the Summons."

   18. The Judge gives ample reasoning for why little weight was attached to
       this document which is not solely as a result of  the  difference  in
       the name appearing upon the same and the named used by the appellant,
       although that was clearly a factor taken into account by the Judge.
   19. The grounds fail to establish arguable legal error  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal when the determination is  read  as  a
       whole. The findings are adequately reasoned, have not been  shown  to
       be irrational, and are within the range of those reasonably available
       to the Judge on the evidence.
   20. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal is made out sufficient to warrant a  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The determination shall stand.



Decision

   21. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.


   22. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 August 2019
