
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00028/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2018                           |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


     Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
For the Respondent:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1.  This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Loughridge in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen
    of Iraq, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.


 2. We make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 3. The application under appeal was refused  on  16  December  2016.   The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came  before  Judge  Loughridge  on  26  May  2017  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mark Davies on 18 September 2017 but on renewal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker in the following terms

       The grounds pleaded are arguable in particular that the  judge  gave
       inadequate/no reasons  for  finding  that  the  applicant  had  been
       subjected to 'low-level' violence or why  'low-level'  violence  was
       acceptable or could be tolerated; why the applicant  should  attempt
       to obtain documents from her place of origin when such may place her
       at increased risk; why she should, in a brief conversation  disclose
       her fears; how a young single woman with  a  baby  could  return  to
       Iraqi Kurdistan.



Background


 4. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Appellant is a
    citizen of Iraq born on 1 January 1991. She arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 19 June 2016 and claimed asylum on arrival. The basis of her
    claim was that she had been ill treated by her uncle with whom she
    lived in Iraq due to her refusal to marry her cousin and that there was
    no sufficiency of protection to prevent her uncle continuing this ill
    treatment if she had to return. The ill treatment already suffered
    consisted of violent attacks upon her and now included threats to kill.
    The Appellant feared that the risk was heightened because since her
    arrival in the United Kingdom she had married someone else and, at the
    time of the hearing, she was pregnant.




 5. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  claim  not  accepting  that  the
    Appellant had given a true account of events in Iraq nor that her claim
    displayed a Refugee Convention reason. In dismissing  her  appeal,  the
    Judge found (paragraph 44) that  whereas  the  Appellant's  account  of
    disagreement and difficulties with her uncle over her refusal to  marry
    his son was plausible her claim that he had been significantly  violent
    to her or had threatened to kill her was not credible. The  Judge  also
    found that there was no Refugee Convention reason and no reason why  on
    a return the Appellant would face a  threat  to  her  protected  rights
    under Article 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  So  far  as  the
    claim to Humanitarian Protection was concerned the Judge  followed  the
    Country Guidance then applicable and found that the Appellant  had  not
    established her claim.






Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Mr Joseph said that the grounds focus on credibility,
    but the main issue is the failure to consider risk on return. There was
    no consideration of relocation. The Appellant did not have  a  CSID  at
    any point and the Tribunal did not consider re-documentation.  Although
    she had a passport this was held by her uncle. Her brother  helped  her
    to leave using a false French passport.  She  could  not  approach  her
    uncle for assistance the  Tribunal  having  accepted  that  there  were
    difficulties with her uncle and that she had been  subjected  low-level
    violence. There seemed to be no consideration of  where  the  Appellant
    would be returned. According to the country  guidance  cases  it  would
    only have been to Baghdad and there  was  no  consideration  of  onward
    travel or relocation. By the time of her return she would have a child.
    Answering questions from us Mr Joseph accepted that the question  of  a
    CSID was not raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  the
    Appellant did not say that she did not have a CSID. Mr Joseph  accepted
    that the  Appellant  used  to  have  a  passport,  that  there  was  no
    suggestion of any risk faced from the authorities and that  she  had  a
    brother in Iraq who assisted  her  to  leave.  He  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's husband was subject to a deportation  order  and  that  the
    Appellant was now pregnant with their second child.


 7. For the Respondent Mr Howells said that the Judge found at paragraph 45
    of the decision that the actions of  the  Appellant's  uncle  were  not
    sufficient  to  reach  the  threshold  of  persecution.   So   far   as
    humanitarian protection is concerned the Appellant is able  to  contact
    her brother to assist in redocumentation should this be necessary.  The
    Home Office understands that her husband is an Iraqi national.


 8. We said that the appeal would be dismissed, and that  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stood. The credibility findings made by the  First-
    tier tribunal are sound and well-reasoned and there is no error of law.
    The Appellant has a brother in Iraq, her  husband  is  Iraqi,  and  she
    would be returning with him and their children as a family. We reserved
    our written decision.


Decision

 9. The basis of the Appellant's claim is briefly  set  out  above  and  is
    detailed in her written witness statement presented to  the  First-tier
    tribunal. The Appellant lived with her elder brother, uncle and  family
    in Iraq after her own father died when she was very young. Her  brother
    got married and moved away from home. The Appellant's uncle wanted  her
    to marry his disabled son,  but  the  Appellant  refused.  This  caused
    discord within the family and the Appellant claims that her  uncle  was
    violent towards her. The  First-tier  tribunal  Judge  found  that  any
    violence that she may have suffered did  not  cross  the  threshold  of
    severity into persecution. The Appellant's  brother  made  arrangements
    for the Appellant to leave the country and she  sought  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom. Whilst in Iraq the Appellant lived in Rashad but  moved
    with the family to Kirkuk City after Daesh took over their  home  area.
    Her brother also lived in Kirkuk City about 10 minutes  away  from  the
    home the Appellant shared with her uncle.

10. The grounds of appeal assert that the  First-tier  tribunal  materially
    erred in its consideration of the credibility of the Appellant's claim.
    Having accepted that the Appellant had been  largely  consistent  about
    violence and threats and that her uncle's reaction to  her  refusal  to
    marry his son was plausible it is suggested that the rejection  of  her
    account on minor adverse credibility issues was in error.

11. The grounds do not assert that the findings were perverse or irrational
    nor that they are not adequately reasoned. In our judgement the  First-
    tier Tribunal has given clear and sound reasons for rejecting the parts
    of  the  Appellant's  account  that  are  not  accepted.  There  is  no
    suggestion in the decision that 'low-level' violence is  acceptable  or
    should be tolerated just that it does not  amount  to  persecution  and
    indeed does not need to  be  tolerated.  So  far  as  the  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's account are concerned paragraphs 43 to 47  go
    into considerable detail. The Judge accepts that it is  plausible  that
    the Appellant's refusal to marry her  cousin  caused  disagreement  and
    difficulties between the Appellant and her uncle. He goes on to explain
    why, given this plausibility, he did not find her account of the extent
    of her uncle's adverse reaction credible. The Appellant's brother,  who
    on her account was sympathetic to her plight,  lived  only  10  minutes
    away. If her uncle had been violent in the way  the  Appellant  claimed
    the  Appellant  could  have  sought  her   brother's   assistance   and
    protection. If the Appellant had  truly  reported  the  matter  to  the
    police, she could have obtained a copy of the police  report  from  her
    brother. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's claim  to  have  lost
    contact with him.

12. Mr Joseph said in his submissions that  the  main  issue  was  risk  on
    return. The Appellant, he said, had never had a CSID and  although  she
    had a passport this was held by her uncle. The grounds assert that  the
    Tribunal made no findings as to where in Iraq the Appellant is expected
    to return. The grounds, and Mr Joseph's submissions, also referred to a
    lack of findings on internal relocation.

13. In our judgement this ground is completely ill founded. The Judge found
    that there was no risk to the Appellant  in  her  home  area.  In  such
    circumstances the issue of internal  relocation  does  not  arise.  The
    means of transport and the route to be taken to  the  Appellant's  home
    area was not a  matter  raised  by  Mr  Joseph  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal so any failure by the Judge to deal with this could not be  an
    error of law. The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  also  the
    Appellant's  own  domestic  circumstances  are  illuminating  in   this
    respect. The  Appellant  had  a  passport,  and  this  was  last  seen,
    according to her account, at her uncle's house.  With  the  credibility
    findings made by the Judge there appears to be no reason why  enquiries
    could not be made, through the  Appellant's  brother,  to  locate  this
    passport. Even if the passport could not be located the very fact  that
    she had one shows that she is on record with the authorities. She has a
    male relative, a brother, who could assist in obtaining a new  passport
    or CSID. Indeed, as she previously held a passport, it may be that  the
    Iraqi Embassy in London would be able to issue a  document.  There  has
    been no evidence put forward by the  Appellant,  and  no  argument  put
    forward by her representatives, to suggest that she is unable to obtain
    the necessary documents to enable her to return to  her  home  area  of
    Iraq. Added to this is the fact that the Appellant  is  married  to  an
    Iraqi national who has no status in the United Kingdom. The couple have
    a child and are expecting their second child. No argument has been  put
    forward to suggest that this family cannot return to Iraq together.

14. For all these reasons we find no error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Summary of decision

  15. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date: 31 January 2019

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

