
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00237/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                            |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     RAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami, of Counsel instructed Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born  on  4  December  1999.
    He claimed asylum on 27 June 2016.  His application was refused  on  23
    December 2016.  His appeal against that decision was dismissed by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad who in a determination promulgated  on
    11 July dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

2.   It is of  note  that  although  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claim he was,  because  of  his  age,  given  leave,  under
    paragraphs 352ZC to 352ZF of the Immigration Rules,  until 20 May 2019.



3.   The appellant's claim was that he was an  Iraqi  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    who had lived in the Mosul area of Iraq before moving to live with  his
    uncle in Suleymeniyah in Kurdistan.  His father had been  killed  while
    the family had lived in Mosul by, he claimed, ISIS stating also that  a
    paternal uncle was killed at the same time.  The appellant's claim  was
    that  he  too  would  be  targeted.   The  judge  pointed  to   various
    discrepancies in the appellant's claim between  what  he  had  said  at
    interview and in his statement and at appeal  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not credible about how his father had  died.   She  found
    that he would not be targeted as he had claimed by ISIS on return,  and
    said that she did not find that  the  appellant's  father  had  been  a
    peshmerga or that he was specifically targeted.

4.   She said that on the appellant's own evidence there was no risk to  him
    in Suleymeniyah apart from some acrimony with his mother's new partner.
     She found that he had not fled Iraq in fear of his life and  had  been
    sent here for a better life.  She said that  he  was  clearly  a  smart
    intelligent young person  whose  family  had  invested  a  considerable
    amount of money in sending him to Britain.

5.   She went on to say in paragraph 8:-

         "He accepted having an Iraq national ID card and said he  had  left
         it behind.  Under cross-examination the  appellant  indicated  that
         his ID card had disappeared but that was very different  from  what
         he said in interview which was that he had left his ID card  behind
         because he needed a passport and not ID card.  There is  no  reason
         why the appellant's identification  cannot  be  verified  with  the
         Iraqi authorities."

6.   In the following paragraph she noted that he had indicated that he  had
    Facebook contact with some of his family in Iraq.  She found  that  the
    appellant had been sent to  Britain  for  economic  reasons.  She  then
    dismissed the appeal.

7.   The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had not had any  regard  to
    the country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  and
    had misdirected herself on the risk to return.  It was argued that  the
    country guidance case set out a stage by  stage  approach  to  risk  on
    return for Iraqi Kurds and that that had  not  been  followed  nor  had
    there been any  engagement  at  all  with  relevant  country  guidance.
    Moreover,  it was argued the judge had erred in not  making  a  finding
    about the risk the appellant faced by virtue  of  not  having  a  civil
    status ID card.  Reference was made to the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 which had stated  that  a  CSID
    card was not a document that  could  be  automatically  acquired  after
    return to Iraq although  it  was  feasible  that  an  individual  could
    acquire a passport or laissez passer without possessing or  being  able
    to obtain a CSID.

8.   The guidance in the Court of Appeal had gone  on  to  say  "in  such  a
    case,  an enquiry would be needed to establish whether  the  individual
    would have other means of support in Iraq, and  the  absence  of  which
    they might be at risk of breach of Article 3 rights".

9.   The grounds went on to state  that  given  that  the  appellant  was  a
    resident of Mosul it might well be that  internal  relocation  was  not
    open to him.

10.  With regard to possible  return  to  the  IKR  reference  was  made  to
    country guidance which showed the difficulties the appellant might face
    if he returned to that area.  Similarly there were issues as to whether
    or not the appellant would face persecution if returned to Baghdad.

11.  It was argued that the judge had erred in failing to consider  Articles
    2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR and finally that the judge had applied the wrong
    standard of proof.  Moreover it was  argued  that  she  had  failed  to
    consider his best interests.

12.  Before the hearing of the appeal Ms Nizami sought to widen the  grounds
    of application stating that the judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
    appeal in a manner as appropriate "to A's vulnerability as a minor" and
    had not complied with the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  the  case
    of AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1123  where  the  Court  of
    Appeal had recognised the principle that "a child is foremost  a  child
    before he or she is a refugee".

13.  She  stated the judge had  failed  to  properly  have  regard  to  that
    principle and that  therefore  she  had  erred  when   considering  the
    credibility of the appellant.

14.  At the hearing of the appeal before me I dealt first with  the  request
    by Ms Nizami to enlarge the grounds of appeal.  I took the view that it
    would be appropriate to look at the appeal at its highest:   the  facts
    being that the appellant although originally from Mosul had  lived  for
    some time in Suleymeniyah and furthermore that ISIS was  no  longer  in
    control of those areas and had in fact retreated from those areas.  The
    appellant's fear, no matter how it had arisen related solely to a  fear
    of ISIS and they were no longer a threat to him.  I would  add  that  I
    consider that there is nothing in the determination that would leave me
    to consider that the judge was incorrect in her approach to the  appeal
    on the issue of credibility.  In paragraph 3 of the  determination  she
    stated:-

         "I take his age into account when  assessing  his  credibility  and
         giving the benefit of doubt.  The core of his claim relates to  the
         death of his father who the appellant claims was  killed  by  ISIS.
         It is the appellant's case that this was a deliberate targeting  of
         his father by ISIS and not a random indiscriminate attack.  However
         his explanation for this killing was inconsistent."

15.  The judge then gives details  of  the  inconsistencies  which  she  had
    found.

16.  The fact that the appellant was 17 at the  date  of  hearing  does  not
    mean that  the  judge  should  have  found  that  he  was  credible  in
    everything he  said.   Indeed  the  reality  is  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was not consistent.  The judge was entitled to point that out.
    It is not the case simply because a young man is  17  rather  than  18,
    what he says should be believed and found to be credible.  Be  that  as
    it may,  I do not consider that that is the nub of this case.

17.  I consider that the central issue is that of whether or not or the  the
    appellant would be able to return to his family in Suleymeniyah and how
    he could  do that.  In that regard Ms Nizami referred  to  the  country
    guidance in the Court of Appeal decision in AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944 in which it is written in the annex thereto at the B that:-

         "B   Documentation feasibility of return (including IKR).


         5.   Return of former residence for the Iraqi Kurdish region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  laissez
             passer.


         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.


         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276,  an  international
             protection claim made by P cannot succeed by reference to  any
             alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of the current or
             expired Iraqi passport or a laissez  passer  if  the  Tribunal
             finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account  of
             a lack of any of those documents.


         8.   Where P has  returned  to  Iraq  and  laissez  passer  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a current passport.


         C.   The CSID


         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arriving in Iraq.  The  CSID
             is  generally  acquired  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
             financial  assistance  from   the   authorities;   employment;
             education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P  shows  there
             are no family or other members likely to be  able  to  provide
             means of support, he is in general likely to face a real  risk
             of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P would still have no CSID.


         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home  Governorate  by  using  an
             Iraqi passport (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If
             P does have such a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that of  P's  family).   P's
             ability to persuade the official that P is the person named on
             the relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has  family
             members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for  P.




         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is an area where Article 15(c)  serious
             harm was occurring.  As a result of violence, alternative  CSA
             Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have been  established
             in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The  evidence  does  not  demonstrate
             that the 'Central Archive', which exists  in  Baghdad,  is  in
             practice able to provide CSIDs  to  those  in  need  of  them.
             There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad to which
             P could apply for formal recognition of identity.  The precise
             operation of this court is, however, unclear."

18.  In Section E of that guidance  the  issue  of  return  to  the  IRK  is
    considered.  It reads as follows:-

         "E.  Iraqi Kurdish Region


         17.  The respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
             from the IKR and his identity has been  pre-cleared  with  the
             IKR authorities.  The authorities in the IKR do not require  P
             to have an expired or current passport or laissez passer.


         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free.  There is no Article 15(c)
             risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


         19.  A Kurd (K) which does not originate from the IKR contain entry
             for ten days as a visitor  and  will  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further ten days.  If K finds  employment,  K
             can remain for longer, although K will need to  register  with
             the authorities and provide details of the employer.  There is
             no evidence that IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds from
             the IKR as permits have come to an end.


         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact-sensitive; it is likely to
             involve an assessment of (a) the practicality of  travel  from
             Baghdad to the  IKR  (such  as  Erbil  or  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K  securing  employment  in  the  IKR;  (c)  the
             availability of assistance from  family  and  friends  in  the
             IKR."

19.  Mr Avery in  reply  stated  that  the  judge  not  only  had  made  the
    appropriate self-direction on the issue of the fact that the  appellant
    was a minor but stated that the judgment  in  AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123, on which Ms Nizami had relied did not  really  apply  to
    someone such as this appellant who was able-bodied and articulate - his
    circumstances were very different from that of AM.   In  any  event  he
    argued that the judge had made sufficient findings that  not  only  was
    the appellant not credible but that he would be able to return  to  the
    KRG.  It  is important to look at  an  individual's  circumstances  and
    there was nothing in this appellant's circumstances  which  would  mean
    that he could not return, particularly that he had family there.

Discussion

20.  I do not consider that there is  anything  in  the  argument  that  the
    judge erred in the way she dealt with the evidence  of  this  appellant
    and that somehow she had not properly given consideration to  the  fact
    that this appellant was a minor.  I consider that a  self-direction  in
    paragraph 3  of  the  determination  was  a  self-direction  which  she
    followed and, as I have said above I consider that there was absolutely
    no reason why she should then be placed in a situation where she had to
    find something which she did not consider was credible to be  credible.
    The reality is that she considered the evidence and  the  discrepancies
    therein and was perfectly entitled to find that the  appellant's  story
    was not credible.

21.  However,  there is the further issue of the ability  of  the  appellant
    to return to the KRG.  This is an issue which requires considerable and
    detailed analysis regarding the way in which  the  appellant  would  be
    returned to that area and the documentary evidence which could or could
    not be obtained which would facilitate his return.  I consider that  it
    is an error of law for the judge not to have engaged  with  that  issue
    and that her comment that "there  is  no  reason  why  the  appellant's
    identification cannot be verified with the Iraqi  authorities"  is  not
    sufficient to determine that issue.

22.  I consider that is a material error of law in the determination  and  I
    therefore set aside the determination.

23.  As this is an  exercise  which  requires  considerable  fact-finding  I
    consider it is  appropriate,  applying  the  Senior  President  of  the
    Tribunal's directions, to order that this appeal proceeds to  a hearing
    afresh in the First-tier.

Decision

I set aside the judgment of the First-tier Judge.



Directions

This appeal is remitted to be heard again in the First-tier.

Signed   [pic]                          Date 10 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

