
 [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pA/00821/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                    [J K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel, instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND FACTS OF THE CASE

1.   The Appellant, who was born  on  5  January  1980,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.  It is her account that in 2002 she was  raped  by  distant
    relative of her mother's.  She was only able to name him as  [R].   Her
    parents and herself did not report this incident to the authorities  in
    Bangladesh.

2.   In 2007 she worked as a primary school teacher for about  a  year.  She
    then moved to Sylhet to study and, whilst she was there, she was  raped
    by [R] in December 2008, January 2009 and June 2009. She says that  her
    parents had wanted her to marry this man and he had wanted to marry her
    but they deferred permission until she had completed her studies.

3.   On 16 January 2011 the Appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  Tier
    4 Student.  She applied for further leave on 31 July 2012 but this  was
    refused on  6  October  2012  on  the  basis  she  had  not  passed  an
    appropriate English language test.  She did  not  appeal  against  this
    decision.  She remained here without leave and she was  encountered  by
    the Immigration Service working illegally on  25  May  2015.   She  was
    detained  and  refused  temporary  admission  on  28  May  2015.    Her
    solicitors submitted a human rights application on 5 June  2015.   This
    was refused and certified on 24 June 2015.  In this application she did
    not mention her fear of [R].

4.   The Appellant claimed asylum on 6 July  2015  saying  that  she  feared
    returning to Bangladesh, as a woman, because she would  be  once  again
    assaulted by [R].  Her asylum interview took place on 4 August 2015  in
    which she disclosed details of her ill-treatment by [R].  On  7  August
    2015 she saw a doctor at Yarl's Wood and repeated her account  to  her.
    Her application for asylum was  refused  on  12  August  2015  and  she
    appealed against this decision on 25 August 2015.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler dismissed her appeal on 7 October  2015
    and the Appellant appealed against this decision on 21 October 2015.

6.   Her main ground of appeal was that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    not mentioned the Rule 35 report by Dr Rebecca Ward and she was granted
    permission on this point on 28  October  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lewis.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   The Appellant's counsel said that he would rely on the reasons give  by
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge Lewis when granting permission. In reply, the
    Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  contents  of  the
    doctor's report derived from what she was told  by  the  Appellant  and
    were self-serving.

8.   He also noted that at paragraph 10 of her decision First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kaler had stated that she had  taken  into  account  all  of  the
    documents in the Respondent's Bundle, which included the report by  Dr.
    Ward.  At paragraph 21.v of her decision she also took into account the
    fact that the Appellant had failed to mention any incident  of  torture
    when she was first questioned by medical staff at Yarl's Wood. He  then
    submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  at  sub-
    paragraphs 21.i and 21.ii were open to her on the evidence before  her.
    He added that taking the evidence as a whole the Judge  had  not  found
    the Appellant's account credible and that there was no  material  error
    of law in her decision.

9.   The Appellant's counsel then replied  and  submitted  that  an  oblique
    reference to Dr.  Ward's  report  was  not  sufficient.   It  mentioned
    torture and did not find any inconsistencies or contradictions  in  the
    Appellant's account.  He submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler
    should have explained why she  had  not  given  weight  to  Dr.  Ward's
    report. In particular, the consistency of the account given to Dr. Ward
    with the Appellant's earlier account of her rapes needed to  have  been
    taken into account.

10.  This is a narrow ground of appeal but on balance it is my view that  in
    an asylum appeal anxious scrutiny has to be applied to all the relevant
    information and evidence before a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11.  Dr. Ward went no further than saying that the Appellant may  have  been
    tortured.  She did not notice any scars on the Appellant's  body.   She
    just noted a small patch of discolouration likely to be an old abrasion
    or bruise.  She does not attribute that to anything and it is not clear
    from Dr. Ward's notes whether she thought the Appellant  came  straight
    from Bangladesh shortly before claiming asylum.   Although,  it  sounds
    like she did from the manner in which she recorded her discussion  with
    the Appellant.  What the Appellant said to Dr. Ward did not  raise  any
    new points apart from her saying that she was having nightmares.

12.  This report taken together with the rest  of  the  evidence  would  not
    necessarily have meant that First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler would  have
    reached a different decision. However, as was said, by Counsel for  the
    appellant, Dr. Ward's report records the Appellant stating  that  there
    were four incidents; two of which involved a physical attack and two of
    which involved him threatening to expose photographs  of  her.  I  find
    that this does impact on the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Kaler at paragraphs 21(ii) where she found that the Appellant had given
    different accounts of whether there were two or four incidents.

13.  That is the main impact of  the  failure  to  take  into  account  this
    report. So on a very narrow basis I find  that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

DECISION

1.   The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

2.   The Appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler.


Signed   Date 18 February 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

