

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/00119/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 26th September 2018                |On: 21st December 2018              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     VS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Tampuri,  Tamsons Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born in 1976.  She appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hindson)  to
    dismiss her protection and human rights appeal.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's linked protection and human rights  claims
    was that she faced  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Nigeria
    because she is a gay woman. Alternatively her sexual orientation,   and
    her status as an unmarried mother, meant  that  she  would  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to her integration  in  Nigeria  such  that  she
    qualified for leave to remain on the grounds  that  her  removal  would
    amount to a disproportionate interference with her private  life.    In
    addition she contended that it would be strongly contrary to  the  best
    interests of her three children if they were to be  removed  from  this
    country; an important part of this limb of her case was that her  young
    daughter would be subject to Female Genital Mutilation in Nigeria.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's case on  all  grounds.
    It did not accept that the Appellant was gay; nor  did  it  accept  her
    claim that her former husband in  Nigeria  would  seek  to  harm  their
    daughter, or that she had  been  rejected  by  her  natal  family.  The
    Tribunal found that the Appellant is an educated and resourceful  woman
    who would be well equipped to  re-establish  herself  in  Nigeria.  The
    appeal was thereby dismissed.

 4. I granted permission on the 8th February 2018.  The grounds, elaborated
    before me by Mr Tampuri, are various, but broadly cover three areas  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's  findings:  the  Appellant's  sexuality,  her
    children, and her human rights.





    The Appellant's Sexuality

 5. The  central  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    treatment of the evidence of three additional  witnesses  who  attended
    the hearing and gave live evidence.  Mr  Tampuri  contends  that  these
    three witnesses were of crucial importance since they could  all  speak
    to their personal knowledge of the way that  the  Appellant  lives  her
    life in the United Kingdom. It  is  submitted  that  the  determination
    contains no clear findings on the weight to be attached to the evidence
    of these witnesses, and that to the extent that negative  findings  are
    made, the reasons given are irrational.

 6. The first of these witnesses, 'C', is a woman who claims to  have  been
    in an on-off sexual relationship with the Appellant  between  2013  and
    2017.  Since she could speak directly  to  matter  of  the  Appellant's
    sexuality, her evidence was of central importance to  the  appeal.  The
    Tribunal could conclude that the Appellant  was  a  witness  devoid  of
    credibility but if it accepted the evidence of C,  it  could  still  be
    satisfied that the Appellant is in fact living as a gay  woman  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The determination notes [at paragraph 37] there  were
    some inconsistencies between C's evidence and that of the Appellant  in
    respect of "how they conduct their relationship", but found  that  this
    was not a matter in itself capable of undermining  the  evidence.   The
    Tribunal then notes [at 39] that C was not  aware  that  the  Appellant
    married a man whilst  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  (it  being  the
    Appellant's evidence that she did so in order to appease her family), a
    matter the Tribunal found to be "surprising".  The  determination  then
    makes reference to some  unspecified  inconsistences  in  the  evidence
    about how much time the two women spent together [at 40] and that C has
    been living illegally for much of the time that she  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom [at 40].


 7. The second witness 'M' is a national of Albania who is a close personal
    friend of the Appellant. She averred that she knows the Appellant to be
    gay, and knew her when she was in a relationship with C.  M's  evidence
    is rejected squarely on the basis that she entered the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and was subsequently sent to prison  for  the  use  of  false
    documents, matters which she did not disclose in her witness statement.

 8. The third witness was Mr Aaron Chady,  a Community  Development  Worker
    with a sexual health organisation working in  the  LGBT  community.  Mr
    Chady had met the Appellant in his professional capacity and was  quite
    satisfied that she was a gay woman. The  Tribunal  gives  his  evidence
    "appropriate weight".

 9. I am satisfied that this ground of appeal is made out. In respect of  C
    the determination gives a number  of  reasons  why  the  weight  to  be
    attached to her evidence might be diminished, but no findings are  made
    on the central plank of the case that this woman has been in  a  sexual
    relationship with the Appellant. Paragraph 40 of the determination ends
    abruptly with no clear conclusion reached about whether that  claim  is
    accepted. It is of course possible that C is lying in order to help the
    Appellant; if that was the conclusion of the Tribunal  it  should  have
    been clearly stated.  In respect of M it is  true  that  a  history  of
    criminal deception can fairly result in the evidence of such a  witness
    being critically assessed. In this instance I am however satisfied that
    the approach of the Tribunal was irrational. M was being called to give
    her  evidence  about  the  Appellant's  lifestyle.  It   is   therefore
    unsurprising that her witness statement was exclusively focused on that
    evidence. To discount her evidence in its entirety because she did  not
    detail, in advance, the fact that she had been to prison in 2015  seems
    to me to fail to engage with the actual evidence.   As for Mr Chady the
    determination states that "appropriate" weight has been  given  to  his
    evidence. What the Tribunal deems appropriate is  not  entirely  clear.
    No findings are made on  his  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    seeking support from his organisation since 2016, that he has known her
    to date another gay woman who attends the group, and that having  given
    the Appellant one-to-one counselling on a number of  occasions,  he  is
    firmly of the belief that  she  is  in  fact  homosexual.    For  these
    reasons I am satisfied that the Tribunal did err in its approach to the
    evidence of the witnesses, and  so  to  the  overall  question  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality.

10. It follows that Mr Tampuri need not make out his  second  ground  under
    this heading: his submission that the Tribunal  erred  in  placing  the
    weight that it did on the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  twice  been
    married to a man. Mr Tampuri contends  that  the  Appellant's  previous
    marriage has "no bearing" on the question of her sexual orientation. As
    I observed in granting permission, that is patently not  so.  The  fact
    that she has been married in the past is obviously of some relevance to
    her claim to be a gay woman. Whilst it is true that the Tribunal  found
    the Appellant's evidence was "fundamentally" and "seriously" undermined
    by, in particular, her second marriage,  I am unable  to  say  that  it
    treated her past heterosexual relationships  as  determinative  of  her
    current sexual orientation.  The weight given  to  those  relationships
    was otherwise a matter for the Tribunal and I am unable to say that  it
    was here irrational in its approach, particularly in  respect  of  that
    second marriage in the United  Kingdom:  the  Tribunal  considers,  and
    rejects, the Appellant's explanation for it.


    The Children

11. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has  failed  to  give  any
    reasons why it did not accept that the Appellant's daughter would be at
    risk of FGM  if  returned  to  Nigeria.  The  relevant  finding  is  at
    paragraph 46 of the determination:


         "Especially given the time that has passed, I do not accept that it
         is reasonably likely that her husband would seek to find her and to
         subject her or her daughter to FGM".


12. It is further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  conduct
    an assessment of the best interests of the children in accordance  with
    s.55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.


13. For the Respondent Mr Diwnycz accepts that  reasoning  on  FGM  appears
    sparse.  I  would  agree.  If  the  child's  father  wants  her  to  be
    circumcised it is difficult to see why that desire would be lessened by
    the passage of time. Given the social and cultural reasons underpinning
    the practice it is arguable that the desire would increase as the child
    approaches marriageable  age.   Mr  Diwnycz  further  agreed  that  the
    determination does not  contain  any  reference  to  s55,  a  statutory
    requirement of particular importance in a case dealing with FGM, and so
    invited me to find the decision flawed for that reason.



    Article 8


14. In respect of human rights the grounds contend that  the  determination
    is flawed for a failure to conduct a Razgar Article 8 enquiry, complete
    with reference to s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, and, as noted above, a best interests assessment  in  respect  of
    the children.


15. I need not make detailed findings on this submission since  Mr  Diwnycz
    again accepts it to be made out.   The Appellant had  expressly  relied
    on the private lives of her children,  and  their  best  interests,  to
    contend that  the  family's  removal  would  be  disproportionate.  The
    determination fails to address those submissions.

16. It follows that from the above that all of  the  material  findings  in
    this determination have been set  aside.  In  those  circumstances  the
    parties invited me to remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Having regard to the extent of  the  fact-finding  required,  and  that
    there are three  witnesses,  I  agree  that  this  would  be  the  most
    appropriate forum.


    Anonymity Order

17. This appeal concerns a claim for protection. Having had regard to  Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Decisions


18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed  for  material
    errors of law and it is set aside.


60. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-determination
    before a judge other than Judge Hindson.


61. There is an order for anonymity.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            18th December
                                    2018
