
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00884/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 September 2017                   |     On 11 September 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                     F M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale of Counsel, instructed by Brighton
                    Housing Trust Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is a national of Iraq who was born on 25th
    January 2000          and is therefore aged 17 years at the moment.  He
    made application for asylum to the respondent and in a decision dated
    12th January 2017, the respondent refused that claim.

 2. The appellant subsequently appealed the decision  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bernard Andonian at Taylor House  on
    24th February 2017.


3.   At paragraph 23 of the judge's determination he did not  consider  that
    the appellant had established a well-founded fear of persecution for  a
    Convention reason, but granted the appellant's  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection on the basis that the appellant was in need of international
    protection, but could not qualify  under  the  Geneva  Convention.   He
    accepted that the appellant was at risk in his home area and  in  Iraqi
    Kurdistan.  He accepted that he would be at general risk  elsewhere  in
    Iraq, but he failed to consider that as a displaced unaccompanied child
    his claim would engage the Convention.  Mr Neale accepted that  he  had
    not addressed the judge on the issue of particular social  group.   Had
    he done so, the result may well have been different.

4.   At the hearing before  me  today,  having  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Neale, Mr Tarlow (and in my view entirely appropriately) conceded  that
    the determination could not stand and that it should be remade and that
    it should be allowed granting asylum to the appellant.  I find that the
    determination of Judge Andonian does contain a material error  of  law.
    He was wrong to find that the appellant could not  engage  the  Refugee
    Convention. The appellant's claim does engage the convention.  I remake
    the decision myself.  His asylum appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of
their family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to the
respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to  contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
