
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00732/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2020                   |On 17 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MSHM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Thompson, instructed by L&L Law Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Maka ('the Judge') promulgated on  the  10  March
       2020 in  which  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
       Convention and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.
    2. Permission to appeal was considered by another judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal who in the section of the notice  appearing  above  the
       bold line, below which the reasons for the decision are given, writes
       "Permission to Appeal is GRANTED".
    3. In the section below  the  bold  line  headed  REASONS  FOR  DECISION
       (including  any  decision  on  extending  time)  the  judge  granting
       permission writes:

           "1.    The application is in time.


           2.     The grounds argue that the Judge erred in the  assessment
                of risk against the adverse credibility  of  the  Appellant.
                The decision was inadequately reasoned, evidence that should
                have been provided (such as documentation and the Appellants
                claimed prescription) were missing.


           3.     Given the time available to prepare the appeal given  the
                period since the previous appeal it is  not  clear  why  the
                arrest warrant would not  have  been  produced  or  why  the
                Appellant and his representative had not  sorted  the  issue
                out. It is not clear where  the  misunderstanding  lay.  The
                observation in the decision that it was not clear  what  the
                previous judge had decided does not sit with those parts  of
                the previous decision referred to in the Refusal Letter. The
                complaint  that  the  decision  is  adequately  reasoned  is
                arguable.


           4.     The grounds  disclose  no  arguable  errors  of  law  and
                permission to appeal is refused."

    4. Mr  Thompson  raised  as  a  preliminary  point  that  the  grant  of
       permission should be struck out on the  basis  there  had  been  some
       procedural irregularity pursuant  to  rule  43(2)(d)  Upper  Tribunal
       Procedure Rules on the basis it is claimed the grant of permission is
       ambiguous and lacks the required degree of clarity.
    5. Mr Thompson also refers  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  No.1
       Permission to Appeal to UTIAC which states at [46] that if permission
       to appeal is granted the reasons for doing so must be clear.
    6.  The  answer  to  this  point   can   be   found   in   Isufaj   (PTA
       decisions/reasons; EEA reg. 37 appeals) [2019]  UKUT  283  (IAC)  the
       first headnote of which reads: "(1) Judges deciding applications  for
       permission to appeal should ensure that, as a general  matter,  there
       is no apparent contradiction between the decision on the  application
       and what is said  in  the  "reasons  for  decision"  section  of  the
       document that records the decision and the reasons  for  it.  As  was
       said in Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018]  UKUT
       388 (IAC), a decision on a permission application must be capable  of
       being understood by the Tribunal's administrative staff, the  parties
       and by the court or tribunal to which the appeal lies. In  the  event
       of such an apparent contradiction or other uncertainty,  the  parties
       can expect the Upper Tribunal to treat the decision  as  the  crucial
       element."
    7. The 'decision' recorded  by  the  judge  considering  the  permission
       application is that permission to appeal is granted. Whilst [4]  does
       create some ambiguity [3] does not and clearly sets out  the  reasons
       why the judge granted permission to appeal.
    8. For this reason, Mr Thompson's submission was rejected.

Error of law

    9. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 4  October  1991  who
       entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a student  on  28  March  2010
       with leave valid to 11 June 2011, which was extended so as to  expire
       on the 25 August 2014.
   10. Following the revocation of the licence of the college where MSHM was
       purporting studying his leave was curtailed on 22 November 2012  with
       no right of appeal.
   11. On 10 January 2013 MSHM requested  an  appointment  with  the  Asylum
       Screening Unit in Croydon and made a formal claim  for  international
       protection when he attended the appointment on 21 January 2013.
   12. The Secretary of State refused his application against which the MSHM
       appealed. That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lingard
       who in a decision dated 21 February 2013 dismissed the appeal on both
       protection and human rights grounds.  Unsuccessful  applications  for
       permission to appeal were made resulting  in  MSHM  becoming  'appeal
       rights exhausted' on 5 March 2013.
   13. Further submissions made on 15 August 2019 were refused on 10 January
       2020. It is the appeal against that refusal  which  came  before  the
       Judge
   14. Mr Tan's first submission is that although  the  Judge  purported  to
       consider the previous decision carefully from [36]  of  the  decision
       under challenge what was said by the Judge at [38] is  at  odds  with
       the previous decision and subsequent refusal of permission to  appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal in that case.
   15. At [38] the Judge writes:

           "38.   It is not my role to definitively  dissect  the  previous
                determination nor do I seek to do this.  There  is  however,
                with respect to the Judge, no definite findings, one way  or
                another, on the Appellant's account,  its  plausibility  and
                whether that account is accepted or rejected and why.  Given
                these concerns, while I accept the previous determination is
                the  starting  point  and  its  findings  definitive,  I  am
                satisfied that there are issues,  besides  the  2005  Rules,
                which I find, allow me to depart from some of  the  findings
                of the previous First-tier Tribunal. In particular, the risk
                factors as they now  apply  are  relevant  and  the  medical
                evidence, psychiatric report and the fact-finding report are
                all relevant to  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  for  this
                Appellant now."

   16.  The  previous  decision  was  challenging  by  an  application   for
       permission to appeal on the basis the appellant claimed Judge Lingard
       had not given the claim the required degree of anxious  scrutiny  and
       that  the  findings  were  flawed.  The  Designated  Judge   refusing
       permission found Judge Lingard set out clearly a number of evidential
       reasons why she found MSHM's account lacked credibility and  that  it
       was a careful determination  in  which  Judge  Lingard  gave  anxious
       scrutiny to the claim.
   17. The existence of clear and understandable findings is also  evidenced
       by the Secretary of States reasons for dismissing the  current  claim
       where there is a specific reference to the decision of Judge  Lingard
       and pertinent findings made  therein  at  [15]  of  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter.
   18. At [16 -19] of the refusal letter is written:

           "16.   The Immigration Judge found  you  to  be  incredible  and
                stated that he could not discount that you had  concocted  a
                simple story and committed it to memory for the sole purpose
                of trying to obtain asylum in the UK.


           17.    The Judge did not accept that the Sri Lankan  authorities
                would wait three years to issue an  arrest  warrant  for  an
                individual who, bailed by a court, had not  adhered  to  his
                reporting restrictions. He also noted that no  evidence  was
                received to support your claims  of  medical  treatment  and
                diagnosis in Sri Lanka following your alleged ill-treatment,
                and no  arrest  warrant  has  been  provided  or  any  court
                documents relating to your bail. It is of note that  despite
                you being aware of this lack of documentary  evidence  since
                your  appeal  on  21/02/2013  none  of  the   aforementioned
                evidence has ever been produced.


           18.    The Immigration Judge found you inconsistent  in  several
                parts of your  evidence  including  your  alleged  treatment
                during  your  detention,  your  subsequent  injuries,   your
                fathers and uncles supposed arrest and the advice you  claim
                to have received regarding claiming  asylum,  again  despite
                being aware of these inconsistencies since  your  appeal  in
                2013 no explanation has been given for these discrepancies.


           19.    The Judge concluded that the risk you faced by  returning
                to Sri Lanka  was  that  of  having  made  an  asylum  claim
                abroad."

   19. There is arguable merit in Mr Tan's submission that the Judge  failed
       to consider the earlier decision with the required degree of  anxious
       scrutiny as  the  Judge  was  required  to  in  accordance  with  the
       Devaseelan principles.  The  Devaseelan  principles  do  not  prevent
       another judge from making  a  decision  that  is  different  to  that
       previously considered if the evidence warrants such  a  finding,  but
       there  is  merit  in  the  submission  that  the  Judge's   incorrect
       understanding of the earlier decision formed part of  the  belief  by
       the Judge that he was able to depart from the earlier findings or not
       give them appropriate weight.
   20. Mr Tan also refers to  the  Judge's  finding  at  [39]  where  it  is
       written:

           "39.    I  consider  the  Appellant's  detention.  It   is   the
                Appellant's case he was detained in 2009 and was ill-treated
                for about 5 days. It transpired the Appellant also stated he
                was sexually  abused  whilst  in  detention.  This  was  not
                mentioned previously. In oral evidence the Appellant said he
                did not want to mention it to his  own  Solicitor,  who  was
                female, and he was embarrassed and ashamed by it. I was  not
                provided with the asylum interview but  accept  it  was  not
                mentioned. I also accept it was  not  mentioned  before  the
                previous Immigration Judge. I note it was mentioned  in  the
                fresh representations but not dealt with specifically in the
                refusal letter."

       Mr Tan criticises the Judge for not engaging with MSHM's  explanation
       especially as at the previous hearing MSHM was represented by a  male
       advocate from his previous solicitors, Liyon Legal Limited, which  it
       was said undermined his claimed reason he was unable to disclose  any
       sexual assault was as a result of his having a female solicitor.
   21. Mr Tan also referred to [41] in which the Judge finds:

           "41.   In the objective context, I note the fact-finding  report
                states at 6.1.5 that there is torture  in  police  detention
                and that this is random, widespread and  across  the  board.
                There was a perception 'without assault you  won't  get  the
                truth'. I note the previous Judge noted  some  discrepancies
                in the account of ill treatment (see paragraph  49).  I  was
                not  provided  with   the   interview   from   which   these
                discrepancies  were  taken.  Notwithstanding  this,   I   am
                satisfied having regard to the psychiatric  evidence  before
                me,  the  fact-finding  report  and  the  Appellant's   oral
                evidence on this, I accept he was  sexually  ill-treated  in
                Sri Lanka by the authorities at the time."

   22. The Judge is criticised on the basis the information in the 2020 fact-
       finding report was  available  to  the  Judge  in  the  2013  country
       guidance case and prior. The Secretary of  State  asserts  the  Judge
       failed to give adequate reasons for why it was accepted that evidence
       had established a claim to the required lower standard especially  in
       light of the lack of material evidence and what is  said  to  be  the
       bare acceptance of the core aspects of MSHM's claim without  adequate
       reasoning or justification.
   23. Even though there is  reference  in  the  country  material  to  ill-
       treatment by some members of the security forces in  Sri  Lanka,  the
       Judge was still required to consider the subjective assertion made by
       MSHM and give adequate reasons as to why it was found weight could be
       placed upon that which, when  combined  with  the  country  evidence,
       established that the  required  lower  standard  of  proof  had  been
       discharged.
   24. A similar argument arises in relation to the  report  of  Dr  Dhumad,
       which covered some but not all matters to which the Judge appears  to
       accept as being determinative of the issue. There  is  merit  in  the
       submission that there was no cross-referencing in the report  to  the
       previous judicial findings and how  that  would  impact  upon  MSHM's
       account and diagnosis based upon the same.
   25. The original judge commented upon the  lack  of  evidence  which  had
       still not been provided before the Judge, which is the basis for  the
       assertion that ample time had been allowed to provide the same  which
       had not been provided.
   26. The Judge is also criticised for finding at [44]:

           "44.   I note the Appellant has not produced the arrest  warrant
                or documents that he wanted to produce previously.  In  oral
                evidence, he said he believed it was before the Court as  it
                had been handed in previously by  his  last  solicitor.  His
                current solicitor was not aware of this. I accept this was a
                genuine misunderstanding by the Appellant and  do  not  hold
                this against him."

   27. There was no evidence before the Judge other than  MSHM's  contention
       that the document had been handed in and it is not mentioned  in  the
       decision that the document was in the Court file. The  Judge  appears
       to have failed to contemplate another plausible  explanation  of  the
       reason such documents had not been provided, which was that they  did
       not exist. The Secretary of State's criticism is that the Judge  made
       a concession to the relevant evidential requirements rarely  afforded
       to the Home Office without giving adequate reasons or an  explanation
       for why that concession was given. I find there is arguable merit  in
       the Secretary States concerns that raise the  issue  of  the  Judge's
       failing to consider the evidence properly and making finding  without
       having properly considered the matter in sufficient detail  and  that
       are not supported by  adequate  reasons.   MSHM's  claim  came  as  a
       surprise to the current solicitor which  is  relevant,  for  had  the
       documents existed and been handed in there would no doubt  have  been
       copies on the file or a note to reflect the fact they had been handed
       to the court previously. The Judge also appears  to  have  failed  to
       consider the Upper Tribunal decision of TK (Burundi) in  relation  to
       this issue.
   28. The Judge is also criticised for accepting MSHM's oral evidence  that
       his prescription of sertraline had increased to 100 mg when there was
       no evidence to support this or to show that his GP had  made  such  a
       prescription.
   29. A further example of the Judge appearing to accept MSHM's  assertions
       without more is at [43] in relation to MSHM's claim that since  being
       in the United Kingdom he has attended some Tamil events and  assisted
       the  TGTE  voluntarily.   At  [50]  the  Judge  finds  MSHM  will  be
       identified as a Tamil activist involved in the diaspora violating the
       territorial integrity of  Sri  Lanka.  The  Judges  findings  do  not
       identify the source of such evidence. Mr Tan refers to there being no
       evidence of this in the  appeal  bundles.  This  submission  was  not
       countermanded by Mr Thompson. The absence  of  any  evidence  of  sur
       place activities of a sufficient degree so as to  create  a  credible
       real risk undermines the Judges findings both as to whether MSHM  was
       involved in the same and any risks that may arise on return.
   30. The Judge's finding that MSHM will appear on a 'watch list'  is  also
       based upon the Judge's assessment of the merits but there is arguable
       merit in Mr Tans assertion  the  decision  is  infected  by  material
       error, including the assertion the Judge failed to properly apply the
       country guidance case of GJ and others [2013] UKUT 319 when assessing
       whether MSHM would face a current risk from current activities.
   31. Mr Thompson did his best to counter the Secretary States  submissions
       but disagreement with them is not enough, on the facts. Whilst I have
       in mind the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in KB (Jamaica)  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1385
       reminding the Upper Tribunal and other  appellate  courts  that  they
       should not interfere with findings of fact  or  decisions  of  judges
       whose determinations they are considering unless there is good reason
       to do so, I find that even though cumulatively individual aspects  of
       Mr Tan's challenge may  not  warrant  interfering  with  the  Judge's
       decision the cumulative effect of the issues set out above, including
       concerns regarding the Judge's starting point as per  the  Devaseelan
       principles, leads me to find the decision is un-safe. It has not been
       made out that had all aspects of the appeal been considered  properly
       the decision would have been the same.  It  was  incumbent  upon  the
       Judge to analyse the material carefully and resolve any disputes that
       arose and to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings  made.  The
       Secretary of State's case raised a number of relevant issues creating
       a conflict between the parties which the Judge failed  to  adequately
       deal with.
   32. It was accepted that  in  light  of  the  errors  and  the  need  for
       substantial fact-finding on the basis of  the  correct  approach  and
       assessment of the evidence, and in accordance with  the  Presidential
       Guidance on the remittal of appeals, that it is  appropriate  in  all
       the circumstances for this appeal to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to be considered afresh by judge other than Judge Maka.

Decision

   33. The First-tier Judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
       sitting at Hatton Cross to enable it to be heard afresh  by  a  judge
       other than Judge Maka, de novo.

  Anonymity.

   34. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 November 2020
