
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00553/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 9 April 2021                  |On the 21 April 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between
                                     K N
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Frantzis, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Vietnam,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Sills)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   her
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         8 October 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions indicating that it was provisionally of  the  view  that
         the error of law issue could be determined without  a  face-to-face
         hearing and that this could take place via Skype. Both parties have
         indicated that they were content for the hearing to proceed by this
         method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties. I am  grateful  for
         their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

      4. The hearing took place on 9 April  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. The advocates attended  remotely  via  video  as  did  the
         appellant and E so that they could listen and observe the  hearing.
         There were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems
         were encountered  during  the  hearing  and  I  am  satisfied  both
         advocates were able to make their respective cases  by  the  chosen
         means. I am grateful for their  assistance  and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:


      5. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      6. The appellant is a Vietnamese national who  stated  that  she  left
         Vietnam for France in December  2016  and  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom on 26th February 2017 and made a claim  for  asylum  on  21
         September 2017. The factual claim made by the  appellant  was  that
         when she had left  Vietnam  aged  16  she  had  been  a  victim  of
         trafficking and had been the victim of  a  serious  sexual  assault
         during that process.

      7. On 16  October  2019,  the  National  Referral  Mechanism  ("NRM"),
         accepted that the appellant had  been  broadly  consistent  in  her
         account  and  that  she  had  been   subjected   to   an   act   of
         transportation, transfer harbouring and receipt, that she was 16 at
         the point of the acts and thus did not need to show any element  of
         force, threats, coercion as she was below the age  of  consent  but
         that the account indicated that she was not subjected to these acts
         for the purposes of sexual exploitation but accepted that  she  had
         been the victim of a serious sexual assault.

      8. The respondent refused her claim  in  a  decision  letter  dated  6
         January 2020 and beyond accepting her nationality, did  not  accept
         the factual account  given  or  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
         trafficking  and  thus  there  was  no  risk  on  return.  In   the
         alternative, it  was  considered  that  there  was  sufficiency  of
         protection on return, or she could internally relocate. Her article
         8 claim was also rejected.

      9. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT on the 25 September
         2020. In  a  decision  promulgated  on  8  October  2020  the  FtTJ
         dismissed her appeal.

     10. The FtTJ accepted the appellant's account that  she  had  been  the
         subject of a serious sexual assault whilst in France by one of  the
         individuals involved in bringing her from  Vietnam  to  Europe  but
         beyond that did not accept her account for the reasons set  out  at
         [15 - 28]. The judge  set  out  a  number  of  adverse  credibility
         findings in relation to her account.

     11. Having made those findings of fact,  and  addressing  the  risk  on
         return, the judge reached the conclusion that the  appellant  would
         not be at risk from those who had brought her to the  UK  and  that
         there was no ongoing intention to exploit the appellant any further
         nor was there any motivation for seeking to contact or  in  essence
         to re-traffic the appellant. Part of the assessment made  was  that
         the appellant could return to live with her mother.  Reference  was
         made to the  report  of  Dr  Tran  (the  country  expert)  and  the
         respondents CPIN and the judge concluded  that  the  only  relevant
         factor relevant to risk was that the appellant knew her  trafficker
         but considered that this alone would not significantly increase the
         risk of the  appellant  being  re-trafficked.  At  [33]  the  judge
         concluded that even if any of the group did  seek  to  contact  re-
         traffic the  appellant,  she  would  have  the  protection  of  the
         authorities in her home area or in the alternative at [34] even  if
         at risk in a home area, the appellant  could relocate  to  a  major
         city. Thus the judge dismissed the appeal against the refusal of  a
         protection claim. At [36 - 37].  The  judge  also  carried  out  an
         analysis of  the  article  8  claim  but  found  that  removal  was
         proportionate.

     12. Permission to appeal was sought on five grounds and permission  was
         granted by UTJ Martin on 10 November 2020.

     13. Ms Frantzis,  who  had  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         appeared on behalf of the appellant and  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. There was no Rule 24 response issued  on  behalf
         of the respondent.

     14. At the outset of the hearing Ms Frantzis informed the Tribunal that
         the parties had the opportunity to discuss the issues  set  out  in
         the grounds of appeal and upon which permission had been granted by
         UTJ Martin and that it was accepted on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         that the grounds disclosed the making of an error  on  a  point  of
         law. In particular, and relevant to Ground 3 which related  to  the
         failure to record or make any findings on the evidence of a witness
         that had been called to give evidence, Mr Diwncyz had  checked  the
         notes of the Presenting Officer and  confirmed  that  evidence  had
         been given.

     15. There are 5 grounds advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  which
         challenged the factual findings and assessment of risk made by  the
         FtTJ and which were instrumental in the decision  of  the  FtTJ  to
         dismiss the appeal. It is not necessary to set  out  all  of  those
         grounds, but they also include an  error  of  fact  (ground  4),  a
         failure to take account of oral evidence given before the  tribunal
         (ground 3) and failure to take into account aspects of  the  expert
         report when reaching a decision on risk (ground 5).

     16. The challenge to the factual  findings  and  the  failure  to  take
         account of material evidence (the evidence of E) were  material  to
         the outcome. As the ground 3 sets out,  the  witness  E  gave  oral
         evidence  before  the  FtTJ  that  were  relevant  to  the  factual
         assessment of the appellant's claim but there was  no  separate  or
         any analysis of that evidence in the decision. The  only  reference
         that I can see in the decision is that at [37] but that was not  in
         the context of the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  factual
         history and the relationship with T with  whom  the  appellant  had
         initially lived with. As set out above, Mr Diwnycz  confirmed  from
         the notes that the witness did give evidence and agreed  that  that
         evidence was material  evidence  which  has  not  been  taken  into
         account in the factual findings at [20] relevant to the appellant's
         relationship with T and also the issue of the  appellant's  contact
         with her mother.

     17. That is also relevant to the  assessment  of  the  expert  evidence
         which  set  out  the  importance  of   family   support   and   the
         disadvantages for those who cannot return to  their  families.  The
         FtTJ considered this at [31],  but  as  a  result  of  the  factual
         findings the FtTJ concluded that the appellant could return to live
         with her mother and that it had been her mother who  had  paid  for
         the travel and therefore would  the appellant would not  fall  into
         the category of those  who  need  access  to  a  social  protection
         centre. However, as the  respondent  accepts,  that  assessment  is
         relies upon  the  factual  findings  relating  to  the  appellant's
         account and relies in part on the evidence of E in conjunction with
         the evidence of the appellant.  I  recognise  that  the  FtTJ  also
         undertook an analysis of the issue of internal relocation (at [34])
         on the basis of not returning to her mother, however as the factual
         findings are challenged I cannot be certain  that  this  assessment
         would also not be affected.

     18. The respondent concedes that the grounds of challenge are made  out
         and that they were material to the outcome and as such the decision
         should be set aside. In the light of that concession  and  for  the
         reasons set out in the grounds which the respondent accepts as made
         out, I am satisfied that as this was a protection  claim  involving
         issues  of  trafficking  and  sexual  exploitation  and  thus   the
         requirement of anxious scrutiny applied, the findings of  fact  are
         unsafe and therefore cannot stand.

     19. For the reasons agreed between the parties, I am satisfied that  it
         has been demonstrated that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the
         making of an error on a point of law and that the  decision  should
         be set aside.

     20. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                  (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     21. Ms Frantzis submits that the venue for hearing the appeal should be
         the FtT. I have considered that submission in the light of the
         practice statement recited above and by reference to the history of
         this claim.  There will be the necessity for evidence to be given
         and therefore further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the
         analysis of risk on return in the light of the relevant documentary
         evidence. In my judgement the best course and consistent with the
         overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a
         hearing.

     22. I have considered whether  any  of  the  factual  findings  can  be
         preserved and in doing  so  have  considered  the  decision  in  AB
         (preserved FtT findings; Wisniewski principles)  [2020]  UKUT  268.
         The decision makes it plain that there is no hard- edged answer  to
         whether findings of fact have been "undermined"  or  "infected"  by
         any "error or errors of law".  The  decision  also  identifies  the
         legal error in  the  task  of  assessing  an  individual's  overall
         credibility is in general likely to affect the  conclusions  as  to
         credibility reached by the First-tier Tribunal. When looking at the
         decision in  this  appeal,  the  grounds  of  challenge  sought  to
         undermine the approach to the appellant's credibility taken by  the
         FtTJ as a whole as well as the evidence of  a  supporting  witness.
         Having considered this issue I have reached the conclusion none  of
         the findings of fact should be preserved.

     23. I further observe that at paragraph [7] of the  decision  the  FtTJ
         noted an inconsistency in the decision making (which was  reflected
         in the grant of  permission).  That  should  be  rectified  and  if
         necessary,  an  addendum  or  note  should  be  provided   by   the
         respondent.

     24. Any further directions can be determined at the CMRH before the FtT
         and will include any application made for an all -female court.

     25. I also record that the appellant's consolidated bundle is not  with
         the file. I have an electronic copy of the consolidated bundle. The
         evidence relied upon by the  appellant  must  be  provided  to  the
         tribunal in either paper form or by electronic means.

     26. Further directions should also include any issues of  vulnerability
         identified  by  the  parties  in  accordance   with   the   of   AM
         (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 1123 in which Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President, referred
         to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No.  2  of  2010:  Child,
         Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note")  and
         also the Practice Direction, First-tier and Upper  Tribunal  Child,
         Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses.



Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
The decision will be remitted to the FtT for a  hearing  on  a  date  to  be
fixed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 12 April 2021

