


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/00459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 6th October 2016                        |Promulgated                    |
|                                           |On 7th October 2016            |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [G I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M C Benitez, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 1st September 1988.   She
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated 23rd December 2015  to
    refuse her asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.

 3. On 1st August 2016 First Tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. The Respondent filed grounds for permission to appeal on the  following
    bases

      i) the judge gave no  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant's
         father would be involved with her registration

     ii) the Judge had no considered  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
         police  and  that  under  these  circumstances  she  would  require
         involvement from the father in registration.

    iii) the  judge  ignored  the  background  evidence  regarding  the  NGO
         shelters

     iv) the First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared to find all women in Albania
         were ill-treated because they were  women.   There  was  no  lawful
         justification for this on evidential terms.

    Permission to Appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Ransley.

 5. Ms Benitez at the hearing referred me to the  background  material  and
    attempted to persuade me that there was  no  material  error.   Ms  Pal
    relied essentially on the written grounds.

 6. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons  set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    confirms 'although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
    the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

 7. The difficulty with this decision is that the judge made  no  reference
    whatsoever to sufficiency of protection in his decision.  This, in turn
    may  well  affect  consideration  of  the   father's   involvement   in
    registration to the material on registration with regards  her  father.
    Nor did the judge make  any  assessment  of  the  availability  of  the
    facilities of NGO shelters in Albania.  There is, in  fact,  little  by
    way of establishing the facts save for a reference that, to the judge's
    surprise, the Respondent had  accepted  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    claim.    Although  the  judge  appears  to  accept  the   respondent's
    findings, his own findings, the analysis of background information  and
    the assessment of complex issues  are  essentially  compressed  into  3
    short paragraphs and are overly sparse.  The  decision  lacks  adequate
    findings as to the circumstances of the  appellant  and  further  lacks
    adequate reasoning with regards essential elements as cited above.    I
    find, therefore, an error of law which is material to the outcome.

 8. I note the appeal was allowed on humanitarian protection grounds  alone
    without final reference to refugee grounds or moreover to human  rights
    grounds.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 6th October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

