
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/00510/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 29 August 2017                     |          On 18 September 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                      Mr AHAMED NUSRATH MOHAMED ISMAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by KQ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtT) Judge Davidson sent  on
    24 March 2017 against a decision made by the respondent on  11  January
    2016 refusing to grant asylum or humanitarian protection.  The crux  of
    the appellant's challenge is that the  judge  erred  in  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim as not credible.  The appellant's claim was  that  he
    would be at risk on return because in 2010 he had been arrested and ill-
    treated by the authorities because they believed  he  was  involved  in
    actively assisting a high-ranking police officer, ASP Lakshman  Cooray,
    who had colluded with a bomb attack by LTTE operatives in April 2009.

2.   The factors the judge counted against the appellant's credibility  were
    that he had delayed five years before making an asylum claim;  that  he
    had ceased studying before the end of his student  visa;  that  it  was
    implausible he would have transported the three  LTTE  men  around  Sri
    Lanka in such a danger-ridden operation; that it was  unclear  how  the
    appellant could have known Cooray when Cooray worked in Jaffna  whereas
    the appellant worked in Matara on the other side of Sri Lanka; that the
    COI linked Cooray  with  a  political  assassination  of  a  government
    minister in 2008  and  three  unsuccessful  assassination  attempts  on
    former President Rajapaksa; that there was no COI linking Cooray to the
    April 2009 bombing in Matara; that the COI noted  Cooray  had  used  an
    official government vehicle in  Gumpaha  and  that  Cooray's  level  of
    activity in the LTTE was "far removed from the level of  asking  people
    like the Appellant to transport suicide bombers around to plant  random
    bombs among civilians" (paragraph 31); that  given  the  appellant  had
    never claimed LTTE membership it was  unlikely  he  would  have  become
    involved in the way he claimed; that his own particulars as to the time
    he heard the  bomb  blast  (11.45  a.m.)  were  inconsistent  with  the
    background COI showing it was 10.30 a.m; that it was  implausible  that
    despite the authorities on his account looking  for  him  since  August
    2009 he had been able to go about his  normal  business  until  January
    2010, especially as he claimed the  police  had  fingerprinted  him  in
    September 2009; that it was not credible that whilst claiming  to  have
    been arrested and tortured between 4 January 2010 and 31 January  2010,
    he also claimed to have been able to supply a photograph, fingerprints,
    and other biometrics as well as various supporting documents to confirm
    his application for a visa to study in the UK; and finally:

         "35. I note that he left Sri Lanka on his own  passport  on  before
             13.2.2010.  Again it is  simply  not  credible  that  someone,
             allegedly the associate  of  someone  who  was  implicated  in
             political assassinations such as Lakshman Cooray, and who  had
             recently been arrested and tortured by the authorities,  would
             have been allowed to leave  the  country  unhindered  so  soon
             after  his  arrest.   The  Appellant  claims  that  he  bribed
             officials, but it is extremely doubtful that someone  who  was
             associated with someone as high  profile  as  Lakshman  Cooray
             would  have  been  able  to  bribe  themselves  out  of   that
             situation".


3.   I am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  submissions,  Mr
    Gajjar's concisely amplifying the appellant's written grounds.

4.   I am not persuaded that the grounds disclose any error of  law  on  the
    part of the judge.

5.   It is contended that the judge erred by  failing  to  engage  with  the
    appellant's reasons for the delay in his claiming asylum.  Whilst it is
    correct that the judge does not spell out his reasons in paragraph  27,
    the judge was plainly aware of the terms in  which  Section  8  of  the
    Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act   2004
    stipulates behaviour damaging to credibility - he  actually  cites  the
    wording relating to "a reasonable opportunity" to make an asylum claim.
     Earlier the judge had noted that he took into account the  appellant's
    evidence which included his witness statement in which  he  offered  an
    explanation for the delay.  It is clear  from  paragraph  27  that  the
    judge agreed  with  the  respondent's  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant had not explained why he had failed to avail himself of  what
    was plainly a reasonable opportunity over the period since  he  entered
    the UK in February 2010 until he claimed asylum in September 2015.

6.   It is contended that the judge's finding that it was  implausible  that
    the appellant would have driven three LTTE men around  Colombo  at  the
    request of PC Cooray was flawed by  legal  error  because  it  did  not
    adequately consider the fact that the appellant knew Cooray due to  the
    latter coming to his shop four times a week to buy things for  his  own
    vehicles.  Again, whilst the judge does not  expressly  refer  to  this
    aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim,  it  is  entirely  clear  that  he
    considered it and found it did not square with the known  circumstances
    as to the way Cooray operated.  This ground voices a mere  disagreement
    with the judge's findings.  The same can be  said  for  the  contention
    that the judge was wrong to find it  implausible  the  appellant  would
    have become  involved  with  Cooray  in  transporting  the  three  LTTE
    operatives.

7.   I see nothing in the complaint that the judge erred by failing  to  put
    to the appellant the matter of he and Cooray being from  opposite  ends
    of  the  country.   The  appellant  was  represented  and   had   every
    opportunity to present his case.  It was not incumbent on the judge  to
    put to the appellant all the difficulties attaching to his account.

8.   It is submitted that the judge also erred in finding that  it  was  not
    likely the appellant would  have  been  able  to  take  all  the  steps
    necessary for  obtaining  a  student  visa  whilst  been  detained  and
    tortured - because this overlooked that the appellant employed the help
    of an agent.  This contention amounts again to a mere disagreement with
    the judge's findings; and the suggestion that the explanation proffered
    remedied all the concerns with this  aspect  of  his  claim  is  itself
    difficult to understand, certainly without any explanation of  how  the
    appellant was able to liaise with the agent whilst  in  detention  over
    this period to continue pursuing this application.

9.   I do not accept that the appellant can derive any assistance  from  the
    country guidance given at paragraph 394 of GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  CG
    00319 UKUT (IAC) as regards the pervasive bribery and  corruption  that
    exists  at  the  airport  in  Colombo.   That  paragraph  was   clearly
    addressing the general situation.  It did not address the likelihood of
    persons who had been identified as key suspects in high-profile acts of
    terrorism being able to utilise bribes to exit Sri Lanka.

10.  It is argued that the judge "demonstrably  fails  to  engage  with  the
    appellant's oral and written evidence  as  to  the  fact  that  he  had
    provided his fingerprints and photographs prior to being detained".   I
    fail to see any  force  in  this  submission.   What  the  judge  found
    implausible in the appellant's account was that he had been able on his
    own account to go about his business between August  2009  and  January
    2010, given that he said he had been worried they were looking for  him
    in August 2009.  In this context, his evidence  that  he  had  actually
    been fingerprinted in September 2009 "as part  of  their  investigation
    into his perceived links with the LTTE" only added  to  the  degree  of
    implausibility.

11.  Viewed in the round  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  credibility
    properly relied on a range of shortcomings in the appellant's  account,
    encompassing    both    material    inconsistencies     and     serious
    implausibilities.  The inconsistencies included both points of internal
    inconsistency and external inconsistency (lack of accord with COI).

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law, and the appellant's challenge fails.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 15 September 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey

