
[pic]


Upper Tribunal IA/29770/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00309/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Heard on 8th June 2017                   |on 26th June 2017                 |
|Prepared on 16th June 2017               |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                    [Z S]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Billie, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ] 1970. She  appealed
      against a decision of the Respondent dated 23rd of  December  2016  to
      refuse to grant her asylum. Her appeal was allowed at  first  instance
      by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hillis sitting at Bradford on 10th
      of February 2017. The Respondent appealed against  that  decision  and
      the matter came before me to determine whether there  was  a  material
      error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  For  the  reasons
      which I set out in more detail below I found that there was  an  error
      such that the decision was set aside and I re-heard the matter.  Thus,
      although the appeal initially came before  me  as  an  appeal  by  the
      Respondent, for the sake of convenience I will continue  to  refer  to
      the parties as they were known at first instance.


 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2001 with leave
    as a student valid until 2004. She was diagnosed  as  HIV  positive  in
    2003. She applied for further leave to remain on  25th  September  2004
    (five days before her leave was due to expire).  This  application  was
    rejected by the Respondent on  14th  April  2005  (the  refusal  letter
    appears to contain a misprint stating 2004 which would be an impossible
    date).  She  claims  she  did  not  receive  that  decision  from   the
    Respondent. In January 2011, she met her partner, [M]  and  they  began
    living together in December 2012. On 5th of March 2015 she applied  for
    leave to remain on private and family life grounds but this was refused
    by the Respondent on 28th of May  2015.  The  Appellant  appealed  that
    decision but subsequently withdrew her appeal. On 26th of June 2016 she
    applied for asylum which resulted in the  Respondent's  decision  dated
    23rd of December 2016 which led to these proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was summarised by Judge Hillis at  paragraphs  18
      to 22 of his determination. The Appellant had fled  Zimbabwe  in  fear
      for her life in 2001 as the Mugabe regime was killing people. She fled
      to South Africa where she obtained a genuine  Zimbabwean  passport  in
      her own name and with her own details. She  travelled  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 2001 using this  passport.  From  about  2009  onwards  the
      Appellant began attending the vigils on a  weekly  basis  outside  the
      Zimbabwean embassy in London demonstrating against the Mugabe  regime.
      The Appellant's fear was that she would have been  identified  at  the
      vigils by the Zimbabwean authorities as a result of which  they  would
      have an adverse interest in her due to her  political  opinion  should
      she be returned to Zimbabwe.


   4. She further argued that whether or not  she  was  credible  she  would
      nonetheless be at risk of persecution on arrival in  Zimbabwe  due  to
      the two-stage  test  of  questioning  at  the  airport.  According  to
      information contained in HS [2007] UKAIT 94 the purpose of the initial
      interview (the first of the two stages) is to  establish  whether  the
      deportee is of any interest to the CIO or the  security  services.  If
      such a political or relevant military  profile  is  suspected,  or  if
      there are outstanding criminal matters to be  resolved,  the  deportee
      will  be  taken  away  by  the  relevant  branch  of   the   CIO   for
      interrogation. This second stage interrogation carries with it a  real
      risk of serious mistreatment sufficient  to  constitute  a  breach  of
      Article 3.  The Appellant would be singled out for that  second  stage
      interrogation because of her prolonged absence from Zimbabwe (which is
      now some 16 years). She would be required to demonstrate  her  support
      for the regime and Zanu-PF which she would be unable to do.


   5. Her partner [M] had refugee status in the United Kingdom and would  be
      unable to accompany her to Zimbabwe which would breach her  Article  8
      right to family life with him. Further she  would  be  at  risk  as  a
      single female returning without male support to Zimbabwe. The lack  of
      adequate medication in Zimbabwe to treat her  medical  condition  also
      engaged Article 8 on the basis of a private and/or family  life  claim
      outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  Appellant  produced  photographs
      showing her attendance at the demonstrations which she submitted added
      significant evidential weight in support of her claim.


   6. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was credible  arguing
      that her activities in the United Kingdom were purely self-serving and
      it  was  not  likely  she  would  be  identified  by  the   Zimbabwean
      authorities attending the  vigils.  She  was  not  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with [M] as if she was he would be  supporting
      her application. He did not  attend  the  hearing  at  first  instance
      before Judge Hillis (and he did not attend the hearing before me). The
      Appellant had withdrawn her previous appeal  but  had  given  no  good
      reason why.

The Decision at First Instance

   7. At paragraphs 38 to 54 the Judge set out his reasons  why  he  allowed
      the appeal on asylum grounds. The Judge did not accept it was credible
      that the Appellant had left Zimbabwe illegally since she had  gone  to
      the Zimbabwean authorities in South Africa and obtained  a  Zimbabwean
      passport from them. She must have been  asked  for  identification  to
      obtain a passport and must have therefore  proved  to  the  Zimbabwean
      authorities that she was one of their nationals. If she  had  been  of
      adverse interest to the authorities at that time she  would  not  have
      been issued with a passport. In short, the Appellant had no  political
      profile when she left Zimbabwe, her political  activities  only  began
      once she had arrived in the United Kingdom when she  began  to  attend
      the vigils from 2009 onwards.


   8. The Judge accepted that a photograph of a building marked "Embassy  of
      the Republic" was indeed the Zimbabwean embassy.  A  letter  from  the
      Zimbabwe  vigil  coordinator  provided  significant  support  to   the
      Appellant's account that that photograph was taken outside the embassy
      and thus that the Appellant had  attended  vigils  as  a  regular  and
      active  participant  since  2009.  The  Judge  acknowledged  that  the
      evidence of the coordinator, Ms Benton, was not tested because she had
      not attended the hearing. However, the Judge noted from the background
      evidence  that  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  actively  monitored  the
      demonstrations outside their embassy  in  London  and  had  undercover
      officers mingling with those in attendance in support  of  the  vigil.
      The vigil was of a particularly high profile taking place at the  same
      time  every  Saturday.  It  was  therefore  extremely  easy  for   the
      Zimbabwean authorities to photograph and record those who attended the
      vigil who were protesting against the Mugabe regime and thus were  not
      supporters of Zanu-PF.


   9. The Judge then went on to consider these  facts  against  the  country
      guidance authorities. Unfortunately, it was at  this  stage  that  the
      Judge fell into an error of law. At paragraphs 48 and 50  he  referred
      to a relatively old country guidance case RN [2008] UKAIT 83.  On  the
      basis of this case he concluded that the Appellant would come  to  the
      attention of the Zimbabwean authorities on removal to  Harare  airport
      due to her attendance at the vigils and the period  of  time  she  had
      been outside Zimbabwe. She would be unable to demonstrate support  for
      the regime during the two-stage questioning she would face  whilst  in
      detention at the airport. She therefore came within one  of  the  risk
      category set out in RN. The risks were throughout the country in  both
      urban and rural areas and it was not  reasonable  or  viable  for  the
      Appellant to internally relocate. Article 3 stood  or  fell  with  the
      refugee claim.


  10. In relation to Article 8 the Judge noted the absence from the  hearing
      of the Appellant's claimed partner [M] but found no evidence that  [M]
      was in fact a recognised refugee. He had been granted indefinite leave
      to remain on the basis of settlement. No weight was  placed  on  [M]'s
      statement as he had not been questioned on it and  the  Appellant  had
      failed to show that she was in a relationship akin  to  marriage  with
      him. Her presence in the  UK  had  been  as  an  over-stayer  and  her
      relationship with [M] had taken place during that time. She could  not
      meet the Immigration Rules. Compelling circumstances would be required
      before she could succeed under Article 8 outside the  rules.  In  this
      case the compelling reasons were the basis for the Appellant's  asylum
      claim. The Judge allowed the appeal under both the Refugee  Convention
      and the Human Rights Convention.

The Onward Appeal

  11. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing that  the  Judge
      should have adjourned the matter for [M] to attend court  so  that  he
      could be cross examined. The Appellant's representative had made  such
      an application although one presumes that that  application  had  been
      made to strengthen the Appellant's claim under Article 8. This  rather
      weak onward appeal resulted in a refusal of permission by Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal Pedro on 27 March 2017. He rightly  observed  that
      the Respondent's grounds were misconceived  since  the  Appellant  had
      attended and gave oral evidence and had been cross examined. The Judge
      had given an adequate explanation why he had refused  to  adjourn  the
      matter for the attendance of the Appellant's partner.


  12. The Respondent renewed her application for permission  to  appeal  but
      this time on different grounds. The first bullet point of the  renewed
      application accepted that the  grounds  before  Judge  Pedro  did  not
      identify an arguable error of law. The grounds now submitted that  the
      First-tier had  allowed  the  appeal  without  applying  the  existing
      country guidance on returns to Zimbabwe. RN was several years  out  of
      date. The Judge had failed to apply the current country guidance  case
      of CM [2013] UKUT 59.  This  failure  led  to  incorrect  findings  in
      respect of risk on return and the ability to relocate internally.  The
      Judge's findings applied out of date and incorrect risk categories and
      this had materially affected the outcome of the appeal.


  13. The renewed grounds of onward appeal came before Upper Tribunal  Judge
      Kebede on the papers on 25th of April 2017. In granting permission  to
      appeal she wrote that there was arguable merit in the  assertion  that
      the Judge's assessment of risk  on  return  was  based  upon  arguably
      incorrect risk categories  and  thus  arguably  flawed  owing  to  his
      application of outdated country  guidance.  Following  that  grant  of
      permission directions were sent to the parties  that  they  should  be
      prepared that if the decision at the First-tier Tribunal was set aside
      as erroneous in law the remaking of the decision would take  place  at
      the same hearing. The fresh decision would normally be  based  on  the
      evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  any  further  evidence
      admitted together with the parties' arguments.  The  parties  must  be
      prepared accordingly in every case.


  14. The Appellant filed a reply under rule  24  of  the  Procedural  Rules
      responding  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.  The  rule  24
      submission noted those parts of the Appellant's case  which  had  been
      accepted  by  the  Judge  and  submitted  that  his  decision  was  in
      accordance with a Court of Appeal decision in EM [2009] EWCA Civ  1294
      even if it had not been  cited.  There  was  active  scrutiny  by  the
      Zimbabwean authorities of  MDC  activities  in  the  UK.  In  EM,  the
      Appellant had been taking part in vigils.  In  the  instant  case  the
      Appellant's profile had not been challenged by the Respondent  and  no
      other conclusion could be reached except that the Appellant  would  be
      persecuted on arrival at Harare airport. The grounds argued that  risk
      of persecution had been maintained in cases after RN and the Judge was
      aware of the two-stage interrogation process. There was  a  reasonable
      possibility that the Appellant would be  stopped  at  the  airport  on
      account of her prolonged absence from Zimbabwe. The  Judge's  decision
      was  neither  perverse  nor  so  lacking   in   reasons   as   to   be
      unintelligible. No error of law was disclosed.


  15. The Appellant could not safely return to her home town  of  Zvishavane
      which it was claimed, was located in the Midlands province of Zimbabwe
      (but see below paragraph 30). In the case of EM serious concerns  were
      expressed about the position of Zimbabwean citizens returning from the
      United Kingdom after a significant absence to  live  in  the  Midlands
      province. In any event once the Judge determined  that  the  Appellant
      would be stopped, interrogated and persecuted at the airport the issue
      of internal  relocation  was  no  longer  relevant.  The  Respondent's
      grounds were no more than a disagreement with the result.

The Error of Law Stage

  16. The first issue I had to determine was whether there  was  a  material
      error of law such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
      be set aside. I heard submissions  from  both  representatives  before
      giving my decision that there was a material error of law because  the
      Judge had followed out of date  country  guidance.  I  now  give  full
      reasons in this section of my determination.


  17. The Respondent argued that  there  had  been  significant  changes  in
      Zimbabwe since RN was decided. The Appellant  was  from  the  area  of
      Gwanda as could be seen from her birth certificate. If the  Judge  had
      considered the up to date country guidance of CM and considered  where
      the Appellant came from in Zimbabwe, he would have seen that there was
      no risk on return to the Appellant in her  home  area.  In  reply  the
      Appellant's representative argued that whether or  not  the  Appellant
      came from Matabeleland that was not the correct position. It was  said
      to be common ground that she came from the Midlands area. She was born
      in Gwanda but the issue of a person's home  area  was  a  question  of
      fact. HS Zimbabwe was still good law and all the subsequent cases  had
      maintained that guidance regarding interrogation at the  airport.  The
      Appellant's  sur  place  activism  was  not  challenged  under   cross
      examination.


  18. I considered  the  submissions  both  written  and  oral  that  I  had
      received. The position in Zimbabwe at the time that RN was decided was
      significantly different to the position in that country  by  the  time
      the Upper Tribunal came to give fresh country guidance on Zimbabwe  in
      2013 in the case of CM. Indeed, had  there  not  been  any  change  in
      country conditions since RN was decided there would have  been  little
      point in the Upper Tribunal giving country guidance in  CM.  The  head
      note referred specifically to the Tribunal being entitled to find that
      there had been a durable change since RN. Certain risk categories such
      as teachers remained at risk in 2013 but that is not suggested  to  be
      relevant in this case.


  19. The issue to be determined was whether in applying  RN  to  the  facts
      which he had found the Judge  had  fallen  into  error.  When  RN  was
      decided the economy in Zimbabwe was in a very poor state with  rampant
      hyperinflation. The position now was that a returnee  to  Matabeleland
      was highly unlikely to face significant difficulties from  the  regime
      even if they were an MDC  member  or  supporter.  There  had  been  no
      increase in risk at the point of return since HS. On the contrary, the
      available evidence as to the treatment of those who had been  returned
      to Harare airport since 2007 and the absence of any reliable  evidence
      of risk they might have faced meant that there  was  no  justification
      for extending the scope of who might be regarded by the authorities as
      an MDC activist.


  20. It was clear that by applying out of date country guidance given at  a
      time when the position in Zimbabwe was very different to  what  it  is
      now the Judge fell into error. Quite  why  more  up  to  date  country
      guidance was not presented to the Judge was  not  at  all  clear.  The
      Appellant's representative who appeared  before  me  had  appeared  at
      first instance but neither representative at the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier had seen fit to provide the Judge with  up-to-date  country
      guidance. In those circumstances, there was always  going  to  be  the
      danger that the assessment of  risk  upon  return  for  the  Appellant
      (whose claim was essentially a sur place claim) would fall into error.
      I found that it did  and  announced  that  I  was  setting  aside  the
      decision of the First-tier.

The Substantive Rehearing

  21. I invited Mr Billie for the Appellant to call his client in the  event
      that he wanted her to give further evidence and also  for  her  to  be
      available for cross examination. It was put to the  Appellant  by  the
      Presenting Officer that when interviewed she had said she was born  in
      Zvishavane and later went to Gwanda (contradicted by what was said  on
      her birth certificate) but also said that  the  two  places  were  the
      same. She believed that there had been a mistake in the interpretation
      and did not remember saying that Zvishavane and Gwanda were  the  same
      (but see her answer recorded at question 106). The Appellant was  also
      invited to comment on paragraph 205 of CM which stated that there  was
      no evidence to show that the authorities were likely to detain and ill
      treat a person at the airport merely for having attended a MDC  branch
      meeting in the United Kingdom. The Appellant replied that people  were
      being arrested almost every day in Harare on  arrival.  The  Appellant
      denied that she was from Matabeleland. It was a mistake to say she was
      born in Gwanda in Matabeleland.

Closing Submissions

  22. For the Respondent, it was argued that  the  Appellant  had  said  she
      lived in Zvishavane but she had told the Home Office she was  born  in
      Gwanda.  She  was  seeking  to  hide  the  fact  that  she  was   from
      Matabeleland. Even someone with an  anti-government  profile  was  far
      less likely to be at risk there. Her excuse that it was a  translation
      error did not  explain  the  very  clear  answers  she  had  given  in
      interview. When she said in interview that Zvishavane and Gwanda  were
      the same that was her opportunity to point out if there  had  been  an
      error but she had not done so. The evidence strongly suggested it  was
      most unlikely she would be of any interest to the authorities  at  the
      point of return. Matabeleland would be the correct place  for  her  to
      relocate and she would be highly unlikely to face  difficulties  there
      from the authorities including the security forces. That was the  case
      even if the returnee was  an  MDC  member  or  supporter.  Taking  the
      Appellant's case at its highest that  she  attended  vigils  it  still
      meant her claim could not  succeed.  She  would  not  be  at  risk  in
      Matabeleland and it was not unduly harsh for her  to  relocate  there.
      The claim must fail in the light of the correct country guidance.


  23. In closing for the Appellant reference was made to the guidance in CM.
      The risk on return had to be assessed in accordance with the  guidance
      of HS. A returnee who had a political profile or had been involved  in
      sur place activities would be persecuted on  arrival.  Decision-makers
      had to take into account the activities of the  Zimbabwean  police  in
      the United Kingdom. For the 2nd time there had been  no  challenge  to
      the Appellant's sur place activism. Evidence about her profile was  in
      the public domain, anyone who googled her name could  find  her.  That
      distinguished her profile from someone who had attended one or two MDC
      meetings. If one looked at the  length  of  her  activism  she  was  a
      genuine member of the MDC. It was safe to conclude  that  her  profile
      had come to the attention of the authorities.


  24. There would be no record of her exit from Zimbabwe at all. It  was  an
      offence to travel on a foreign passport outside Zimbabwe. She would be
      questioned about that. She would be asked whether she had ever claimed
      asylum or criticised the regime and she would not be able to lie about
      that. She grew  up  in  Zvishivane  which  she  called  home.  Lengthy
      submissions were made at first instance in support of her claim  under
      paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  There   were   very
      significant obstacles  to  her  return.  These  included  her  medical
      condition which had to be looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  general
      collapse of the health system in Zimbabwe with a shortage of drugs and
      the ostracism of those suffering from that type of  health  condition.
      In relation to the claim under the Immigration Rules  (which  appeared
      not to have been dealt with substantively by the Judge) the Respondent
      relied on the refusal letter. Finally, in conclusion  the  Appellant's
      representative said the Appellant would be at risk on the airport  and
      there was a risk in her home area.

Findings

  25. The Appellants claim is essentially a sur place claim. The authorities
      had no interest in her when she left  Zimbabwe  and  there  is  little
      beyond her own assertion that she left illegally. The First-tier Judge
      rejected that claim and I can see no basis for the claim made  by  her
      representative that the Appellant had ever travelled abroad on a false
      or a non-Zimbabwean passport. The First-tier Judge did not accept  any
      such argument and I too find it has no merit. I deal with the issue of
      the two-stage interrogation  below  but  I  do  not  accept  that  the
      Appellant would face any such interrogation because of  an  allegation
      she travelled on a non-Zimbabwean passport.


  26. The Respondent rejected the genuine nature of  the  Appellant's  claim
      indicating that she had made the  claim  in  bad  faith  in  order  to
      bolster an otherwise weak asylum claim.  The  authorities  make  clear
      that the issue in assessing a sur place claim is not the state of mind
      of the person putting forward the claim (whether  she  is  genuine  or
      otherwise) but whether the  authorities  would  become  aware  of  the
      Appellant's activities and if so would act adversely  upon  them.  The
      Respondent  doubts  that  the  authorities  would  be  aware  of   the
      Appellant's activities but as was submitted to me  by  the  Appellants
      representative,  the  Appellant  was  not  cross  examined  about  her
      activities. The Judge at first instance found that the activities  did
      take place.


  27. The question therefore is if the Appellant  were  to  be  returned  to
      Zimbabwe and her opposition activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
      known to the authorities (albeit that they are limited  to  attendance
      at Saturday afternoon vigils) would that put her at risk upon  return?
      The Appellant's argument is that the  country  guidance  in  HS  still
      applies and that  anyone  subjected  to  the  two-stage  interrogation
      process would succeed in a  claim  for  international  protection.  At
      paragraph 202 of CM the Upper  Tribunal  indicated  that  the  country
      guidance remained as given in  HS  but  the  duty  to  follow  country
      guidance under the practice direction was only to the extent that  the
      evidence was the same or similar to that which  had  been  before  the
      Tribunal in HS. To say  therefore  that  the  Appellant  must  succeed
      because of HS assumes that  the  authorities  would  have  an  adverse
      interest in a low ranking MDC supporter as the Appellant is.


  28. I say low ranking because  when  one  looks  at  the  Appellant's  own
      description of what she has done for the opposition in  this  country,
      selling T-shirts, dancing, giving out flyers and travelling  alone  to
      the vigils, it is difficult to find that the Appellant's participation
      in the vigils is anything  other  than  low  level.  Significantly  Ms
      Benton on whom the  Appellant  relied  in  support  of  the  claim  to
      participate in the vigil has never made herself available  for  cross-
      examination  for  example  on  her  knowledge  of  the  scope  of  the
      Appellant's activities. The Judge accepted  Ms  Benton's  evidence  in
      generic terms, that vigils existed and were monitored  but  I  do  not
      accept that any weight can be placed on untested  evidence  about  the
      Appellant's claimed profile in the opposition. The  evidence  received
      by the Upper Tribunal in CM (see paragraph 205 thereof) was that there
      was no justification for regarding low level  MDC  supporters  as  the
      sort of activists who would be likely to fall foul of the  authorities
      as set out in HS. There was no evidence to show that  the  authorities
      would detain and torture a person for attending an MDC branch  meeting
      in the United Kingdom. In my view that extends to low level activities
      around vigils.


  29. In the light of the Judge's findings of  fact  at  first  instance,  I
      accept that this case has to be looked at taking the Appellant's  case
      at its highest but even at its highest in the  light  of  the  changed
      situation in Zimbabwe and the  changed  country  guidance  it  is  not
      possible to come to the same conclusion on the need for  international
      protection that the Judge at first instance came to. At paragraph  203
      of CM it was said that the evidence as a whole  revealed  no  case  of
      scrutiny for loyalty at the airport. Nor were there any roadblocks  en
      route from the airport to Harare or Bulawayo  where  checks  might  be
      made on sympathies to the  peril  of  those  who  could  not  honestly
      proclaim support for ZANU-PF. An expert who gave evidence to the Upper
      Tribunal when pressed could not give  any  example  of  such  a  thing
      happening since 2009. I do not accept  therefore  that  the  Appellant
      would be at any risk upon return at Harare airport.


  30. The Appellant's evidence on  where  she  was  born  and  grew  up  was
      muddled. The  Respondent's  submission  was  that  the  Appellant  was
      altering her evidence as she went along to shore it up by  saying  she
      was from the Midlands province a risk area according  to  the  country
      guidance. She was born in Gwanda in South Matabeleland which is not  a
      risk area and in interview she was ambiguous as to where she had grown
      up. When I asked her to identify where in Zimbabwe  was  the  town  of
      Zvishavane she hesitated for a  very  long  time  and  appeared  quite
      uncertain eventually venturing  that  it  was  in  the  north  of  the
      country. In fact, Zvishavane  is  also  in  South  Matabeleland.  This
      explains the appellant's answer in interview that both towns were  the
      same. They are two different towns but crucially they are both in  the
      same safe area. I see no reason why the Appellant could not travel  to
      Matabeleland where she grew up, upon return.


  31. I do not find that the Appellant  has  been  truthful  either  to  the
      Respondent or to me in relation to where she has grown up in  Zimbabwe
      and I cannot therefore accept her argument that she would be destitute
      upon return without any form of support. The  Appellant  is  not  from
      Harare and there would be no risk from the point of  view  of  someone
      engaging in anti-regime activities in Harare since the Appellant could
      reasonably be expected to return to her home area upon return. As  the
      Appellant cannot demonstrate that she would be at risk upon  return  I
      dismiss her appeal under the  Refugee  Convention.  Her  appeal  under
      Article 3 falls with that decision. It cannot  be  said  that  country
      conditions in Zimbabwe are so bad that  the  Appellant  could  succeed
      under Article 15 C of the qualification directive or in respect  of  a
      claim for humanitarian protection.


  32.  That  leaves  the  Appellant's  claim  under  the  Immigration  Rules
      paragraph 276 ADE and outside the Rules under Article 8. The Appellant
      puts her claim under paragraph 276 ADE on two  bases.  She  says  that
      there will be very significant obstacles  to  her  reintegration  into
      Zimbabwe because of the risk  to  her  upon  return.  I  have  already
      dismissed that  and  therefore  reject  that  as  a  very  significant
      obstacle. The other basis is that she has been out of  the  country  a
      long time and has  a  serious  medical  condition  for  which  she  is
      receiving treatment in the United Kingdom which would not otherwise be
      available to her in Zimbabwe.


  33. There is no evidence that the position is still as  it  was  under  RN
      that someone who has been out of the country for  a  long  time  would
      face  significant  difficulties  where  for  example  they   went   to
      Matabeleland. Persons going to other areas might find a requirement to
      demonstrate loyalty but this would not apply to the Appellant for  the
      reasons which I have set out at some length above.  The  return  of  a
      failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom having no significant MDC
      profile would not lead to that person facing a real risk of having  to
      demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF. As I  have  indicated,  the  low-level
      activities of the Appellant mean that she does not have a  significant
      MDC profile even on her own case.


  34. The length of time that she has been out of the country is  of  little
      relevance, the Appellant would be returned as a failed  asylum  seeker
      and all the case law indicates that that  of  itself  does  not  bring
      risk. Similarly, difficulties in  obtaining  medication  are  also  of
      marginal significance. As I have indicated the  position  in  Zimbabwe
      has changed since RN was decided. Whilst medication may  be  difficult
      at times to obtain it is not completely unobtainable as the background
      evidence shows.  Whilst the standard of  healthcare  in  that  country
      might be lower than that of the United Kingdom that does not of itself
      mean that the Appellant can succeed. I do not consider the Appellant's
      medical condition amounts  to  a  very  significant  obstacle  to  her
      reintegration. The Appellant gave her evidence to me in Shona  as  she
      gave her evidence at first instance. She speaks the local language and
      has clearly not lost all ties to her home country. I therefore dismiss
      her claim that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
      reintegration and I dismiss her claim under the Immigration Rules.


35. In relation to her  claim  outside  the  rules  under  Article  8,  the
    Appellant does not make any claim concerning her relationship with [M].
    That must be right. He did not attend at first instance and he did  not
    attend before me. Her claim in relation to  [M]  was  rejected  by  the
    Judge at first instance and I have seen nothing to indicate  that  that
    was wrong. Whilst the Appellant has established a private life of sorts
    in this country during the time she has been here,  for  much  of  that
    time she has been  here  without  leave.  Her  private  life  would  be
    interfered with by  requiring  her  to  return  to  Zimbabwe  but  that
    interference  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control because the Appellant has  overstayed  her  student
    visa. I find that  the  interference  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued because of the unlawful nature of her  stay  and
    the little weight to be given to a private life built up while she  was
    here unlawfully since the rejection of her 2004 application.   That  is
    to be contrasted with the very significant weight to be afforded on the
    Respondent's side. The  Appellant's  private  life  has  been  somewhat
    limited in its scope. She can resume her private life  upon  return  to
    her country of origin. I therefore dismiss the appeal under  the  Human
    Rights Convention and make no anonymity order as  there  is  no  public
    policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it  aside.  I  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant
asylum.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

Signed this 22nd day of June 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and the appeal was dismissed. There can be no fee award.

Signed this 22nd day of June 2017
.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

