
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00506/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2020                      |On 20 March 2020                     |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Henderson  promulgated  on  11  December   2019,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made as long ago as 27 December 2017 to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania whose case is that he was subject
    to trafficking within his own country, having been introduced to a  man
    called Arif who compelled him to smuggle drugs by  delivering  packages
    for him.  The details of the account are set out  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Henderson and in the refusal letter.  There is no need to  go  to
    them in any detail given the narrow thrust of the challenge made.

 3. Broadly speaking, the appellant's account involved as a core issue  his
    ability to leave Albania by picking up his passport and  then  crossing
    the border into the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ("FYROM")  at
    some point in 2015.  It is not in dispute that for a child of that  age
    in Albania to travel unaccompanied that there must be a proxy signed by
    the parents, permitting unaccompanied travel  which  is  given  to  the
    authorities.

 4. In reaching her decision the judge concluded that the appellant was not
    a credible witness.  In doing so, she made it clear from  paragraph  63
    that credibility was the key and at paragraph 68 she said that  whether
    or not he had the proxy document, when he left Albania was a key  issue
    as to his credibility stating

         "It is the fact that the appellant  denies  ever  having  seen  the
         proxy travel document or having used it, which was the key issue as
         to his credibility.  Acknowledgment of  the  proxy  document  would
         suggest the appellant's parents were complicit in his  leaving  the
         country, (as would the fact he travelled by car  and  not  by  bus)
         which,  in  turn  significantly  impacts  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's account as regards his  treatment  and  trafficking  by
         Arif."

 5. That this issue is key is repeated again at [70] and it is evident also
    that the judge had regard to the evidence put before her as to how  the
    system operates.  This is set  out  in  some  detail  at  [41]  of  the
    decision when she summarises, as she does at [47], the  evidence.   Put
    simply, the appellant's evidence is that he has never  seen  the  proxy
    document.

 6. The judge appears from what she says at both [ 41]  and  [47]  to  have
    assumed that when it was said that a proxy  document  was  needed,  was
    that it had to be in the appellant's possession to  cross  the  border.
    This is based on her interpretation of the  background  evidence  which
    had been put forward by the respondent.  I consider that her assessment
    of the evidence was fundamentally flawed.  There is no basis  on  which
    it could properly be inferred from  the  material  that  an  individual
    child who is travelling has to be in possession of the proxy  document.
    It is reasonable to assume that a proxy document is required for travel
    as an unaccompanied minor as that is implicit in what is  said  by  the
    Albanian authorities.  It is also implicit in the fact that they have a
    copy of it that this had to be supplied to the Albanian authorities  in
    order to be activated.  There is, as Mr Toal submits,  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the proxy document has to be handed over to  any  official
    when crossing a border (as opposed to being submitted  to  the  central
    office) or to be held with the passport.   It  may  well  be  that  the
    document is available online to border officials  or  there  is  a  box
    ticked on the passport record viewed by  officials  when  conducting  a
    check on someone leaving the country as they did clearly  did  in  this
    case somebody leaving the country.

 7. On that basis alone, the credibility finding  is  in  my  view  flawed.
    Given that the judge has said that this was a key issue and  given  the
    centrality of credibility in this case,  the  adverse  finding  is  not
    properly founded in the evidence.

 8. Mr Bramble however submits that this is not material  because  what  he
    submits is relevant in this case is that there is a discrepancy in  the
    appellant's evidence as to how he left the  country.   At  [41]  it  is
    recorded that he left Albania by car and that what this is evidence  of
    is that the appellant, or rather the proxy document  is  evidence  that
    the appellant's account of having left  the  country  spontaneously  is
    fundamentally wrong because of the need to prepare the proxy  document.



 9. I reject that submission for two principal reasons.  First, it  is  not
    that clear that is the reason the judge relied upon and second,  it  is
    of course entirely possible that a proxy document had been obtained  in
    the past and it matters not how it was obtained. It may well have  been
    obtained partly by the mother, partly under the influence of  Arif,  or
    it may have been entirely forged, but it does  not  matter,  but  given
    that a passport was obtained it is plausible that a smuggler wishing to
    use the appellant would also obtain  a  proxy  document  to  allow  the
    person to travel unaccompanied.  It does not matter because  the  point
    does not appear to have been the subject of submissions or the  details
    questioning, which would have supported that submission.

10. Turning to ground 2, I consider that this is made out too.   The  judge
    does, I accept, appear to have adopted in  certain  passages  a  higher
    test than is permissible in a protection claim, referring at  paragraph
    [46] to her not accepting the newspaper articles show conclusively that
    the proxy travel document in question is a forgery.

11. In addition, further examples appear at [48] where it is said  that  it
    is "unlikely" that the agent would leave the appellant's  passport  and
    money within easy access to the appellant.  At [49] where it is said it
    is "more likely" that he was assisted in  his  departure  and  also  at
    paragraphs [68] and [69], although less so.

12. Whilst these are indicative of a failure properly to apply the  correct
    test, had there been one single incidence of this,  I  might  not  have
    been persuaded that this is what had occurred in this case but I  find,
    viewing the evidence as a whole, and given that there  appeared  to  be
    five instances of this within the findings, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge did use  an  improperly  high  burden  of  proof  in  this  case.
    Accordingly, and for the reasons I have given  this  is,  already  with
    regard to ground 1, this is material.

13. Turning to ground 3, I consider that the judge did  not  properly  have
    regard to the report of  the  expert,  in  that  she  appears  to  have
    mischaracterised his evidence in certain passages, as is set out in the
    grounds of appeal.  However, given that for the reasons already stated,
    the credibility findings  and  indeed  the  findings  as  a  whole  are
    fundamentally flawed and have to be set aside, it is unnecessary to  go
    into any detail in addressing ground 3, given that the consequences  of
    findings that grounds 1 and 2 are made out, are that the decision  must
    be set aside as a whole it is unnecessary to go into any detail on that
    ground.  Accordingly, for these reasons I set aside the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I conclude that none of the findings of fact  can
    be sustained and that the decision  will  have  to  be  remade  in  its
    entirety.

14. In the circumstances, and in line with the relevant practice direction,
    I consider that the appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all issues; none of the findings of fact are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 13 March 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



