
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00090/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                            |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                zendjebil [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Zendjebil [R], was born on  [  ]  1987  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Algeria.  By a decision dated 19 May  2017,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hemingway found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    such that its decision fell to be set aside.  His  reasons  for  making
    that decision were as follows:

         1.   This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  brought
         with the permission of the judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First tier Tribunal (Judge LSL  Mensah  hereinafter
         "the Judge") made after a hearing of 6 October 2016, to dismiss his
         appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  16  December
         2015, refusing to grant him international protection.

         2.   In brief, the appellant, who is a national of Algeria and  who
         was born on [ ] 1987, had asserted, when claiming asylum,  that  he
         is gay, that such is disapproved of in  Algeria  and  that  matters
         having been discovered by his uncle, he was beaten by a  number  of
         persons.  He says that, in consequence, he fled Algeria fearing for
         his safety.  The Secretary of State, though,  did  not  accept  the
         truthfulness of his claims regarding his sexuality or (as logically
         follows) the way he had been treated in  consequence.   So  it  was
         concluded that he would not be at risk of  persecution  or  serious
         harm upon return.

         3.   Both parties were represented when the Judge heard the appeal.
          She received oral evidence from the appellant and from one witness
         on his behalf.  She had before her the country guidance decision of
         the Upper Tribunal in OO (Gay Men) Algeria  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00065
         (IAC).  She had  a  skeleton  argument  prepared  by  Counsel  then
         representing the appellant.  Unlike  the  Secretary  of  State  she
         accepted the truth of the  account  regarding  sexuality  and  past
         problems in Algeria as a consequence of that, but  she  thought  OO
         did not assist him and, ultimately, she explained her  reasons  for
         dismissing the appeal in this way:

             "21. Applying the facts and considering the expert evidence, I
             am satisfied the appellant faces a real risk of  serious  harm
             in his home area at the hands of his  family.   The  issue  is
             whether he can relocate.  The  expert  evidence  confirms  his
             family are unlikely to  trace  him  to  another  part  of  the
             Capital or another city and the CG  case  confirms  the  same.
             The first issue is therefore whether he would live  discreetly
             to avoid being ostracised, harassed, insulted and stigmatised.
              I am satisfied on the lower stand of proof he would  as  this
             is exactly what he did when he was in Algeria.   Would  he  be
             forced to conceal his sexuality as  a  result  of  a  fear  of
             serious harm?  On the evidence before me his case presents  no
             particular characteristics that might unusually or contrary to
             what is generally expected, attract disapproval at the highest
             level.  In fact his own history supports that  proposition  as
             he did not attract any serious adverse attention,  other  than
             through his family, which I accept was serious.   There  is  a
             paucity of evidence that he was robbed and sexually  assaulted
             because of anything particular to him.   Further,  the  expert
             does not in my view go so far as to say he would attract  that
             high level adverse attention but simply  raises  the  risk  in
             general terms.  Therefore, applying  the  CG  case  I  do  not
             accept he is in the same position as  argued  by  Counsel  and
             considering HJ (Iran) or MSM (journalists; political  opinion;
             risk); OO makes it clear that the general risks fall below the
             threshold of  persecution  and  therefore  do  not  engage  HJ
             (Iran)."

         4.   Various challenges to the judge's reasoning were made in  what
         are quite lengthy grounds of appeal.  Some of those are quite bold,
         in particular, a contention that OO is simply  wrong  because  it's
         reasoning conflicts  with  that  contained  within  HJ  (Iran)  and
         another v SSHD [2010]  UKSC  31.   The  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who
         granted permission said this:

             "Whilst I find no arguable merit in  the  grounds  insofar  as
             they seek to challenge the country guidance in  OO  (Gay  men)
             (CG) [2016] UKUT 65, and whilst the judge's  decision  appears
             on its face to be consistent with  that  country  guidance,  I
             nevertheless grant permission  on  the  basis  that  there  is
             arguably  some  confusion  on  the   judge's   part   in   her
             understanding of the country guidance at [21] and  that  there
             are arguably no clear findings in [21] as to whether it  would
             be unreasonable or unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to
             relocate."

         5.   Permission having been granted, the matter came before me  for
         a consideration as to whether or not the Judge had  erred  in  law.
         Representation at that  hearing  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am
         grateful to both representatives, in particular, for the  sensible,
         fair and straightforward way in which they approached matters.

         6.   Mr Duffy frankly acknowledged he saw merit in  the  contention
         that the Judge had not properly considered the  question  of  undue
         harshness with respect to internal flight.   Ms  Mair,  whilst  not
         conceding anything at all, chose to focus more upon that particular
         issue than the  others.   Indeed,  the  "OO  point"  had  not  been
         mentioned in a skeleton argument  filed  for  the  purpose  of  the
         hearing before the Judge and it did not appear  that  it  had  been
         mentioned in submissions either.  So, it seems  that  it  was  only
         taken for the first time when an initial application for permission
         to appeal was made.  As it turned out, in any event, I did not have
         to form any view as to that ground.

         7.   I have, though, decided that the Judge's decision did  contain
         an error of law.  I accept the submission not seriously opposed  by
         Mr Duffy, to the effect that the Judge, whilst producing a  careful
         and clear written decision, did not actually ask herself  about  or
         make findings about whether  in  his  particular  circumstances  it
         would be unduly harsh to require the applicant to relocate.  On  my
         reading her analysis appears to be that he  could  relocate  simply
         because there would be no risk of persecution in a part of  Algeria
         where he is not known.  That, though, falls short of  the  sort  of
         analysis required as to internal flight  and,  in  particular,  the
         reasonableness or unduly harsh element of it.  I do, therefore, set
         the decision aside.

         8.   I have decided that the matter shall  remain  with  the  Upper
         Tribunal.  I have also decided that all of the  favourable  factual
         findings  (that  is  to  say  favourable   from   the   appellant's
         perspective) as are contained within the  Judges  written  decision
         shall stand.  That shall, then, represent the  starting  point  for
         the reconvened hearing.  To be  clear,  though,  the  next  hearing
         before the Upper Tribunal will not simply  be  concerned  with  the
         question of internal flight.  The decision having been  set  aside,
         the parties shall be at liberty to pursue all other  issues  raised
         by the appeal.  Since little or nothing was said in the reasons for
         refusal letter regarding internal flight (a matter acknowledged  by
         Mr Duffy) I have issued  some  directions  requiring  a  degree  of
         clarification as to the Secretary of State's  position.   The  next
         hearing before the Upper Tribunal shall, I hope, be assisted by the
         directions I have set out below.

         CASE MANAGEMENT DIRECTIONS

         A.   The appeal shall be listed for a further  hearing  before  the
         Upper Tribunal on the next available dated.  The hearing shall take
         place before Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway at the Bradford Hearing
         Centre.  The appellant is to be  supplied  with  an  Arabic  (North
         African) speaking interpreter.

         B.   The Upper Tribunal appears to have all  of  the  documentation
         which was before the First tier Tribunal.  If either  party  wishes
         to supply further written material, that must  be  with  the  Upper
         Tribunal at least 10 working days prior to the date fixed  for  the
         next  hearing.   A  party   filing   such   material   must   also,
         simultaneously, send a copy to that party's opponent.

         C.   In particular, if it is intended that the appellant shall give
         any further oral evidence such evidence shall be contained  in  the
         form of a witness statement which is to be filed in accordance with
         direction B.

         D.   Further, the Secretary of State is  specifically  directed  to
         indicate whether  it  is  simply  argued  that  the  appellant  can
         relocate to any area other than his home area.  If, however, it  is
         accepted that he could not relocate to certain areas but  could  to
         others, then the respected areas should be identified along with an
         explanation.  Again, this material,  which  is  to  be  reduced  to
         writing, shall be filed in accordance with direction B.

         Decision

         The decision of the First tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and is set aside.

         The decision is to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal  in  accordance
         with the above directions.

         Anonymity

         No anonymity order is made.  None was sought before nor made by the
         First tier Tribunal.  None was sought before me.

 2. Following the making of a transfer  order,  the  resumed  hearing  came
    before me at Bradford on 9 February 2018.

 3. I refer to the directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway.   The
    Secretary of State wrote to the Upper Tribunal in compliance with those
    directions on 10 August 2017 to indicate that there were  two  possible
    areas of relocation for the appellant in Algeria.  First, the appellant
    could relocate within the city of Algiers to an area which was "not the
    area of the appellant's family  home."   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    found (in a finding which was  preserved  notwithstanding  the  setting
    aside of the decision), that the appellant could not live in  his  home
    area of Algiers because of a fear of his family.  The  appellant  is  a
    gay man and his family do not approve of his sexuality.  Similarly, the
    Secretary of State considered that the appellant could live in Oran  "a
    city of over 1 million people."

 4. The appellant adopted his written evidence  as  his  evidence-in-chief.
    That evidence includes his most recent statement of  5  February  2018.
    In that statement, the appellant said that he cannot  live  in  Algiers
    because his family would be able to locate him easily within that city.
     The appellant's cousin is  in  the  Algerian  police.   Secondly,  the
    appellant said he could not live in Oran  for  the  same  reason.   The
    appellant also asserts that in Oran there are "gangs that  go  out  and
    specifically target homosexual men."  The appellant also told  me  that
    he has been since August 2017 in a relationship with a  Lithuanian  man
    in the United Kingdom whom he identified as Marius.   Marius  lives  in
    London.  Both Marius and the appellant are living in the United Kingdom
    openly as gay men.

 5. I also heard evidence from Mr Lotfi [S].  Mr [S]  adopted  his  written
    statement as his evidence-in-chief.   He  supports  the  appellant  and
    would send him money if he lived in Algeria.  Mr [S] works as  a  sales
    assistant at Next.  Mr [S] is also a gay man and his partner is a coach
    driver.

 6. I also heard evidence from Mr [H] who adopted his written statement  as
    his evidence-in-chief.  He was not cross-examined.  Mr [H]  is  also  a
    friend of the appellant.

 7. The country guidance for gay  men  in  Algeria  remains  OO  (gay  men)
    Algeria CG [2016] UKUT 65 (IAC).  The headnote of OO reads as follows:

         1.   Although the Algerian Criminal Code makes homosexual behaviour
             unlawful , the authorities do not seek to prosecute  gay  men
             and there is no  real  risk  of  prosecution,  even  when  the
             authorities become aware of such behaviour. In  the  very  few
             cases where  there  has  been  a  prosecution  for  homosexual
             behaviour, there has been some other feature  that  has  given
             rise to the prosecution. The state does not actively seek out
             gay men in order to take any  form  of  action  against  them,
             either by means of prosecution or by  subjecting  gay  men  to
             other forms of persecutory ill-treatment.

         2.   Sharia law is not applied against  gay  men  in  Algeria.  The
             criminal  law   is   entirely   secular   and   discloses   no
             manifestation, at all, of Sharia law in its application.

         3.    The  only  risk  of  ill-treatment  at  a  level  to   become
             persecution likely to be encountered by a gay man  in  Algeria
             is at the hands of his own family, after they have  discovered
             that he is gay. There is  no  reliable  evidence  such  as  to
             establish that a gay man, identified as  such,  faces  a  real
             risk of persecutory ill-treatment from persons outside his own
             family.

         4.   Where a gay man remains living with his family to whom he  has
             disclosed his sexual orientation in circumstances  where  they
             are prepared to tolerate that, his decision to live discreetly
             and to conceal his homosexuality outside the  family  home  is
             not  taken  to  avoid  persecution  but  to  avoid  shame   or
             disrespect being brought upon his family. That means  that  he
             has chosen to live discreetly, not to  avoid  persecution  but
             for reasons that do not give rise to a right to  international
             protection.

         5.   Where a  gay  man  has  to  flee  his  family  home  to  avoid
             persecution from family members, in his place of relocation he
             will attract no real risk of persecution  because,  generally,
             he will not live openly as a gay man. As the evidence does not
             establish that he will face a  real  risk  of  persecution  if
             subsequently suspected to be a gay man, his decision  to  live
             discreetly and to conceal his sexual orientation is driven  by
             respect for social mores and  a  desire  to  avoid  attracting
             disapproval of a type that falls well below the  threshold  of
             persecution. Quite apart from that, an Algerian man who has  a
             settled  preference  for  same  sex  relationships  may   well
             continue to entertain doubts as to his sexuality  and  not  to
             regard himself as a gay man, in any event.

 8. I recall that the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  in  this
    case have been preserved.  Judge Mensah accepted that the appellant was
    a homosexual man who had been shunned by his family and  who  had  been
    beaten by his uncle and threatened by his brother.  The judge  accepted
    that the "family would not be able to openly accept  [the  appellant's]
    sexuality  in  the  context  of  Algeria."   Mr  Jagadesham,  for   the
    appellant, submitted that the only issue remaining in  this  appeal  is
    internal relocation.  Mr Diwyncz, for the respondent, did not  seek  to
    argue (as had his colleagues in the letter referred to above) that  the
    appellant could relocate within  Algiers  City.   Mr  Diwyncz  did  not
    challenge the assertion of the appellant that  his  cousin  is  in  the
    police in Algiers and that it was reasonably likely that  he  would  be
    able to locate the appellant in that city.  The only issue,  therefore,
    is whether the appellant would find it  unduly  harsh  to  relocate  to
    Oran, the area identified by the Secretary of  State  as  suitable  for
    internal flight within Algeria.

 9. I have no evidence other than that of  the  appellant  (which  was  not
    challenged) that there are gangs of men in  Oran  who  seek  to  target
    homosexuals.  There is no evidence that this particular appellant would
    be targeted by such gangs, should they exist, but that, in  turn,  that
    depends how and for what reasons the appellant would adopt a particular
    form  of  behaviour  in  Algeria  as  regards  the  expression  of  his
    sexuality.  To answer that question, I turn to the guidance offered  by
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 at [82]:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.

             If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.

             If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".

             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

             If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him."

10. Having listened carefully to the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  is
    witnesses, I find that he is credible as are the witnesses.   I  accept
    that he and his partner and his friends live openly as gay men  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Tribunal therefore  needs  to  consider  for  what
    reason the appellant might alter that openly gay behaviour upon  return
    to living in Algeria.  I do not  accept  that  the  appellant's  family
    would be a threat to him  anywhere  within  in  Algeria.   I  do  find,
    however, that the appellant would wish to live as an openly gay man and
    that his primary reason for not doing so would be in order to avoid ill-
    treatment at  the  hands  of  individuals  in  the  community  who  are
    aggressively homophobic.  The test posed in the first part of paragraph
    [6] of OO (see above) in respect of an individual who  cannot  live  in
    their home area because of threats from the family, is simply the  test
    of undue hardship as set out by the House of  Lords  in  Januzi  [2006]
    UKHL 5.   Having regard  to  the  particular  characteristics  of  this
    appellant, I find that (i) he would wish to express  his  sexuality  by
    living an openly gay life in Algeria; (ii) if he lived as an openly gay
    man in Oran then he is reasonably likely to be at risk of ill-treatment
    at the hands of homophobic individuals or groups; (iii) if  he  altered
    his behaviour in order to live "discreetly" and not in  an  openly  gay
    way, he would not do so in order to comply  with  social  mores,  still
    less in order to avoid embarrassment to  a  family  which  has  already
    rejected him.   His  reason  for  hiding  his  sexuality  and  behaving
    "discreetly" would be in order to avoid ill-treatment.  In the light of
    that finding, the appellant is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom
    on Article 3 ECHR grounds.  I am aware of the country  guidance  of  OO
    and the fact that it is unlikely that he would be prosecuted for  being
    a homosexual but I accept that he has a real fear of being  ill-treated
    on account of his sexuality should he live an openly gay life.  In  the
    circumstances, his appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 18 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
