
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00959/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    a m p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public identifying the  appellant.   A  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born  on  19  July  1956.
    She is, therefore, now 63 years old.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 February 2008 with  a
    six month visit visa  valid  until  21  August  2018.   When  her  visa
    expired, the appellant overstayed  and  she  has  remained  in  the  UK
    illegally.

 4. On 10 November 2015, the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private and family life.   That  application
    was refused on 5 February 2016 and her subsequent appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed by Judge Coaster on 7 February 2017.  On 21
    October 2017, the appellant was refused permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 5. On 14 December 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.  The  basis  of  her
    claim was that her son-in-law in Jamaica had  threatened  to  kill  her
    after her daughter discovered that she had been born as a result of the
    appellant's father raping and  sexually  abusing  the  appellant  as  a
    child.

 6. On 16 January 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.



 7. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 8. The appeal was heard by Judge L Murray on 7 August 2019.

 9. Before the judge, the appellant relied  upon  expert  medical  evidence
    from Dr Battersby which included a  diagnosis  that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from  moderate  complex  PTSD.   Because  of  her  background
    circumstances, and the report of Dr Battersby, the  appellant  did  not
    give oral evidence before the judge.  Nevertheless, the judge  accepted
    the appellant's account concerning her  history  of  sexual  abuse  and
    violence  by  her  father.   However,  in  the   light   of   all   the
    circumstances, including that the  appellant  had  remained  safely  in
    Jamaica between 2002 and 2008, Judge Murray was not satisfied  that  on
    return to Jamaica she was at risk from her son-in-law as  she  claimed.
    Consequently, Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  That decision is not challenged and I need say no more  about
    it.

10. In addition, the appellant relied upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  She  relied,
    in particular, upon para 276ADE(1)(vi) and Art 8 outside the Rules.  In
    relation to the former, Judge Murray did not accept that the  appellant
    would face "very significant obstacles" to her integration into Jamaica
    on return.  At paras 47-48 of  her  determination,  Judge  Murray  said
    this:

         "47. It is submitted that she  would  have  no  social  support  or
             network.  Whilst I accept that she may have  become  estranged
             from her daughter as a result of the disclosure of incest, and
             thus depart, in  this  regard,  from  the  findings  of  Judge
             Coaster, I do not accept that she would be  socially  isolated
             for the following reasons.  Firstly, I do not accept that  she
             would have lost contact or tie [sic] with Jamaica  in  the  11
             years she has been here.  Secondly, she has  moved  away  from
             her family in Gloucester and is currently  living  in  Cardiff
             and has been since some point in 2018.  She is a member  of  a
             Church as evidenced at  A40  and  has  been  attending  weekly
             health walks (A38).  She has clearly been  able  to  integrate
             into a community in  Cardiff.   There  would  be  no  language
             issues on return to Jamaica, she was  51  when  she  left  and
             hence has spent most of her life there.

         48.  I conclude that she would be able to operate on  a  day-to-day
             basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time
             a variety of human relationships  to  give  substance  to  her
             private life within a reasonable time."

11. A central issue of the appellant's Art 8 claim was that, on  return  to
    Jamaica, she would be destitute as she would  not  have  the  financial
    resources to survive.  The appellant's case, before Judge  Murray,  was
    that she would be unable to  obtain  support  from  Jamaica's  National
    Insurance Scheme ("NIS") and would have no financial support  from  her
    relatives in the  UK.   In  the  earlier  appeal  determination,  Judge
    Coaster had accepted  that,  at  that  time,  the  appellant  had  been
    financially supported by her family in the UK and that  they  would  be
    willing to continue to do so.

12. Judge Murray approached the two  related  issues  concerning  financial
    support to the appellant in paras 41-43 as follows:

         "41. The Appellant relies on the objective evidence at C1 to 114 of
             her  bundle  which  it  is  said  in  the  skeleton   argument
             establishes that she would not be able to access  health  care
             and support services on return to Jamaica.  The parts  of  the
             report relied on are at C12 and C36  where  it  is  said  that
             around 85% of older people are unemployed in Jamaica and older
             women suffer high rates of unemployment in males and C12 where
             it is said that there are only two financial support  programs
             for older people in Jamaica and only a small number  of  older
             people can access the NIS program because  contributions  need
             to be made and there are high levels  of  informality  in  the
             labour market.  The other program,  the  PATH  program  covers
             only 40% of the aged  population.   52%  of  older  people  in
             Jamaica have no access to either of the programs.  It is  also
             said that older people have lack of funds  to  purchase  food,
             medication and pay utility bills and  indicate  they  have  to
             make a choice between spending their meagre resources on  food
             and medicine.

         42.  Neither  Dr  Battersby's  report  or  all  the  other  medical
             evidence before me address whether the Appellant may  be  able
             to do some form of work but it is clear from the  decision  of
             Judge Coaster that the Appellant worked  as  a  carer  in  the
             past.  Whilst I accept that the findings in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's ability to integrate in Jamaica  need  revisiting,
             the evidence and factual  findings  in  that  appeal  are  not
             irrelevant to this appeal.  The decision of Judge Coaster  was
             not overturned despite permission having been  sought  by  the
             Appellant.  The Appellant relies on a  number  of  letters  of
             support in her bundle and also did so at the hearing in  2017.
             The authors of those letters did not attend to  give  evidence
             in 2017 nor have they attended court to give  evidence  today.
             However, it is clear both from the decision of  Judge  Coaster
             and from the letter at a 43 [sic] of  the  Appellant's  bundle
             that she lived with a relative in Gloucester until  she  moved
             to Cardiff and that they supported her whilst  she  was  here.
             She was provided with accommodation and  food.   There  is  no
             suggestion that apart from the assistance of her relatives she
             had any other source  of  funds.   There  is  a  letter  dated
             September 2015 from the Appellant's sister who at  that  point
             in time was 60 years old  and  supported  her  application  to
             remain in the UK.  I find, as did Judge Coaster in 2017,  that
             her family in the UK have supported her  for  many  years  and
             there is no subsequent evidence  to  show  that  they  are  no
             longer willing to do so.

         43.  The Appellant has also not disclosed whether  whilst  she  was
             working in Jamaica she made any payments by  way  of  national
             insurance contributions or otherwise which would mean she  was
             entitled to benefits under the NIS scheme.  I  do  not  accept
             therefore that she  would  be  without  support  or  funds  in
             Jamaica."

13. In addition to concluding that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
    para 276ADE(1)(vi), the judge went on  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not breach Art 8 outside the  Rules.   At  para  51,  the
    judge found that the appellant could not establish that she had  family
    life with her relatives in the UK now that she  was  living  separately
    from them - they lived in Gloucester and she  lived  in  Cardiff.   The
    judge said this:

         "51. Judge Coaster found in 2017 that  there  was  no  family  life
             between the Appellant and her sister, step-father  or  cousin.
             I accept  that  this  finding  was  made  in  the  absence  of
             knowledge  of  sexual  abuse  and  the  vulnerability  of  the
             Appellant.   However,  I  consider  that  it  has   not   been
             established that there is family life  between  the  Appellant
             and her sister or step-father.  There are only letters  before
             me and she no longer  lives  with  them.   They  all  live  in
             Gloucester.  At paragraph 9 of her witness statement she  says
             that her sister has seen her twice since she moved to  Cardiff
             and the last time her step-father came was  before  Christmas.
             There is currently no  dependency.   I  find  that  there  are
             normal  emotional  ties  and  that  the  evidence   does   not
             demonstrate that the relationships amount to family life.  The
             evidence does not demonstrate a real  committed  or  effective
             support.  In view of the absence of frequent  contact  I  also
             conclude that there would be no disproportionate  interference
             with the family life of her relatives in the UK."

14. The judge went on to find that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    proportionate interference with her private life in the UK  (at  [55]).
    In the result, Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal.

The Submissions

15. As I have already indicated, there  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  or,  indeed,
    humanitarian  protection  grounds.   Instead,  the  grounds  of  appeal
    focused solely upon the judge's decision in relation to Art 8.

16. In fact, as Ms  Lowis  acknowledged  in  her  oral  submissions,  those
    grounds raise a single point.  That point is that Judge Murray erred in
    law in concluding that the appellant had not established that she would
    not have access to the NIS in Jamaica because the judge had misdirected
    herself about the appellant's previous employment.  It  was,  Ms  Lowis
    submitted, clear  from  Judge  Coaster's  decision  that  the  previous
    employment of the appellant "as a carer in the past" would not  entitle
    her to NIS as she would not have made any relevant  contributions.   Ms
    Lowis pointed out that there were two instances of  employment  by  the
    appellant as a carer which were referred to at para 12 and paras  15-16
    of Judge Coaster's decision.  The first instance was between  2002  and
    2008 when the appellant, in Jamaica, informally looked after an elderly
    great-uncle and aunt living with them in their home.   That,  Ms  Lowis
    submitted was not employment which would have resulted in the appellant
    making relevant contributions to the NIS so as to be entitled to a  NIS
    pension on return.  The second instance occurred in  the  UK  when  the
    appellant, again, acted as a carer, this time for  an  individual  when
    she lived in the home of that  individual  and  his  wife.   Also,  she
    helped her own sister to nurse her husband who passed away  in  October
    2015.  Ms Lowis pointed out that these were also informal  arrangements
    and  they  occurred  in  the  UK.   It  could  not  have  resulted   in
    contributions being paid to the Jamaican NIS so as  to  result  in  the
    appellant's entitlement to a pension on return.

17. Ms Lowis also relied upon the background material referred to by  Judge
    Murray at para 41 of her  determination.   She  submitted  that,  inter
    alia, "domestic helpers" were unlikely to make contributions  and  that
    only a small number of older people could access the NIS programme  (at
    C34).  Ms Lowis submitted, in effect, that  the  proper  inference  was
    that the appellant would not be one of  those  small  number  of  older
    people who could access the programme.

18. Ms Lowis acknowledged that Dr Battersby had identified  in  her  report
    (at A17) under the heading "Occupational History" that: "Her  last  job
    was when she was pregnant with her daughter.   She  worked  in  a  high
    school in  a  canteen.   She  also  worked  in  a  cleaner  company  in
    advertising/sales."  Ms  Lowis  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  was
    pregnant with her daughter in 1981 and so that was her last job.  Judge
    Murray had failed to make any  findings  as  to  whether  or  not  this
    employment involved contribution which would entitle the appellant to a
    NIS pension on return.

19. Whilst Ms Lowis accepted that the grounds only  challenge  the  judge's
    decision in relation to the availability of an NIS pension  on  return,
    in her skeleton argument she  also  sought  to  challenge  the  judge's
    finding in para 42 that the appellant's family in the UK had  supported
    her in the past and that they would be willing to do so in the  future.
    Ms Lowis submitted that Judge Murray had failed to make a clear finding
    as to whether there would be  sufficient  financial  support  from  her
    family in the UK such that the appellant would not become destitute  or
    street homeless on return to Jamaica on the assumption that  she  would
    not be entitled to an NIS pension.  In particular, if  such  a  finding
    were made then that would be inconsistent with the judge's  finding  in
    para 51 that family life did not exist between the  appellant  and  her
    family in the UK because there was "currently no dependency".

20. Ms Lowis submitted that the judge's errors were material and,  even  if
    the grounds did not challenge the  judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
    future financial support from her family, that issue necessarily  arose
    in the context of whether an error in relation to whether she would  be
    entitled to an NIS pension was material.

21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells relied upon the Rule 24  reply.
    He submitted that the appellant had not, in  the  grounds,  raised  any
    point in relation to the availability of  financial  support  from  the
    appellant's family.  That point had been raised for the first  time  by
    Judge Adio  when  granting  permission  to  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

22. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant had not raised in  her  witness
    statement  any  suggestion  that  she  would   not   be   entitled   to
    contributions from the NIS.  He submitted, relying  upon  the  Rule  24
    response, that the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant
    would have access to an NIS pension.  Further, he  submitted  that,  in
    any event, the judge had made a finding that  the  appellant  would  be
    financially supported by her relatives in the UK and  that,  therefore,
    if there were any error in relation  to  the  availability  of  an  NIS
    pension that was not  material  to  her  decision,  in  particular  the
    finding that the appellant would have  adequate  financial  support  in
    Jamaica.

Discussion

23. The appellant's challenge to the judge's decision to dismiss her appeal
    under Art 8 is a very narrow one.  It relates  exclusively  to  whether
    the judge found and, if she did, whether she was entitled to find, that
    the appellant would have adequate financial support either  via  a  NIS
    pension (or from her relatives in the UK).

24. If the judge did not fall into any material error in  that  regard,  no
    other aspect  of  her  findings,  leading  her  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant  had  not  established  that  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles  to  her  integration"   under   para   276ADE(1)(vi),   were
    challenged.

25. Neither is there any real challenge to the judge's  decision  that  the
    appellant cannot succeed outside the Rules under  Art  8.   As  regards
    that conclusion, Ms Lowis, via her skeleton argument  referred  to  the
    judge's finding in para 51 that there was no family  life  between  the
    appellant and her relatives in the UK  on  the  basis  that  there  was
    "currently no dependency" and that there were  only  "normal  emotional
    ties" and that the evidence did not "demonstrate a  real  committed  or
    effective support".  That  finding  was,  of  course,  based  upon  the
    factual situation, subsequent to  Judge  Coaster's  decision  in  2017,
    namely the appellant no longer lives with her relatives  in  Gloucester
    and she lives independently in Cardiff and, it would seem, without  any
    present financial support.

26. There is no challenge  to  that  finding  in  the  grounds.   Ms  Lowis
    accepted in her submissions before me that the finding in para  51  was
    not necessarily inconsistent with a finding  (if  indeed  Judge  Murray
    made such a finding)  that  the  family  would  support  the  appellant
    financially if she returned to Jamaica.  Given  the  evidence  and  the
    judge's reasoning in para 51, I see no conceivable basis upon which her
    finding that at present the appellant  has  no  family  life  with  her
    relatives in the  UK  could  be  successfully  challenged.   The  judge
    plainly correctly directed herself in accordance with the relevant case
    law at para 50 of her determination, including Kugathas v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31; Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and PT (Sri  Lanka)  v  ECO,
    Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612.  The judge's finding was not irrational on
    the evidence and she was correct, in my  judgement,  to  determine  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 outside the Rules on the  basis  of  any
    interference with the appellant's private life.

27. Turning now to the judge's findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    financial circumstances if she returned to Jamaica, I accept Ms  Lowis'
    submission that Judge Murray may have been misled as to the  nature  of
    the appellant's previous employment and whether that would entitle  her
    to a NIS pension on return to Jamaica.  In para 42, Judge Murray refers
    to Judge Coaster's  determination  and  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant had "worked as a carer in the past".  It may  be  that  Judge
    Murray, in the context in which that was said,  was  simply  reflecting
    that as the appellant had worked as a carer in the past she might  well
    be able to do some work on return to Jamaica in the  future.   However,
    in para 43, Judge Murray noted that the appellant had:

         "not disclosed whether whilst she was working in Jamaica  she  made
         any  payments  by  way  of  national  insurance  contributions   or
         otherwise which would mean she was entitled to benefits  under  the
         NIS scheme".

    If Judge Murray had in her mind the examples of  work  referred  to  by
    Judge Coaster she could have been in no doubt that the appellant  would
    not have made NIS contributions which  would  entitle  her  to  an  NIS
    pension in the future.  Her employment in Jamaica was as a carer on  an
    informal basis and it was  highly  improbable  that  NIS  contributions
    would have been made.  Her other employment, equally informal,  was  in
    the UK and therefore plainly could not have resulted in her making  NIS
    contributions.

28. There was evidence in Dr Battersby's report of  earlier  employment  in
    Jamaica, no later than 1981 but Judge Murray did  not  rely  upon  that
    evidence or make any finding whether it  would  have  resulted  in  the
    appellant paying NIS contributions which would entitle  her  to  a  NIS
    pension.  In the result, therefore, the evidence relied upon  by  Judge
    Murray did not entitle her to reach  the  finding  that  the  appellant
    would have adequate support from a NIS pension.

29. Whilst that factual finding is  flawed,  I  do  not  accept  Ms  Lowis'
    submission that that error is material.  In my judgment,  Judge  Murray
    clearly found in para 42 that the appellant's family had  provided  her
    with financial support previously in the UK (and that is not  disputed)
    and that they would do so in the future.  Judge Murray's conclusion  in
    para 43 was, in my judgment, not limited to support from a NIS  pension
    when she said:

         "I do not accept therefore that she would  be  without  support  or
         funds in Jamaica".

30. I do not accept Ms Lowis' submission that Judge Murray failed  to  find
    that it was adequate support such  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    destitute or homeless.   In  para  42,  Judge  Murray  noted  that  the
    assistance previously given by her relative was the only assistance she
    had received.  There had not been "any other  source  of  funds".   The
    judge was, therefore, identifying that the appellant's relatives wholly
    provided financially for her needs in  the  UK  and  no  doubt  did  so
    entirely adequately.

31. I am satisfied that the judge made a  finding  that  was  properly  and
    rationally open to her on the evidence that, even if  NIS  support  was
    not available, the appellant's relatives in the UK  would  provide  her
    with financial support in the future, as they had  done  in  the  past,
    which would be adequate for her to live on in  Jamaica.   Consequently,
    in approaching the appellant's reliance upon para 276ADE(1)(vi) and her
    claim outside the Rules, the judge made a sustainable finding  that  on
    return to Jamaica she  would  have  adequate  financial  assistance  to
    support herself in Jamaica.

32. As I have already indicated, there is no other challenge to the judge's
    adverse finding in relation  to  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  or  under  Art  8
    outside the Rules.  Consequently, I am satisfied that the judge did not
    materially err in law in reaching those adverse findings.

Decision

33. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve  the  making
    of an error of law.  That decision stands.

34. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            29, January 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Murray,  having  dismissed  the  appeal,  made  no  fee  award.   That
decision stands.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            29, January 2020

