
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/00665/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 February 2021               |              On 15 February 2021|
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                FD (ALBANIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on24 February  1991.
    He appeals, with permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan,
    against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J  S
    White on 16 April 2020.


 2. By that decision, Judge White ("the judge") dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on protection and human rights grounds.  It is  accepted  by  Mr
    Symes that the judge's findings in the latter  respect  -  reached,  as
    they were, in the context of a decision  to  deport  the  appellant  on
    grounds of serious criminality - are unimpeachable.  It  is  submitted,
    however, that the judge erred in  deciding  the  protection  ground  of
    appeal against the appellant.

Background

 3. I need only sketch the relevant background, a detailed account of which
    was set out by the judge at [1] and [6]-[8] of his decision.


 4. The appellant sought asylum unsuccessfully  in  2013  and  returned  to
    Albania.  He returned to this country unlawfully and stayed for a  year
    or  so  with  his  British  girlfriend  but  he  once  again   returned
    voluntarily in November 2014.  He came back for a third  time  in  2015
    and he was subsequently found guilty of possession of a  class  A  drug
    with intent to supply and possession of an article for  use  in  fraud.
    He was deported after his sentence.  He re-entered a fourth time, after
    which he was arrested by the police.

 5. The appellant was referred to the National Referral  Mechanism  by  the
    police.  On 30 October 2017, he was accepted on conclusive  grounds  to
    be a victim of  modern  slavery.   The  Competent  Authority  accepted,
    therefore, that the appellant had been brought from France to the UK by
    a gang of traffickers who had led him to believe that he would be  able
    to repay his debt to them by  working  in  the  construction  industry.
    Upon arrival, however, he was told that he would have to repay the debt
    by dealing drugs.  He was given a quantity of cocaine, a  fake  driving
    licence and  a  car  by  the  traffickers.   He  went  to  the  police,
    surrendered the drugs, and told them what he knew.

 6. In due course, representations  were  made  by  his  former  solicitors
    (Wilsons), requesting the  revocation  of  the  deportation  order  and
    seeking leave to remain as a person in need of international protection
    or on the basis of his relationship with his British partner and  their
    child. The respondent refused that claim on 7 January  2019.  Like  the
    Competent Authority, she accepted the account that  the  appellant  had
    given.  She did not accept that he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Albania, however, and she did not consider that his  deportation  would
    be in breach of his human rights.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by the judge on 25 February 2020.  He  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and his partner.   He  heard  closing  submissions  from  the
    Presenting  Officer  (not  Mr  Clarke)  and  counsel  representing  the
    appellant (not Mr Symes) before reserving his decision.

 8. The judge found that the appellant had been convicted of a particularly
    serious crime  but  that  he  had  rebutted  the  presumption  that  he
    represented a danger to the community of the United Kingdom: [15]-[18].
     He therefore discharged the certificate under s72 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and proceeded to consider the substance
    of the appellant's protection claim at [20]-[29].  I will return to the
    reasoning in those paragraphs shortly since it forms  the  battleground
    for this appeal.  It suffices for present purposes to  state  that  the
    judge did not consider the  appellant  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Albania, despite his acceptance of much of the appellant's account.

 9. The judge then turned to Article 8 ECHR,  finding  that  the  appellant
    could meet neither of the statutory exceptions to deportation and  that
    there were no very compelling circumstances which outweighed the public
    interest in that course.  So it was that the appeal  was  dismissed  on
    all grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. Permission to appeal was refused by the FtT but granted on  renewal  by
    Judge Sheridan.  There is  a  single  ground,  which  is  that  it  was
    perverse for the judge to conclude that the appellant would not  be  at
    risk from the traffickers upon return to Albania,  given  the  positive
    findings of fact he had made in other respects.

11. In his concise submissions, Mr  Symes  confirmed  that  the  only  live
    dimension of the appeal was international protection.   The  judge  had
    resolved the certificate under s72 of the 2002 Act in  the  appellant's
    favour and the focus was on his assessment of the  risk  faced  by  the
    appellant.  The proper starting point in the decision  under  challenge
    was [29], in which the judge had concluded that the  evidence  did  not
    show a continuing adverse interest in the appellant on the part of  the
    traffickers.  It was necessary to consider the reasoning which had  led
    the judge to that conclusion with care.  The judge had taken account of
    the expert reports of Dr Tahiraj and Dr Korovillas and had said at [21]
    that he had accepted their opinion that the traffickers might  have  an
    interest in regaining control over him.  The  judge  had  had  posed  a
    question at the end of [21], which was whether the traffickers had  the
    incentive and the  ability  to  look  for  him.   The  answer  to  both
    questions was plain, however.  Dr Korovillas  had  concluded  that  the
    traffickers would have a clear financial  incentive  to  recapture  the
    appellant and  the  judge  had  accepted  that  it  was  likely  to  be
    relatively easy for anyone to search  the  municipal  records  to  find
    another person.  It was not possible, Mr Symes submitted, to  reconcile
    the judge's  acceptance  of  both  points  with  the  judge's  ultimate
    conclusion at [29].  The  judge  had  erred,  Mr  Symes  submitted,  in
    treating the absence of significant interest in the appellant's  family
    as determiative of the absence of a risk to the appellant.   To  do  so
    was to reach a finding  which  was  irrational  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the FtT.

12. For the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that the focus of  the  grounds
    was very narrow; that the threshold for perversity was high;  and  that
    neither the grounds nor  Mr  Symes'  submissions  did  justice  to  the
    judge's reasoning.  There was a tendency in the grounds to confuse  the
    judge's careful  and  nuanced  findings  with  his  recitation  of  the
    evidence.  The grounds also failed to appreciate the context  in  which
    the judge had made his  findings.  The  traffickers  were  of  Albanian
    nationality but  they  had  been  operating  in  France.   The  judge's
    conclusion that there was no appreciable risk in Albania  was  open  to
    him.  The judge's decision had been made  with  the  experts'  opinions
    firmly in mind.  The experts had not been able to  state  whether  this
    particular gang would target this particular appellant in  Albania  and
    that was a matter of assessment for the judge, who had  noted  at  [22]
    that  it  'all  depends  on  the  decision  of  the  gang'.    Properly
    understood, the judge had found that the  appellant's  family  had  not
    been threatened or harmed by the gang and that the appellant  had  been
    left alone in the United Kingdom.   The  finding  at  [29]  was  to  be
    interpreted in light of that  earlier  reasoning.   Given  the  judge's
    earlier conclusions, the ultimate finding was properly open to him  and
    could not be categorised as perverse.

13. Mr Symes replied briefly.  He submitted that decisive weight  had  been
    given to the absence of prolonged interest in the  appellant's  family.
    It was clear, he submitted,  that  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant's mother had been threatened and that his  brother  had  been
    attacked by the gang.  In any event, Mr Symes  asked  rhetorically,  to
    what extent might it  properly  be  said  that  the  treatment  of  the
    appellant's family was indicative  of  the  treatment  which  might  be
    received by the appellant himself?  Mr Symes noted that the  judge  had
    drawn on the absence of threats from the gang in the United Kingdom but
    he submitted  that  different  considerations  were  at  play  in  this
    country, which did not suffer from the significant  corruption  amongst
    the police and judiciary which was prevalent in Albania.

14. I reserved my decision on whether the  judge's  decision  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


Analysis

15. It is accepted on all sides that the critical finding  in  the  judge's
    decision is to be found in [29], in which he stated that  the  evidence
    does not show that the traffickers have a continuing  interest  in  the
    appellant.  Mr Symes maintains that this  is  a  conclusion  which  was
    reached  by  an  illogical,  and  therefore  irrational,   process   of
    reasoning.  For the respondent, Mr Clarke submits that a close  reading
    of the judge's decision shows that the reasoning was cogent, compelling
    and certainly not irrational.  For the reasons  which  follow,  I  have
    come to the clear conclusion that Mr Clarke's  submissions  are  to  be
    preferred and that the appellant's appeal should be dismissed.


16. The judge's decision is obviously  to  be  read  as  a  whole.   It  is
    apparent that he  was  alive  to  the  rather  unusual  nature  of  the
    appellant's protection claim.  He noted at [18] that the appellant  had
    been involved with criminals and drug dealers in the United Kingdom  in
    order to pay his debt to  the  traffickers,  observing  that  this  was
    "unusual and of considerable importance".   He  went  on  in  the  same
    paragraph to note that he had betrayed the gang who were  holding  him,
    despite the fact that they knew the  address  of  his  partner  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge stated that this was hardly 'risk free'  and
    was the clearest indication of the appellant's determination not to  be
    involved in serious crime again.  It was partly for  this  reason  (and
    partly  because  the  OASys  assessment  reflected  a   low   risk   of
    reoffending) that the  judge  discharged  the  certificate  under  s72,
    finding that the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he  was  a
    danger to the community.

17. The judge then noted that he  had  a  volume  of  background  material,
    including a very lengthy ARC report which concerned the general risk in
    Albania from human traffickers.  The judge considered that this did not
    bear on the appellant's case to any great extent, since  his  case  was
    that he was 'at specific risk from the gang  who  brought  him  to  the
    United Kingdom'.  He noted that the appellant had betrayed the gang  by
    turning himself and the drugs into the police.  A further limitation of
    the ARC report, the judge noted, was that it concerned  traffickers  in
    Albania, whereas the appellant had been trafficked from Dunkirk,  which
    was where he had first encountered the traffickers: [20]

18. At [21], the judge moved from the ARC report to the expert reports from
    Dr Tahiraj and Dr Korovillas, both of  whom  he  accepted  were  to  be
    regarded as experts.   He  summarised  Dr  Korovillas'  report  in  the
    remainder of [21].  Midway through that paragraph, the  judge  observed
    as follows about one aspect of Dr Korovillas' opinion:

         He suggested  that  the  traffickers  would  have  an  interest  in
         recapturing the appellant, both as their debtor  and  as  a  person
         with some inside knowledge who thus posed a  threat.   I  certainly
         accept that these are reasons why they might have  an  interest  in
         regaining control over him, and another might be to make an example
         of him, but this does not address whether they have the ability  to
         recapture him.

19. The judge continued in the same paragraph to note the reasons given  by
    Dr Korovillas for concluding that  the  appellant  could  not  relocate
    within Albania, it being a  small  and  traditional  country  in  which
    outsiders would be likely to be questioned about  their  origins.   The
    judge concluded this paragraph as follows:


         Finally, there is the system  of  civil  registration,  which  will
         require him to provide his details within a short time of moving to
         any new area, but given the high levels of corruption it is  likely
         to be relatively easy for anyone seeking him to gain access to  the
         municipal records.  Again I see some force in this, if it is  clear
         that there would be someone with the incentive and ability to  look
         for him.


20. The  judge  noted  the  broad  agreement  between  Dr  Tahiraj  and  Dr
    Korovillas on various matters in [22].  In the concluding sentences  of
    that paragraph, he observed that Dr Tahiraj had noted:


         pertinently that 'it is difficult to state the extend [sic] of  the
         risk to the appellant from the gang that  trafficked  him  for  the
         purpose of exploitation, as it all depends on the decision  of  the
         gang'.  She goes on to say that if they do decide to pursue him the
         risks would in her view be real."

21. The judge then turned to focus upon the question he had  posed  in  the
    section above, of whether the gang had decided to pursue the appellant.
     He framed that  enquiry  at  [23],  noting  that  the  respondent  had
    observed in the refusal letter that there was no  evidence  that  these
    traffickers had the ability to pursue the appellant to Albania or  that
    they had in fact taken any adverse interest in  the  appellant  or  his
    family.


22. At [24], the judge noted that the appellant had given  an  inconsistent
    account of providing his mother's mobile  number  to  his  traffickers,
    stating on the one hand that he had done so before he  was  brought  to
    the UK and, on the other hand, that it had occurred after  he  came  to
    the UK.  The judge observed that  'the  two  versions  cannot  both  be
    right'.  At [25], the judge noted that the appellant's suggestion  that
    the gang was rich and powerful was unsupported by any specific evidence
    in the witness statement, despite  this  being  'a  diligently  prepare
    [sic] appeal'.


23. At [26], the judge considered the evidence that the appellant's  mother
    had received a threatening telephone call and that his brother had been
    attacked.  He noted the absence of detail in  the  statements  and  the
    absence of  supporting  evidence.   No  dates  were  given  for  either
    incident.  There was nothing from the hospital.  The incidents had  not
    been reported to the police.


24. At [27], the judge noted that the appellant had stated that the  family
    had reported no further incidents; that they  remained  in  the  family
    home; and that they had not paid anyone anything.  He also  noted  that
    the appellant and his partner had experienced no  difficulties  in  the
    UK, despite the fact that they were aware of the address in  which  she
    was living, having taken the appellant there in the past.


25. The final two paragraphs in the judge's analysis must be reproduced  in
    full:


         [28] I am concerned about the lack of any detail in the  statements
         from his family, about the absence of supporting  medical  evidence
         of a 2 day hospitalisation, and about the failure to report  either
         of these apparently serious incidents to  the  police.   I  do  not
         understand why, if the appellant had told them he  was  trafficked,
         neither witness apparently has any idea what  sort  of  trouble  he
         might be in, nor why, if he has told them nothing, as they suggest,
         and they have two siblings unlawfully in the United  Kingdom,  they
         should assume these incidents are related to the appellant.  If the
         traffickers are indeed behind either of these incidents, I  do  not
         understand why they  intended  to  achieve,  given  their  complete
         silence on why they were doing this.  Finally, I  struggle  to  see
         that these two isolated incidents, both  now  a  considerable  time
         ago, are evidence of a determined attempt to  ding  and  punish  or
         recapture the appellant.  For all these reasons I am not  satisfied
         that the this aspect of the evidence  is  reliance  or  capable  of
         being given any weight.


         [29] I have considered all this  evidence  with  case  and  in  the
         round.  I can  see  reasons  why  the  people  who  trafficked  the
         appellant from France not [sic] the United Kingdom  might  have  an
         interest in finding him again, and I find  the  reports  persuasive
         evidence that if they wanted to find him and had links or influence
         in Albania it is significantly  unlikely  that  he  could  relocate
         safely, and  there  is  a  real  risk  that  he  could  not  access
         protection.  I am not, however, persuaded on the evidence tat [sic]
         there is a real risk  that  he  will  be  pursued  there.   Whether
         because they lack  the  resources  or  because  they  have  decided
         otherwise (as Dr Tahiraj envisaged) the evidence does  not  show  a
         continuing adverse interest. I am not therefore satisfied, even  to
         the low standard appropriate, that the appellant is at real risk of
         serious  harm  on  return.   Th  claims  to  asylum,   humanitarian
         protection and under Articles 2 and 3 fail on that account.

26. It is clear that the judge accepted the thrust of what had been said by
    Dr Korovillas and  Dr  Tahiraj,  as  regards  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant's  traffickers  maintaining  an  interest  in  him  and   the
    inadequacy of the safeguards which might be available against any  such
    risk in Albania.  Properly understood, the judge's focus was on whether
    that possibility was a real risk on the facts of this case.  He did not
    derive a great deal of assistance from the ARC report, which  spoke  to
    the generalities, and he noted what had been said by Dr  Tahiraj  about
    'the  decision'  which  had  been  made  by  the  specific  traffickers
    responsible for bringing the appellant to the UK and involving  him  in
    the drugs trade against his will for a second  time.   The  strands  of
    reasoning which led to his conclusion  that  there  was  no  continuing
    adverse interest were logical and rational.  He was  concerned  by  the
    inconsistent accounts of the appellant giving  his  mother's  telephone
    number to the traffickers and by the lack of detail in the  claim  that
    the gang was powerful and well-connected.  The absence of detail in the
    accounts given by the mother and brother in their statements were  also
    legitimate matters of concern.


27. The judge was also clearly entitled to attach weight to the  fact  that
    the traffickers,  who  operate  in  the  UK  and  who  know  where  the
    appellant's partner lives, have taken no action against her whatsoever.
     Mr Symes was minded to accept that this was a relevant matter for  the
    judge  to  take  into  account,  although  he  noted   that   different
    considerations might apply in Albania where corruption is rife.  Whilst
    that might be so, a gang with involvement in the trafficking of  people
    and the sale of class A drugs is clearly not intent on abiding  by  the
    laws of the United Kingdom.  The fact that the appellant had  not  been
    contacted, threatened or harmed since he went to the police in  the  UK
    was properly a matter of significance in the judge's assessment.


28. The judge concluded that the threat to the appellant's mother  and  the
    attack on his brother was not 'reliable or capable of being  given  any
    weight'.  I asked both advocates at the hearing how I should understand
    that finding  at  the  end  of  [28].   Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  it
    represented a rejection of the appellant's account.  Mr Symes submitted
    that it represented an acceptance of  the  appellant's  account  but  a
    decision that these incidents failed  to  demonstrate  a  risk  to  the
    appellant.  On proper analysis, however, the judge made both  findings,
    the second in the alternative to the first.  For  the  reasons  he  had
    given previously, he did not accept that the claims were reliable.   In
    the alternative, he considered that the two incidents did not establish
    the appellant to be at risk.  I consider both of those findings to have
    been reached rationally, when considered as part of the decision  as  a
    whole.


29. Taking a step back, the logical threads  running  through  the  judge's
    decision are clear.  He was conscious of  the  unusual  nature  of  the
    appellant's claim and of the expert evidence which suggested  that  his
    traffickers might seek to target a person in  his  position  when  they
    returned to Albania.  Looking at the specific facts of this  case,  and
    bearing in mind the unsatisfactory nature of  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence,  however,  the  judge  did  not  consider   the   appellant's
    traffickers to retain any interest in him.   That  was  not  a  finding
    which was flatly at odds with the expert evidence;  it  was  a  finding
    reached with the expert evidence (and that of Dr Tahiraj in particular)
    firmly in mind.  The basis upon which the judge reached that conclusion
    was not, as Mr Symes suggested at one point, based on nothing more than
    the lack of constant targeting of the appellant's  family  in  Albania.
    The judge took into account a range of  other  matters,  including  the
    traffickers being based in France and the UK and  the  absence  of  any
    adverse interest in the appellant since he had betrayed  them  in  this
    country.  The findings of fact were logical,  as  were  the  inferences
    drawn from them.  The judge was entitled to find against the  appellant
    on protection grounds for the reasons that he gave.  The appeal will be
    dismissed accordingly.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  FtT
shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction in light of the claims made by the appellant and not  because
I have accepted there to be any particular risk to him in  this  country  or
in Albania.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                              01 February 2021





















