
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00332/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16 July 2020                     |On: 27 July 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, instructed by Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6 April  1981  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision of 30 December 2018 to  refuse  his
asylum claim.

The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Bangladesh as a  result  of
his political activities in Bangladesh and in the UK.  He  claimed  to  have
been actively involved with the student  wing  of  the  BNP,  arranging  and
attending meetings and demonstrations and  arranging  programmes  to  assist
senior leaders. He claimed to have been attacked  and  threatened  by  Awami
league supporters. Since arriving in the  UK,  he  had  continued  to  be  a
member of the BNP and had attended meetings  and  demonstrations  from  2011
and he was the East London BNP library affairs secretary.  He  feared  being
killed by the Awami League if he returned to Bangladesh.

In refusing the appellant's claim, the respondent noted that his account  of
his involvement with the BNP was vague and lacking in  detail  and  rejected
his claim to be a member of the BNP and to have had problems  in  Bangladesh
due to his political opinion. The respondent considered that  the  appellant
would be at no risk on return to Bangladesh and that his removal  would  not
breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 12 July and 20 September 2019 by  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan. The judge was unable to view a DVD  which  had
been produced by the appellant and upon which he was relying as evidence  of
his activities in the UK and she considered that it was not, in  any  event,
necessary for her to view the DVD as she  had  other  evidence  of  his  sur
place activities. The hearing was not concluded on the first  date  and  was
resumed on a second date. The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  was  also
claiming to have a  false  case  registered  against  him,  dating  back  to
February 2018, and an arrest warrant issued against him on 16 May 2019.  The
judge did not find the appellant's account  credible.  She  accorded  little
weight to the supporting letters produced and found  the  oral  evidence  of
the appellant's witness to be unreliable. She did  not  find  the  documents
relating to a false case to be reliable and she was not satisfied  that  the
appellant was wanted by the authorities in Bangladesh prior to  his  arrival
in the UK. As for the appellant's activities in the UK, the  judge  accepted
that he had been an active member of the BNP branch in the UK, that  he  had
attended meetings and public protests, that he  had  participated  in  media
interviews and  that  he  had  posted  political  comments  opposed  to  the
government of Bangladesh on  social  media.  However,  she  noted  that  the
appellant's  involvement  with  BNP  politics  in  the  UK  was   a   recent
development and did not accept that his political convictions  were  genuine
or that he would wish to be politically active on return to Bangladesh.  The
judge did not accept that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Bangladesh and did not accept that his removal would breach  his  Article  8
human rights. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Sullivan's decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on two main  grounds:  firstly,  that  there  was  procedural
unfairness arising from the judge's decision not to view the video  evidence
and from her failure to prevent the respondent's representative from  cross-
examining  him  on  information  that  was  not  before  the  Tribunal;  and
secondly, that the judge had  made  flawed  findings  on  material  matters,
including making errors of fact, failing to engage  with  the  social  media
evidence and failing to engage with submissions  and  evidence  on  risk  on
return.

Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  and,  following
an  adjourned  hearing  and  various  sets  of  directions  related  to  the
procedural unfairness point, the matter came before me.

Mr Clarke expressed some concern about  the  judge's  findings  on  risk  on
return, in light of the accepted sur place activities referred  to  at  [50]
of her decision, and with  reference  to  [26]  in  the  appellant's  second
ground of appeal. In view also of my own concerns as to the  matters  raised
in the second ground of appeal, I asked Ms Bayati  to  address  that  ground
first. Having heard her submissions, and with Mr Clarke's  concurrence  with
the matters raised, I agreed that the second ground was made  out  and  that
the judge had made material errors of law in  her  findings  on  credibility
and risk on return. She had made clear errors  of  fact  in  regard  to  the
appellant's evidence at the screening interview related to  the  false  case
lodged against him ([23] of the grounds of appeal and [32]  of  Ms  Bayati's
reply to directions), in regard to  contemporaneous  evidence  of  treatment
for a head wound in 2009 ([24] of the grounds and [33] to [35] of the  reply
to directions) and in regard to the letters of support ([27] of the  grounds
and [36] to [39] of the reply  to  directions).  She  also  failed  to  have
regard to the background evidence when assessing  the  court  documents  and
the allegation of a false case lodged against the  appellant  ([28]  of  the
grounds and [40] to [41] of the reply to directions). Further, as Mr  Clarke
pointed out himself, the judge made findings at [50] about  the  appellant's
activities in the UK and  in  particular  his  social  media  presence,  yet
failed to consider whether that  would  have  brought  him  to  the  adverse
attention of the authorities in Bangladesh and would have put  him  at  risk
on return.

In light of the judge's errors, as referred to  in  the  second  ground,  Ms
Bayati agreed that there was no need to engage  with  the  first  ground  of
appeal and the issue of procedural unfairness. Both parties agreed that  the
matter had to go back to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Accordingly, I set aside Judge Sullivan's decision in its entirety, with  no
findings preserved and remit the case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard de novo before  a  different  judge.  Both  parties  agreed  that  the
appellant would  need  to  make  a  proper  application  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for the DVD to be admitted and viewed and that  a  full  transcript
of the DVD would need to be produced for the appeal.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Sullivan.


      Signed:   S Kebede
      Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                        Dated:      17 July
2020
