
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/00053/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd February 2018                         |On 13th March 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a 21 years old Kurdish national of  Iran.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford,  dated  20
    August  2017,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   his
    protection claim on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The Appellant appealed on the ground that the judge  erred  in  law  in
    his treatment of the expert evidence in  relation  to  the  risk  as  a
    failed asylum  seeker  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and,  secondly,  in  his
    assessment of the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  failing  to
    properly apply BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and to take into account the reported decision  of
    AB & Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT
    0257.

3.   Permission to appeal was refused on ground 1 and granted on  ground  2.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly stated:

         "The Tribunal was not assisted by the inclusion in the  appellant's
         bundle of a large number of unreported decisions (both FtT and  UT)
         or by the fact that Professor Joffe himself referred to SSH and  HR
         [2016] UKUT  00308  (IAC)  as  the  recent  country  guidance  case
         (paragraph 1 of his report dated 26 August 2016).  Be  that  as  it
         may, the Tribunal was in any event entitled to adopt  the  analysis
         of the relevant background country information in  SSH  and  HR  in
         preference to the critique of that analysis that  was  provided  by
         Professor Joffe in his report. In those  circumstances,  any  error
         concerning the question of whether  Professor  Joffe's  conclusions
         were generic or fact-specific was  not  arguably  material  to  its
         outcome (it is also noted that the grounds  do  not  challenge  the
         statement, at paragraph 4 of the  Tribunal's  decision,  that  both
         parties had agreed that the asylum case actually came down  to  the
         issue of credibility). Permission to appeal on the first ground  is
         accordingly refused."

         "It is however arguable that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
         consider whether the Facebook comments that had been posted in  the
         appellant's name (whether or not he was fully aware of  the  detail
         of their contents) might place the appellant  at  risk  on  return.
         This ground is heavily reliant upon the findings in AB  and  Others
         [2015] UKUT 0257 which as with SSH and HR above is  not  designated
         as country guidance. This appeal may  therefore  provide  a  useful
         opportunity for the Upper Tribunal to give guidance to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal as to how  it  should  approach  the  purely  factual
         findings that were made in that appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  on
         the second ground is accordingly granted."

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal
    and stated:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge was well aware of the Facebook posts
         but gave cogent reasons  for  finding  this  would  not  place  the
         appellant at risk upon return.  There can  be  no  presumption  the
         Iranian authorities would  be  aware  of  the  posts,  and  if  the
         appellant was questioned at the pinch-point of  return  he  can  be
         expected to tell the truth that he has no idea what his account  is
         or what the posts say because he is not literate. Indeed, he  could
         not assist the authorities with accessing his account  even  if  he
         wanted to because of illiteracy."

Submissions

5.   Mr Spurling submitted  that  he  would  like  the  court  to  note  his
    criticism of the refusal of permission on ground 1. The parties did not
    agree that the issue in  relation  to  the  asylum  claim  was  one  of
    credibility and it was clear from  the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument
    that was not the case. Mr Spurling  acknowledged  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to prefer the country guidance  case  to  the  expert  report,
    however, he failed to consider the content of  that  report  which  was
    entirely generic. The country guidance case  of  SSH  and  HR  did  not
    specifically deal with the point of Kurdish ethnicity.

6.   In relation to  the  sur  place  activities  and  risk  on  return,  Mr
    Spurling submitted that it was clear from the country guidance case  of
    SSH and HR that  returnees  would  be  questioned  and  if  there  were
    concerns about their activities there  would  be  further  questioning,
    detention and potential ill treatment. Although the Appellant would not
    be at risk purely because he was a failed asylum seeker, the  panel  in
    SSH and HR did not consider  the  consequences  because  there  was  no
    evidence before them as to what  happened  to  returnees.  Mr  Spurling
    submitted that applying the country guidance case of  BA,  whether  the
    Appellant was a high or low-level political activist was  not  relevant
    because if the government knew that he was anti-regime  then  this  was
    sufficient to bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  and
    potentially put him at risk. In BA the government was not aware of  the
    Appellant's involvement in demonstrations until his  face  appeared  on
    YouTube and it was at that point that it  was  decided  the  government
    would be able to identify him and therefore he would be  put  at  risk.
    BA dealt with the mechanism by which the authorities would come to know
    of any activity in the UK.

7.   However, there was also evidence in  the  case  of  AB  that  returnees
    would be asked about  their  activities  on  Facebook  when  they  were
    questioned on return and if there was anything less than flattering  in
    the posts, then the returnee would potentially be at risk. Mr  Spurling
    submitted that the judge did not specifically deal with the content  of
    the Facebook posts. The judge effectively found that the Appellant  was
    re-posting matters that were on  other  Facebook  pages  and  that  the
    Iranian authorities were not likely to take his anti-regime  activities
    seriously.

8.   Mr Spurling submitted that, even assuming  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    answer questions about the Facebook posts because he cannot read,  then
    looking at pages 12 and 15 of  those  posts  it  would  be  immediately
    obvious to his interrogators that the Appellant is  making  anti-regime
    comments and showing anti-government support. On page 12 the  Appellant
    was holding a flag, which showed that he was  clearly  hostile  to  the
    government and on page 15 the Appellant is holding the PJAK  flag.  The
    Appellant did not need to be able to read to interpret these  posts  or
    for the authorities to be able to access his account. His account was a
    public one and could easily be found from a search on the  internet  by
    his interrogators. Having seen what is posted there it would be obvious
    that the Appellant was supporting what is considered to be a  terrorist
    organisation in Iran.
9.   Mr Spurling submitted that these Facebook posts express  hostility  and
    political opposition to the regime. If the authorities became aware  of
    them, it was a clear example of the Appellant  expressing  dissent.  It
    did not matter about  his  motivation  or  the  fact  that  he  was  an
    opportunistic demonstrator. The judge erred in law in failing to  refer
    to BA at all. The judge failed to recognise  that  mere  expression  of
    dissent was enough to get the Appellant into trouble.

10.  Mr Spurling relied on AB  and  submitted  that,  although  it  was  not
    country guidance, there was relevant evidence of the likely reaction of
    the Iranian Government. The decision had been reported and the evidence
    relevant to risk on return was more recent. The judge  failed  to  deal
    with this case in his decision.

11.  Further, the judge found that  the  Appellant's  inability  to  provide
    evidence of his  own  Facebook  identity,  or  online  address,  access
    passwords, codes or content, undermined any conclusion that he would be
    questioned and expected to reveal the truth about his  own  anti-regime
    activities. Mr Spurling submitted that this finding was  incorrect  and
    was not an accurate reflection of the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge. The Appellant acknowledged that he was illiterate and  explained
    that his friends set up his account. Some of the posts he had linked by
    himself and some he had written by dictating to  literate  friends  who
    had written them for him. He knew how to accept friendship requests and
    he knew the difference between private and public posts. He had ensured
    that his were the latter because he wanted all Iran to see them. He did
    not know the specific details of the post, but he knew that  they  were
    against the regime. The judge failed to  make  a  clear  finding  about
    whether the Facebook posts were critical  or  hostile  to  the  Iranian
    regime. The Appellant's account on Facebook was not password  protected
    and anyone could have access to it. The fact that the  Appellant  could
    not assist the authorities was not relevant. The cases  of  AB  and  BA
    were highly relevant and  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    findings therein or apply the country guidance.

12.  Mr Spurling submitted that particular concerns were likely to arise  if
    the Appellant's name was searched on the internet. He would be at  risk
    because of his Facebook posts, together with the fact  that  he  was  a
    failed asylum-seeker, of Kurdish ethnicity, who had  exited  illegally.
    It was clear from paragraph 34 of SSH and  HR  that  Kurdish  ethnicity
    heightened the risk of harm on return. Accordingly, the judge  did  not
    'join the dots' and he  failed  to  properly  apply  SSH  and  HR.  The
    Appellant would not be at risk as a Kurd, per se, but  that,  added  to
    the other concerns, could create a risk. The judge failed to apply  the
    country guidance of BA; any expression of opposition to Iran could  put
    the Appellant at risk if it came to the attention of  the  authorities.
    The Appellant will be questioned on application  for  travel  documents
    and on return to Iran. It must be assumed he will tell  the  truth  and
    therefore the authorities will be aware of his Kurdish  ethnicity,  his
    asylum claim and that he has posted anti-regime comments on Facebook.

13.  Although there was no evidence that the Appellant was  currently  known
    to  the  authorities,  the  Appellant  was  carrying  a  flag  at   the
    demonstration and photographs were posted on Facebook. It was  apparent
    from paragraph 65 of BA, that this was enough to put him at  risk.  The
    fact that he had expressed his dissent was enough to  give  rise  to  a
    significant profile to be anti-regime. The anti-regime comments in  the
    posts on Facebook were enough in themselves without the photographs.

14.  Mr Tarlow relied on  the  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    findings at paragraphs 25 to 27 were open to the judge on the  evidence
    before him and the challenge was merely a disagreement. It was  pointed
    out that there was no disagreement with the  judge's  factual  findings
    that the Appellant was not credible and had set up his Facebook page to
    bolster his weak claim. Mr Spurling argued that this was sufficient  to
    put him at risk because the country guidance showed that it was  likely
    the Appellant would be questioned and that an internet search would  be
    carried out. The Facebook posts would, therefore, come to the attention
    of the authorities. They were clearly hostile and, from what  was  said
    at paragraph 65 of BA, that was sufficient to put him at risk. At  that
    point Mr Tarlow stated that he no longer relied on the Rule 24 response
    and would not make any further submissions.

15.  In response, Mr Spurling relied on paragraphs 49 and 58 of SA  (Iranian
    Arabs - no general risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT  41  (IAC)  and  submitted
    that the judge had erred in law in failing to  apply  country  guidance
    and failing  to  have  regard  to  the  factual  findings  in  AB.  His
    conclusion that the Iranian authorities would not  take  the  Appellant
    seriously, because he had fabricated his Facebook  account  to  bolster
    his claim, was an irrational finding when one considered  the  evidence
    in the cases of BA and  AB;  the  motivation  behind  any  dissent  was
    irrelevant. Mr Spurling invited me to find an error of law.


Relevant Case Law

16.  BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC):

          "65.    As regards the relevance of these factors to  the  instant
             case, of especial relevance is  identification  risk.  We  are
             persuaded that the Iranian  authorities  attempt  to  identify
             persons participating in demonstrations  outside  the  Iranian
             Embassy in London.  The  practice  of  filming  demonstrations
             supports that.  The evidence suggests that there may well have
             been persons in the crowd to assist in the process.  There  is
             insufficient evidence to establish that the regime has  facial
             recognition technology in use in the UK, but  it  seems  clear
             that the Iranian security apparatus attempts to match names to
             faces of demonstrators from photographs. We believe  that  the
             information gathered here is available in Iran. While  it  may
             well be that an appellant's participation in demonstrations is
             opportunistic, the evidence suggests that this is  not  likely
             to be a major influence  on  the  perception  of  the  regime.
             Although, expressing dissent  itself  will  be  sufficient  to
             result in a  person  having  in  the  eyes  of  the  regime  a
             significant political profile, we consider that the nature  of
             the level of the sur place activity will clearly heighten  the
             determination of  the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify  the
             demonstrator while in Britain and to identify him  on  return.
             That, combined with the factors which  might  trigger  enquiry
             would lead to an increased likelihood of  questioning  and  of
             ill-treatment on return."

17.  SSH and HR (illegal exit - failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308 (IAC):

         "25. We should say at this point that  we  have  no  hesitation  in
             agreeing with the submissions of Mr Mills  that  the  evidence
             shows a real risk of persecution/ill-treatment  in  breach  of
             Article 3 for a person who is imprisoned in Iran. This appears
             to be common ground.  In his skeleton, Mr  Mills  quotes  from
             paragraph 3.17.13 of  the  Respondent's  Operational  Guidance
             Note: 'As conditions in prisons and detention  facilities  are
             harsh and  potentially  life-threatening  in  Iran,  they  are
             likely to reach the Article 3 threshold'."


18.  The conclusions of SSH and HR can be summarised as follows:
         (i)  At [22] - returnees without passports are likely to be
    questioned.
         (ii) At [23] - only if concerns arise about previous activities in
             Iran, or wherever they have returned from, would there be any
             risk of further questions, detention or ill-treatment.
         (iii)    At [25] - anyone at risk of imprisonment in Iran is at
             risk of persecution.
         (iv) At [31] - a person guilty of another offence may additionally
             be imprisoned for illegal exit.
         (v)  At [32] - the mere facts of illegal exit or having made an
             asylum claim abroad do not create a risk of ill-treatment.
             There are not enough examples of cases of ill-treatment about
             which sufficient is known.
         (vi) At [34] - Kurdish ethnicity may be an exacerbating factor for
             a returnee otherwise of interest.

19.  AB and Others (internet activities - state  of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]
    UKUT 0257

         "451.    It cannot be the case that a real risk of  persecution  is
             generated simply by  making  some  unsavoury  remark  or  mild
             criticism of the government of Iran. We  make  it  clear  that
             this is not because the government of Iran is tolerant of mild
             criticisms. There is evidence that it is  not.  Mild  concerns
             can be enough as can association with western music or western
             ideas  or  western  fashions.  All  of  these  things  attract
             disapproval and, we are satisfied, might attract persecution.

         455. We do reject Mr Rawat's  submission  that  a  high  degree  of
             activity is necessary to attract persecution. It  is  probably
             the case that the more active persons are the more likely they
             are to be persecuted but the reverse just does not  apply.  We
             find that the authorities do not chase everyone who just might
             be an opponent but if that opponent comes to  their  attention
             for some reason then that person might  be  in  quite  serious
             trouble for conduct, which to the  ideas  of  western  liberal
             society seems of little consequence.

         456. It was accepted that being resident in the UK for a  prolonged
             period may lead to scrutiny and screening on arrival.

         457. We accept the evidence that some people who have  expected  no
             trouble have found trouble and that does concern us.  We  also
             accept the evidence that very few people seem to  be  returned
             unwillingly and this makes it very difficult to  predict  with
             any degree of confidence what fate, if any, awaits them. There
             is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked  about  their
             internet  activity  and  particularly   for   their   Facebook
             password. We can think of no reason whatsoever to  doubt  this
             evidence. It is absolutely clear that blogging and  activities
             on Facebook are very common amongst Iranian citizens and it is
             very  clear  that  the  Iranian  authorities  are  exceedingly
             twitchy about them. We cannot  see  why  a  person  who  would
             attract the authorities sufficiently to  be  interrogated  and
             asked to give account of his conduct outside of Iran would not
             be asked what he had done on the internet. Such a person could
             not be expected to lie, partly because that is how the law  is
             developed and partly because, as is illustrated in one of  the
             examples given above, it is often quite easy to check  up  and
             expose such a person.  We  find  that  the  act  of  returning
             someone creates a 'pinch point' so that returnees are  brought
             into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both
             the time and inclination to  interrogate  them.  We  think  it
             likely that they will be asked about their  internet  activity
             and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to  be
             exposed and if it is less than flattering of the government to
             lead to a real risk of persecution.

         460. We find that our main concern is the pinch-point of return.  A
             person who is returning  to  Iran  after  a  reasonably  short
             period of time on  an  ordinary  passport,  having  left  Iran
             legally, would almost certainly  not  attract  any  particular
             attention at all. However, very few people who come before the
             Tribunal are in such a category. At the very least people  who
             would be before the Tribunal can  expect  to  have  had  their
             ordinary leave to be in the United Kingdom to have lapsed  and
             may well be travelling on a  special  passport.  Nevertheless,
             for the small number of people who would be  returning  on  an
             ordinary passport having left lawfully we do  not  think  that
             there would be any risk to them at all.

         464. We do not find it at all relevant if a  person  had  used  the
             internet in an opportunistic way. We are aware of examples  in
             some  countries  where  there  is  clear  evidence  that   the
             authorities are scornful of people who try to create  a  claim
             by being rude overseas. There is no evidence remotely  similar
             to  that  in  this  case.  The  touchiness  of   the   Iranian
             authorities does not seem to be in the  least  concerned  with
             the motives of  the  person  making  a  claim  but  if  it  is
             interested it makes the situation worse,  not  better  because
             seeking asylum is being rude about the government of Iran  and
             whilst that may  not  of  itself  be  sufficient  to  lead  to
             persecution it is a point in that direction.

         467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom for  a  prolonged
             period does not lead to persecution. However, it may  lead  to
             scrutiny and there is clear  evidence  that  some  people  are
             asked about their internet activity and particularly for their
             Facebook password. The act  of  returning  someone  creates  a
             'pinch point' so that a person is brought into direct  contact
             with the authorities in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and
             inclination to interrogate them. We think it likely that  they
             will be asked about their internet activity and likely if they
             have any internet activity for that to be exposed and if it is
             less than flattering of the government to lead to at the  very
             least a real risk of persecution."




Background Material

20.  The Respondent's July 2016 CIG Iran Kurds and Kurdish Political  Groups
    noted as follows:

         "5.2.3   The activities that Kurds conduct that can be perceived as
               political activities include social welfare  and  solidarity
               activities."

         "5.2.10  Asharq Al-Awsat reported in January 2016 that:

                    'Kurdish opposition sources in Iran have revealed
                    yesterday that the executions carried out by the Iranian
                    regime against the Kurds and other components are
                    increasing annually, indicating that during the past
                    nine months, according to the Iranian calendar, Iran
                    executed more than 750 people, the majority of whom were
                    Kurdish'."

         "11.1.5  On 10 November  2015,  International  campaign  for  human
               rights in Iran reported on  a  Sunni  Kurd  who  was  facing
               execution. The report noted that:

                    'Shahram Ahmadi has been sentenced to death in Iran  due
                    to his activism as a Sunni Muslim and a Kurd. Members of
                    ethnic or religious minorities in  Iran  who  engage  in
                    criticism  of  the  government  are   singled   out   by
                    authorities for particularly harsh treatment, and  there
                    is  a   well-documented   history   of   the   Judiciary
                    disproportionately  meting  out  capital  punishment  to
                    minority activists. Making speeches, distributing  books
                    and  pamphlets,  or  opposing  the  government  are  not
                    capital offenses.  Unfortunately  Judge  Moghisseh  said
                    that Shahram's first two crimes are that  he's  a  Sunni
                    and a Kurd. Therefore, he was presumed guilty  from  the
                    start.'"

21.  The Policy Summary of the Respondent's July 2016  CIG  Iran  Kurds  and
    Kurdish Political Groups states:

         "2.3.3   The situation is different for those  who  become  or  are
               perceived to be involved in  Kurdish  political  activities.
               The  authorities  have  no  tolerance  for  any   activities
               connected to Kurdish political groups and those involved are
               targeted for  arbitrary  arrest,  prolonged  detention,  and
               physical abuse. Even those who express peaceful dissent  are
               at risk of being accused of  being  a  member  of  a  banned
               Kurdish political group. Those involved in Kurdish political
               activities also face a high risk  of  prosecution  on  vague
               charges such as 'enmity  against  God'  and  'corruption  on
               earth'.


         2.3.4    Persons with a high political profile  as  well  as  human
               rights activists and those seeking  greater  recognition  of
               their cultural and linguistic rights  are  targeted  by  the
               authorities because of  their  political  opinion.  However,
               even a person speaking out about Kurdish rights can be  seen
               as a  general  threat.  If  the  Iranian  regime  catches  a
               perceived sympathizer carrying out an activity perceived  to
               be against the government, the consequences for him and  his
               family can be result  in  arbitrary  arrest,  detention  and
               possible ill-treatment.


         2.3.5    Family  members  of  persons  associated  with  a  Kurdish
               political group are also harassed and detained. In pre-trial
               detention in Evin Prison, members of  minority  ethnicities,
               including Kurds reportedly were repeatedly subjected to more
               severe physical punishment or torture than other  prisoners,
               regardless of the type of crime accused. The execution  rate
               is disproportionately high among  Kurds  in  Iran.  A  large
               proportion of these executions are based on  accusations  of
               drug  smuggling,  but  sometimes  political  activists   are
               executed under the pretext of being drug smugglers."




Discussion and Conclusion

22.  The relevant facts in this case are:
    (i)  The Appellant was of no adverse interest to the authorities before
         he left Iran.
    (ii) There was no risk of persecution on account of his illegal exit or
         the fact that he was a failed asylum seeker.
    (iii)    He is of Kurdish ethnicity.
    (iv) The Appellant was not a credible  witness  and  had  no  political
         profile.
    (v)  He attended one demonstration and, with the assistance of  others,
         he posted anti-regime comments and photographs on a  Facebook  page
         under his own name.

23.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following findings:
    (a)  The Appellant had created his public  profile  on  Facebook  as  a
         means to bolster his patently weak asylum claim.
    (b)  The Appellant's sur place  activities  had  been  manufactured  in
         order to support his claim.
    (c)  The Iranian authorities would not have any adverse interest in the
         Appellant because  it  was  clear  that  he  had  manufactured  his
         Facebook account and therefore they would not take him seriously.

24.  In BA, the Tribunal found that even  low-level  opportunistic  activity
    was potentially dangerous if the authorities came to know of it. In SSH
    and HR, the Tribunal found that returnees will be questioned  and  will
    be at  risk  of  further  questioning,  detention  and  potential  ill-
    treatment if there are  any  particular  concerns  arising  from  their
    previous activities either in Iran or in the UK.

25.  The Appellant left Iran about a  year  and  a  half  ago  and  will  be
    returned on an emergency or temporary travel document. Applying SSH and
    HR, he will be questioned on return. It is likely that he will be asked
    about what he was doing in the UK and he cannot be expected to  protect
    himself by lying.

26.  The authorities are reasonably likely to discover  his  anti-government
    activity on Facebook. Even if the Appellant is unable to explain how he
    posted comments on Facebook because he is illiterate, it is likely that
    the authorities would easily be able to access  his  Facebook  account,
    without any  of  his  instructions,  and  would  be  able  to  see  the
    photographs and the comments, which are clearly anti-regime.

27.  The  judge's  finding  that  the  authorities  would  have  no  adverse
    interest in the  Appellant  on  return  was  contrary  to  the  country
    guidance in BA (even low level opportunistic activity could  give  rise
    to a risk on return) and against the weight  of  the  evidence  in  AB,
    which makes factual findings on matters which were specifically  argued
    before the judge and, as a reported Upper Tribunal decision, he  should
    have taken it into account. I find that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to refer to, or apply,  either  BA  or  AB.  I  set  aside  his
    decision to dismiss the appeal and remake it as follows.

28.  I find that it is likely the Appellant would be  questioned  on  return
    to Iran and it is reasonably likely that the authorities have the means
    and the inclination to carry out an  internet  search  and  access  his
    Facebook account. The Appellant will be perceived as being  anti-regime
    even though his motivation was to improve his chances of asylum and the
    posts do not necessarily represent his political opinion. This will put
    him  at  risk  of  further  questions,  detention  and  potential  ill-
    treatment. The fact that he is of Kurdish ethnicity will exacerbate the
    situation.
29.  I find that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant will be at risk of persecution, serious harm or treatment  in
    breach of Article 3 on return to Iran.

30.  Accordingly, I find that there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal. I set the decision of  20  August  2017
    aside and re-make: The Appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    protection claim is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

