
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00974/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2020                   |On 11 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms McCarthy
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1999 and is a male  citizen  of  Albania.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of  State  dated  21  December  2017  refusing  his   application   for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 October 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the outset of the initial hearing, Mr Jarvis, who appeared  for  the
    Secretary  of  State,  told  me  that  the  respondent  had  misgivings
    regarding the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. He  recognised  that
    there was a tension between the judge's finding that the  appellant  is
    not homosexual as he claims and the finding at [55] that the  appellant
    and his friend K are 'special friends and may even have a crush on each
    other'. It was unclear whether the judge believed that such a  'crush,'
    albeit  between  what  she  described  as  immature  young  men,  could
    constitute a genuine homosexual relationship. Mr Jarvis did  not  refer
    to  the  judge's  alternative  findings  as  regards  internal  flight.
    However, I consider that there is  substantial  merit  in  the  grounds
    concerning the issue [21-23] and, in light of the position  adopted  by
    both advocates, the internal flight alternative will need to be  looked
    at again following findings as regards the appellant's  true  sexuality
    and how this may impact upon his ability to return to his home area  of
    Albania or to relocate.

 3. Ms McCarthy,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  shared  Mr  Jarvis's
    concerns. In addition, she submitted that the judge  had  misunderstood
    the evidence of the appellant's foster mother. The judge  should  place
    substantial weight upon her findings regarding  an  evening  which  the
    appellant claims to have spent with K and whether the foster mother was
    a was not present. The appellant asserts (the Mr Jarvis did not seek to
    argue with that assertion) that the foster mother's evidence  was  that
    she had not eaten a meal with the appellant and his friend and that the
    discrepancies/failure to recall past events identified in the  evidence
    by the judge at [43] did not exist.

 4. The judge has  carried  out  an  extremely  thorough  analysis  of  the
    evidence and issues in this case. However, I find  that  I  agree  with
    both representatives that the judge's reasoning is  unclear  in  places
    and that she has placed weight upon her own misunderstanding of part of
    the appellant's evidence. I told the parties that  I  intended  to  set
    aside the decision. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for that tribunal to remake the decision following a hearing  de  novo.
    None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.  In  the  light  of  the
    complexity of the evidence adduced  in  this  appeal,  the  appellant's
    representatives are directed to serve on the respondent and to file  at
    the Tribunal a paginated, consolidated bundle of documents.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of  the  findings
of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
that Tribunal to remake the  decision  following  a  hearing  de  novo.  The
appellant's representatives are directed to serve on the respondent  and  to
file at the Tribunal a paginated, consolidated bundle of documents  no  less
than 10 days before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


Signed                              Date 7 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
