
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
pa/00052/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st July 2017                          |On 02nd August  2017             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    s a c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge I  F  Taylor  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th March 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born  3rd  January  1980.
    He arrived in the UK on 11th December 2007 with leave to  remain  as  a
    visitor.  He overstayed and made a claim for asylum on 8th June 2016.

 3. The asylum claim was made on the basis of his  sexual  orientation,  in
    that he claimed to be a member of a particular social group, namely gay
    and bisexual males in Bangladesh.

 4. The asylum and human rights application was  refused  on  7th  December
    2016 and the appeal was heard by the FTT on 1st February 2017.

 5. The FTT found the Appellant to be gay, but did not find that  he  would
    be at risk if returned to Bangladesh, and therefore he was not entitled
    to a grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and his  removal  from
    the UK would not breach his protected human rights.

 6. The Appellant had been represented before the  FTT,  but  submitted  an
    application for permission to appeal without legal representation.  The
    application for permission was made on  the  basis  that  the  FTT  had
    applied the wrong standard of proof.  The Appellant contended that  the
    appropriate standard of proof is a reasonable degree of likelihood, and
    the FTT had applied a higher standard, and this amounted to a  material
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf,  although
    no error of law was found  to  be  disclosed  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms;

         "The sole ground for appeal is  that  the  judge  has  applied  the
         incorrect standard  of  proof.   The  judge  set  out  the  correct
         standard and burden of proof at paragraph 2 of the decision and  so
         the grounds disclose no arguable error of law.

         I have considered not only the specific grounds for appeal but also
         the entirety of the decision to see  if  it  readily  discloses  an
         arguable error of law.

         Having found the Appellant to be gay, the treatment of the evidence
         at paragraph 23 of the decision discloses an arguable error of  law
         in the application of the jurisprudence in HJ (Iran) v SSHD  [2010]
         UKHL 31 which the judge incorrectly cited or relied  on  as  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 172 and so permission to appeal is granted."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended that the FTT directed itself appropriately, and
    had found at paragraph 32 that the evidence did  not  disclose  a  real
    risk of persecution to homosexuals in general.  That being the case, HJ
    (Iran) does not have any application.

 9. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mr Nadeem submitted that the FTT had obtained objective evidence  after
    the hearing, and had not considered the objective evidence relied  upon
    by the Appellant at paragraphs 27 - 34 of his witness  statement  dated
    1st February 2017.  The objective evidence referred to in  the  witness
    statement is the Country of Origin  Information  Report  on  Bangladesh
    dated 31st August 2013.

11. Mr Nadeem submitted that at  paragraph  32,  the  FTT  had  found  that
    although there was discrimination, intimidation and harassment  of  gay
    and bisexual  men,  and  there  were  isolated  incidents  of  horrific
    violence, this did not reach the high level required  to  amount  to  a
    real risk of persecution.  Mr Nadeem contended that the FTT had  failed
    to supply adequate reasons for concluding that there was no  real  risk
    of persecution.

12. Mr Nadeem also relied upon the grant of permission, contending that the
    FTT had not adequately considered the guidance in HJ (Iran).

13. Mr Mills submitted that the FTT had followed the guidance in HJ  (Iran)
    and had answered the questions posed in paragraph 82 of that  decision,
    although the FTT had dealt with the questions in a different order.

14. Mr Mills' view differed from the rule 24 response, in that he  accepted
    that HJ (Iran) has relevance,  but  the  FTT  after  finding  that  the
    Appellant was gay, should then have considered whether there would be a
    risk if he lived openly, and having found that  such  a  risk  was  not
    proved, need have gone no further.

15. Mr Mills pointed out that there was no background or objective evidence
    contained within  the  Appellant's  bundle  before  the  FTT,  and  the
    Appellant had been legally represented.  The Presenting Officer  before
    the FTT had not submitted the most up-to-date objective evidence, which
    the FTT had obtained following the hearing,  and  which  was  the  Home
    Office Country  Policy  and  Information  note  on  Bangladesh,  sexual
    orientation and gender identity dated December 2016.  Mr Mills  pointed
    out that this contained independent background evidence.

16. In this case the FTT had commented upon the evidence relied upon by the
    Appellant in his witness statement as  there  were  references  proving
    this at paragraphs 21, 28 and 29 of the  FTT  decision.   The  FTT  had
    dealt with all the evidence produced, and could not be criticised,  and
    permission to appeal was not granted upon the point that  the  FTT  had
    considered the most up-to-date objective evidence after the hearing.

17. In response Mr Nadeem submitted that Mr Mills  had  not  addressed  the
    inadequacy of reasoning at paragraph 32, and although Mr Nadeem had not
    raised as an issue the  fact  that  the  FTT  had  obtained  up-to-date
    objective evidence after the hearing, he now raised the point that  the
    FTT had not given the parties the  opportunity  to  comment  upon  that
    objective evidence.  I was asked to find that the  FTT  had  materially
    erred in law and the decision  should  be  set  aside,  and  Mr  Nadeem
    suggested that it may be appropriate to consider this case as a country
    guidance decision if the decision of the FTT was set aside and  was  to
    be remade.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. Permission to appeal was not granted on the one challenge that was made
    by the Appellant which related to the standard of proof.  It  is  clear
    that the FTT adopted the correct standard and  burden  of  proof.   The
    grant of permission refers to paragraph 2 of the FTT decision,  and  in
    addition at paragraph 20 the FTT makes specific reference  to  the  low
    standard of proof that applies in this case, and specifically refers to
    a reasonable degree of likelihood.

19. There was no challenge to the FTT considering objective evidence  which
    had not been before it.   I  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    legally represented when he made  his  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, but this did not form  part  of  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
    Nadeem, until he responded to the submissions made by Mr Mills.  It was
    then contended that neither party had  been  given  an  opportunity  to
    comment upon the objective evidence obtained by the FTT, which was  the
    December 2016 country Policy and Information  note  on  Bangladesh,  in
    relation to sexual orientation and gender identity.

20. In my view the general rule is that a  Tribunal  should  only  consider
    evidence that has been placed before it, which means that both  parties
    can comment upon that evidence.  However, in this case I  do  not  find
    that relying upon the most up-to-date  Country  of  Origin  Information
    amounts to an error of law.  The FTT considered the evidence  that  had
    been submitted by both parties.  The conclusion of the FTT was that the
    evidence relied upon by the Appellant did not disclose that  a  gay  or
    bisexual male in Bangladesh would be subject to  persecution.   I  find
    that sustainable reasons for that conclusion were given.

21. Mr Nadeem submitted that the FTT had not considered the background  and
    objective evidence relied upon by the Appellant.  That  information  is
    referred to in paragraph 27 of the Appellant's witness statement  dated
    1st February 2007 and is the Country of Origin  Information  Report  on
    Bangladesh dated 31st August 2013.  I do not accept that  the  FTT  did
    not consider this  evidence.   There  is  specific  reference  to  that
    evidence at paragraph 21.

22. I do not find that the FTT materially erred in  considering  HJ  (Iran)
    which is the point upon which permission to appeal  was  granted.   The
    FTT did make reference to an incorrect citation  at  paragraph  16  but
    that without more is not an error of law.

23. The Supreme Court at paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran) provided guidance on the
    approach to be followed by a Tribunal when  an  applicant  applies  for
    asylum on the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution  because  he
    or  she  is  gay.   Firstly,  the  Tribunal  must  decide  whether  the
    individual is gay or would be treated as gay by  potential  persecutors
    in the country of nationality.

24. If satisfied that the individual is gay the Tribunal  must  ask  itself
    whether it is satisfied that gay people who live openly would be liable
    to persecution in the country of nationality.

25. If that is the case the Tribunal must then go on  to  consider  whether
    the  individual  would  live  openly  if  returned.   If  the  Tribunal
    concludes  that  the  individual  would  live  discreetly   and   avoid
    persecution it must ask why.

26. If the Tribunal concludes that the  individual  would  live  discretely
    because that is how he wished to live, then he would not be entitled to
    asylum.

27. If however the individual decided to live discretely because of a  fear
    of persecution, then he would be entitled to asylum.

28. At paragraph 20 the FTT makes a finding that the Appellant  is  gay  or
    bisexual.

29. The FTT does not then ask whether the  Appellant  would  be  liable  to
    persecution but considers whether he  would  live  freely  and  openly.
    Therefore the FTT does not follow the order of questions  posed  in  HJ
    (Iran).

30. The FTT finds that the Appellant would not live openly if  returned  to
    Bangladesh because he fears the consequences.

31. Having reached this finding, the FTT goes on to  consider  whether  the
    background and objective evidence indicates that the Appellant would be
    liable to persecution.  Therefore the FTT is dealing  with  the  second
    question posed in HJ (Iran).

32. The FTT then extensively considers the background evidence at paragraph
    26.  The conclusion is that LGBT individuals in Bangladesh suffer  from
    discrimination, intimidation and harassment, but the evidence does  not
    show that there is a real risk of persecution.  I find that  there  are
    sustainable and adequate reasons given by the  FTT  for  reaching  this
    conclusion at paragraphs 26 - 32.  My conclusion is that  although  the
    FTT did not follow the sequence of questions posed  in  HJ  (Iran)  the
    general principles were considered, and  the  FTT  reached  conclusions
    open to it  on  the  evidence  and  gave  adequate  reasons  for  those
    findings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             28th July 2017
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             28th July 2017

