
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00775/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 11 April 2019                              |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     OT
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, solicitor ofAman Solicitors Advocates
                    (London) Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team

                             Anonymity Direction
Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or  any  family  member.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a Palestinian born in 1998 in  Lebanon  in  a  refugee
    camp where his mother and siblings remain. His father is  deceased.  He
    states his membership of the Palestine Liberation Movement (Fatah)  was
    terminated because of his opposition in the camp to Ansrullah-Hezbollah
    who pursued him and raided his home.

2.   The Appellant states that on 3 May 2017 he  left  Lebanon  on  his  own
    passport and travel to Turkey, thence he went to Bolivia and then to an
    unknown state in Africa, arriving in the United Kingdom  by  air  on  5
    July 2017 when he sought subsidiary protection.

The SSHD's decision

3.    On  2  January  2018  the  SSHD  refused  the  claim  for   subsidiary
    protection. The SSHD accepted the Appellant's membership of  Fatah  but
    did not believe his account of difficulties with Hezbollah or  that  he
    would be at risk on return to his home.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

4.   On 16 January 2018 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal.  The  grounds
    assert the Appellant has told the truth about what happened in  Lebanon
    and referred to two original letters from Fatah which he  had  supplied
    to  the  SSHD  and  which  corroborated  his  account.  By  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 January 2019 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Dineen
    made adverse credibility findings against the Appellant  and  dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.  On 11 February 2019 Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Saffer granted permission to appeal because  it  was  arguable
    Judge Dineen had erred in law by making  adverse  credibility  findings
    without considering the background evidence about conditions in refugee
    camps in Lebanon and in not addressing the two letters from Fatah.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

Submissions for the Appellant

5.   The Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing.  Mr  Saeed  referred  to
    paragraph 4 of the grounds for appeal which identified the need for the
    First-tier Tribunal  to  consider  country  background  information  in
    asylum cases.  Inherent  probability  while  possibly  helpful  in  the
    assessment of  domestic  cases  could  be  dangerous  and  even  wholly
    inappropriate in some asylum cases where the evidence will be reference
    will to societies with customs and circumstances  very  different  from
    those experienced by the fact-finders. Mr Saeed referred to  pages  11,
    12, 15 and 72 of the Appellant's bundle and pages  49  and  50  of  his
    supplemental bundle to show that it had been necessary for the Judge to
    take into account the background evidence before making his findings of
    implausibility which in the circumstances did not bear any scrutiny.



6.   The two letters from Fatah were highly relevant and the Judge  had  not
    taken any account of them. One of them  specifically  referred  to  the
    escape  of  the  Appellant  from  his  home  when  Ansarullah-Hezbollah
    attempted to arrest him. Paragraph 39 of the SSHD's reasons for refusal
    had rejected these two letters simply on the basis that only copies had
    been submitted. This was  incorrect  because  the  originals  had  been
    submitted as identified in his firm's letter of 19 December 2017 in the
    SSHD's bundle which had been sent after the SSHD  had  interviewed  the
    Appellant and some two weeks before the SSHD's decision  under  appeal.
    These letters should have been  considered  and  if  rejected,  reasons
    given. Similarly, the Judge should have considered them. The First-tier
    Tribunal's decision contained material errors of law and should be  set
    aside.

Submissions for the SSHD

 7.   Mr  Kotas  submitted  the  background  evidence  did  not  assist  the
    Appellant on the points which the Judge  had  taken  against  him.  The
    appeal had been dismissed because the Appellant's account of his escape
    from his home  when  raided  by  Ansarullah-Hezbollah  was  simply  not
    credible and because his claim to have continued his activities against
    them after being warned while still in his home camp was  not  accepted
    by the Judge.

8.   The Appellant's home camp was a small one as  identified  at  paragraph
    40 of the SSHD's reasons for refusal and the  challenge  based  on  the
    Judge's claimed  failure  to  take  into  account  background  evidence
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with his conclusion.

9.   It was accepted the Judge had not referred  to  the  two  letters  from
    Fatah. First, they would not have removed the Judge's concern about the
    Appellant's account  of  his  escape  and  second,  given  the  adverse
    credibility findings made by the Judge, the learning in  Tanveer  Ahmed
    *[2002] UKIAT 00439 was applicable with  the  consequence  that  little
    weight could be attached to them.

10.  The grounds disclose no material error of law and the  decision  should
    stand.

Response for the Appellant

11.  Mr Saeed pointed out that one of the letters confirmed  the  manner  of
    escape claimed by the Appellant and needed to have been considered with
    the other evidence and a holistic approach taken to the  assessment  of
    the Appellant's account.

Conclusion

12.  I noted the Appellant was not present so that it would  not  have  been
    practicable in any event if there were a material error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to proceed  to  a  substantive  re-
    hearing. I therefore reserved my decision on the  error  of  law  issue
    which now follows.

13.  I find the letters from Fatah are relevant  to  the  appeal.  Originals
    was supplied before the SSHD  issued  its  decision.  The  reasons  for
    rejecting these letters were inaccurate, in  that  originals  had  been
    produced to the SSHD. The grounds for appeal expressly referred to  the
    submission of the originals of the two  letters  and  it  appears  that
    subsequent to their submission prior to the SSHD's decision neither the
    SSHD nor the First-tier Tribunal have considered them. One of  the  two
    letters made specific mention of the Appellant's escape from arrest  by
    Ansarullah-Hezbollah. It is not possible to conclude that had the Judge
    considered the  extensive  background  evidence  about  conditions  and
    political factions in the Lebanese refugee camps and the  two  original
    Fatah letters he would inevitably have come  to  the  same  conclusion.
    Consequently, I  conclude  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains a material error of  law  and  should  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety, with no findings of fact preserved.

14.  Having regard to the extent of the fact-finding exercise likely  to  be
    required at the re-hearing of this appeal, I consider it appropriate to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

15.  An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  was
    no request for the direction to be lifted and in the  circumstances  it
    is continued until the next hearing when the parties should address the
    Tribunal whether it should be discontinued.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.
    The substantive appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.
    Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  14.  v.
2019



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

