
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00818/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2020                  |On 12 January 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    EAHA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Pipe instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Hollings-Tennant ('the Judge') promulgated on the 17
        August 2020 in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
        protection and human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 28 August 2020.



Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on the  14  January  1981,
        who entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 6 July 2009  with  leave
        to remain as a student valid to 30 June 2010. The appellant's leave
        was extended to 25 July 2014.
     4.  Following  further   unsuccessful   applications,   in   different
        categories, the appellant claimed asylum on 7 August 2015 which was
        refused by the respondent and that refusal upheld  on  appeal.  The
        appellant lodged further  submissions  on  16  October  2018  which
        although  initially  refused  pursuant  to  paragraph  353  of  the
        Immigration Rules, were reconsidered leading to a  further  refusal
        with a right of appeal which was the decision subject to the appeal
        before the First-tier Tribunal.
     5. Having considered the written and oral evidence the Judge sets  out
        findings of fact from [22] of the decision under challenge.
     6. The Judge noted, pursuant to Devaseelan,  that  the  appellant  now
        relied upon new matters that were not part of  his  earlier  claim,
        namely sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom  involving  his
        posting comments on Facebook which  are  critical  of  the  Kurdish
        political parties. The Judge noted that the  earlier  asylum  claim
        was brought on the basis of  an  alleged  fear  of  persecution  on
        return because the appellant sold alcohol and cigarettes as part of
        his business and that  the  appellant  had  been  found  to  be  an
        unreliable witness.
     7. The Judge considered the Facebook posts in the current appeal  from
        [26]. At [27] the Judge writes:


        27.  Having heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  considered
             the content of his Facebook posts, I  am  prepared  to  accept
             that he has strong opinions  about  what  he  believes  to  be
             corruption within the  IKR.  He  has  provided  a  significant
             amount of  documentary  evidence,  by  way  of  printout  from
             Facebook, the content of which indicates that he has  both  an
             awareness of political issues and events in the IKR  and  that
             he can articulate opinions about such matters. It seems to  me
             that the catalyst for such opinions was his failure to  secure
             employment in 2006 because he was not affiliated to  the  PUK,
             rather than any specific interest in politics per se. This  is
             because he mentioned several times in evidence the  fact  that
             he lost a job because of political issues. As such,  there  is
             perhaps some merit in  the  Respondent's  assertion  that  the
             Appellant does not genuinely hold political beliefs. It is, of
             course, possible that his criticism  arises  out  of  personal
             frustration rather than reflective of any moral duty to  speak
             out, and I note that several posts are of a  personal  nature,
             including a post on 12 May 2018 about the incident in 2006,  a
             post about his mother receiving poor treatment from a  doctor,
             and another about the education  sector  and  a  friend  being
             sacked. That said, the Appellant does not claim to  have  been
             involved in political activities and whatever  his  motivation
             for posting comments, I find that it is reasonably likely that
             his criticism reflects genuine views  about  corruption,  that
             such views can properly be categorised as a political  opinion
             and would likely be perceived as such  by  those  reading  his
             posts.


     8. The Judge thereafter considers whether in light of the finding made
        the appellant will face a credible real risk on return. At  [31-32]
        the Judge writes:


        31.  The Respondent  accepts  that  the  content  of  the  Facebook
             adduced are critical of  the  Kurdish  political  parties  but
             argues there is no evidence to  substantiate  the  Appellant's
             assertion that the posts are set to public  view.  Mr  Scholes
             referred to evidence from Facebook  with  regards  to  privacy
             settings and argued that posts can be  made  private,  content
             changed, and that it is easy to manipulate posts.  There  does
             not appear to  be  any  specific  indication  on  any  of  the
             Facebook screenshots provided to suggest that such  posts  are
             set to private view. Even if  there  was  an  indication,  the
             privacy settings on Facebook can be changed  at  any  time  to
             make such posts, or  indeed  an  entire  profile,  private  or
             visible to just friends on Facebook.  As such, I find that the
             screenshots, in themselves, are not  sufficient  to  establish
             that such posts are publicly available to a wider audience.


        32.  An indication  as  to  whether  Facebook  posts  are  publicly
             available may  be  derived  from  the  number  of  'likes'  or
             'comments' such posts receive, with greater numbers  at  least
             suggesting the posts have been viewed by a wider audience.  In
             the Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL), the  Respondent  refers
             to  the  fact  that  there  is  minimal  engagement  with  the
             Appellants posts, with very few  'likes'  or  'comments'  from
             other Facebook  users.  This  is  reflected  in  the  evidence
             presented - the maximum number of 'likes' received on  any  of
             the Appellants posts is 38 (relating to a post on 15  December
             2019) and the maximum number of 'comments' on any one post  is
             19 (relating to a post on 6 November 2018). I have  considered
             the extent of engagement with  the  Appellants  posts  in  the
             context of the expert  evidence  from  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah,  who
             explains that Facebook has become a battleground for political
             activists  [at  paragraph  75].  I  find  that  the  level  of
             engagement  with  the  Appellants  posts   particularly   when
             considering the inflammatory nature of some of his comments on
             subjects that people have strong opinions about and thus  more
             likely to provoke a  reaction,  strongly  suggests  that  such
             posts are not publicly available and are instead only  visible
             to those who he has accepted as friends on Facebook.


     9. The Judge examined the evidence in relation to an alleged threat to
        the appellant's brother by unknown masked men  in  his  summerhouse
        outside Sulaymaniyah city on 27 May 2008, in which it  was  alleged
        the appellant's brother was told he will be killed if the appellant
        continued to post comments on Facebook,  but  noted  at  [36]  that
        despite the appellant  continuing  to  post  comments  on  Facebook
        neither his brother nor any other member of  his  family  had  been
        since threatened by these men  or  any  other  person  directly  or
        indirectly. The Judge also considered the appellant's  evidence  of
        having received  threats  via  Facebook  Messenger  from  a  Hawker
        Ramazan on 11 October 2018. In assessing this evidence at [37]  the
        Judge writes "However, I find that I can place little weight on the
        evidence relating to this threat. First,  the  translation  of  the
        conversation starts with Hawker Ramazan indicating that he has sent
        an 'add request' and asking why the Appellant has not accepted  it,
        with the Appellant following that up by asking  who  he  was,  with
        threatening  responses  received   thereafter.   The   conversation
        suggests they were not on Facebook 'friends' and that the Appellant
        wanted to ascertain  the  person  was  before  accepting  any  such
        request. In contrast, the screenshot of  the  messages  (Appellants
        bundle, page 201), indicates that he 'added' Hawker on  11  October
        2018 and accepted the request. I do not find it credible  that  the
        Appellant would accept a request from an individual he did not know
        only four months after his brother was allegedly  attacked  because
        of the Appellants Facebook activity. In addition, had the Appellant
        received what amounts to a death threat from another Facebook  user
        he would surely at least have reported that threat to Facebook,  if
        not the police, and blocked the individual but there is no evidence
        to suggest he has done that.
    10. The Judge summarises the credibility findings  between  [39-40]  in
        the following terms:


        39.  Having carefully considered all the evidence in the round,  as
             I must do, I accept that the  Appellant  has  strong  opinions
             about corruption in  the  IKR  and  that  this  amounts  to  a
             political opinion. Bearing in mind the lower standard of proof
             that applies in such matters, I do not consider  that  he  has
             deliberately manufactured Facebook posts for the  purposes  of
             seeking asylum (see Danian v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 96) nor can he
             be expected to delete posts  that  relate  to  genuinely  held
             opinions to avoid persecution on  return  (see  RT  (Zimbabwe)
             [2010] EWCA Civ 1285 and HJ (Iran) [2010] EWCA Civ 172.


        40.  However, given my findings as set out above, I do  not  accept
             that he has posted such comments publicly, that  he  has  been
             threatened as a consequence, or that  the  incident  involving
             his brother was related to the Appellants Facebook  activities
             as claimed. I do  not  accept  that  he  has  a  strong  moral
             conviction to raise awareness, if he did then he would  surely
             have posted comments at some point between his arrival in  the
             United Kingdom in 2009 and 2013, notwithstanding that  he  was
             focusing on his studies. He claims to have been aware  of  the
             risks involved and uses that to explain why he  did  not  post
             comments whilst he was in Iraq, yet if he  was  aware  of  the
             risks as claimed, he would surely have mentioned his  Facebook
             posts in his appeal against the refusal of his previous asylum
             claim in 2016, some three years after having started  to  make
             such  comments.  When  these   factors   are   considered   in
             conjunction with the lack of evidence that his posts are,  and
             continue to be, publicly available,  and  the  lack  of  wider
             public engagement with those posts, despite  the  inflammatory
             nature of some comments,  I  do  not  accept  the  Appellant's
             assertion that the posts are available to  others  beyond  his
             friends and family on Facebook.


    11. The Judge considered the position in the  alternative,  as  if  the
        Facebook posts were available  in  the  public  domain,  from  [41]
        leading to an alternative  conclusion  at  [47]  in  the  following
        terms:


        47.  As such, I find that the Appellant has not established that he
             faces a real risk of persecution or serious harm on return  to
             the IKR. Even if his Facebook posts are publicly available  he
             has not established that such posts have come to the attention
             of the Kurdish political parties, and even if they  did  there
             is no real risk of him being targeted directly as a result  on
             the evidence presented. In addition, he would be returning  to
             his home area of Sulaymaniyah, where his family still  reside.
             In his expert report, Dr Fatah  comments  (at  paragraph  174)
             that the Appellants Facebook posts are primarily  critical  of
             the KDP. This further fortifies my conclusion  that,  even  to
             the lower standard of proof, he would not face a real risk  of
             persecution in Sulaymaniyah, an area controlled by the PUK.


    12. The appellant relied on five grounds of appeal. The  respondent  in
        the Rule 24 response dated 12 October 2020 opposes the application.



Error of law


    13. The appellants first ground asserts the  Judge  erred  at  [44]  in
        considering the expert report of  Dr  Fatah  after  making  adverse
        credibility findings and in failing to consider  the  report  as  a
        whole.
    14. [44] falls within the Judges alternative findings  as  demonstrated
        above.  The primary finding is that it was  not  made  out  anybody
        within the IKR other than appellant's friends and family were aware
        of  the  appellant's  Facebook  posts.  The  report  of  Dr   Fatah
        specifically confirms at [52] that he was instructed to address the
        issue of risk to the appellant  due  to  his  criticising  the  KRG
        authorities which is not relevant  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
        Facebook posts could be viewed within the public domain.
    15. The Judge was correct to consider the question of the accessibility
        of the appellant's Facebook posts as being the core of his case, as
        it as a result of such comments being posted in the  public  domain
        that the appellant claims a real risk arises.
    16. A Facebook account  has  a  number  of  restrictions  available  in
        relation to who the account holder wishes to view his or her posts,
        as follows:


            . 'Public': meaning anyone on or  off  Facebook  can  view  the
              posts
            . 'Friends': restricting those who can  view  the  posts  to  a
              user's friends on Facebook
            . 'Friends except': preventing some  added  as  'friends'  from
              viewing the posts.
            . 'Specific friends': only show to some friends
            . 'Only me': only the user can view


    17. The restriction "friends" is the default setting on Facebook.
    18. The Reasons for Refusal letter at [73]  raised  the  issue  of  the
        Facebook posts where it is written at [73]:


        73.  Regarding your Facebook posts themselves, you  have  submitted
             numerous screenshots  of  numerous  posts  featuring  on  your
             Facebook profile spanning dates of 2013 - 2018. These  consist
             of both your  own  and  shared  posts,  including  photos  and
             videos. It is accepted that  the  content  of  the  posts  are
             criticising the Kurdish political regime. However it is  noted
             that there is minimal engagement with your posts. There is  no
             more than 10 'likes' on any picture provided and many have  no
             'likes' or comments. There is also no indication  provided  as
             to whether such posts are set to public view, so that they are
             available to and have been viewed  by  a  wider  audience  and
             people in Iraq. Overall, it has not been evidenced that people
             in  Iraq  have  seen  any  such  posts   on   your   Facebook.
             Additionally, it is noted that you did not leave Iraq  with  a
             political profile. Activity on Facebook is all sur  place  and
             therefore, there is no indication that you have already raised
             the concern of  the  Iraqi  authorities  or  would  do  so  on
             arrival. You have provided no evidence that you  have  carried
             out any additional or activities in the UK which would enhance
             your risk of being adversely known to those you claim to fear.
             There is also nothing to show that these posts have originated
             in Iraq or how of the people you claim to  fear  would  locate
             your page. Ultimately, it is not demonstrated that the parties
             you claim to fear would have any knowledge of your  posts,  or
             if they did, considering the very minimal engagement  on  your
             private Facebook posts, it is not accepted  that  you  are  at
             risk of persecution for your political opinion.


    19. I accept there is merit in Mr Pipe's submission that the number  of
        'likes' or 'comments' is not an indicator of how many  people  have
        read the Facebook post - see  ground  3,  paragraph  5(c).  Entries
        under either  category  arise  as  a  result  of  an  individual(s)
        clicking the 'like' link which records  the  cumulative  number  of
        such activities or the 'comment' which enables them to  enter  text
        in response. It is not irrational for Mr  Pipe  to  have  submitted
        that  others  may  view  posts  who  would  not  necessarily   have
        undertaken either action, especially if they did not want to reveal
        their own identity or location.
    20. This submission does not, however, assist the appellant for even if
        the Judge was wrong to find the number of 'likes' or 'comments' was
        relevant, this does not of itself demonstrate that the  appellant's
        claim that his posts are in the public domain and could  be  viewed
        by others is credible.  The core finding is that the appellant  had
        not shown by adducing suitable evidence that the posts are or  were
        in the public domain.
    21. Whether a Facebook post is public or private is a setting that  can
        be changed. A Facebook user will be aware that the default  setting
        for all posts is that they are private and therefore only viewed by
        those to whom the appellant gives permission. There was no evidence
        before the Judge to show that the appellant had changed the setting
        on his Facebook account  from  private  to  public  or  provided  a
        printout of the timeline which will have clearly recorded  relevant
        information concerning individual  posts,  including  the  date  of
        creation and whether the same have been  manipulated,  despite  the
        lack of any such evidence having been noted as being of concern  in
        the refusal letter.
    22. The onus is upon the appellant to establish his claim. It  has  not
        been shown the Judge's finding there was no evidence  to  show  the
        Facebook posts were publicly available to a wider audience  is  one
        infected by arguable legal error.
    23. In relation to the comments posted in response to  the  appellant's
        own postings, it was not made out these were from  individuals  who
        have the capacity to access the same in the public  domain  or  are
        from those the appellant specifically claims he faces a  real  risk
        from.
    24. The appellant asserts in Ground 2, paragraph 5(b), that at [27] the
        Judge finds the appellant's activities are genuinely motivated  and
        can be categorised as a political opinion yet imports the notion of
        a moral duty which is used as a yardstick by which  to  assess  the
        credibility of the appellant's activities.  The  appellant  asserts
        the use of such amounts to legal error due to applying an erroneous
        test to the consideration of the claim.
    25. As Mr Tan submitted, it is important to read the determination as a
        whole. [27] is set out above. At [28] the Judge writes:


        28.  However, it does not necessarily  follow  that  an  individual
             holding such opinions would consider it their  moral  duty  to
             express those views publicly  on  social  media.  In  evidence
             before me, the Appellant was clear that he  felt  it  was  his
             duty to speak out and raise  awareness  about  corruption  and
             that Facebook was the best way to do so. He went as far as  to
             say that he considered the risks to his family  but  preferred
             to do  his  duty  by  writing  about  such  matters  publicly.
             However, this strong  moral  stance  did  not  compel  him  to
             undertake any political activities or post  critical  comments
             whilst in Iraq, even though  he  claims  to  have  been  using
             Facebook at the time. When asked  about  this,  the  Appellant
             says that he did not post in Iraq due to the  risks  of  being
             tortured or killed and that he said no to them in other  ways,
             which is why he lost an employment opportunity is  2006.  This
             suggests that his moral convictions are not as  strong  as  to
             take such  risks  himself,  which  casts  some  doubt  on  his
             assertions that it is his duty to post on Facebook  regardless
             of the consequences. That said, Facebook was only  created  in
             2004 and I accept Mr Pipe's submission that it was not such  a
             big thing in Iraq before the  Appellant  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom in 2009. However,  whilst  it  is  fair  to  say  that
             Facebook has become more  prominent  as  a  means  to  express
             political views in recent years, the Appellant's oral evidence
             was that he did use Facebook in Iraq but did not post  because
             of the risks involved.


    26. I find there is merit in the written  submission  of  Mr  Tan  that
        rather than applying an impermissible test the Judge was  assessing
        whether a claim put forward by the appellant, that he had published
        critical material on social media publicly, was true. If the  issue
        in the case was whether the appellant could be expected to hide his
        political beliefs and a suggestion the existence of  a  moral  duty
        may have impacted upon the application of established caselaw, that
        may be relevant, but that was not the finding  of  the  Judge.  The
        Judge did not accept that this was a case in  which  the  appellant
        would choose to hide a genuinely  held  political  belief  for  the
        purposes of avoiding persecution, contrary to established  caselaw,
        but rather found that even if the evidence had come into the public
        domain, he failed to make out he will face a real  risk  on  return
        (the alternative finding in  which  the  report  of  Dr  Fatah  was
        properly considered). The Judge noted the appellant had not  posted
        inflammatory comments whilst in Iraq or mentioned that he  faced  a
        real risk for the matters now relied upon, even  though  the  posts
        pre-dated the earlier claim, in the initial asylum  appeal.  It  is
        not made out on the facts this case is similar to  those  in  cases
        such as RT (Zimbabwe) or HJ (Iran) where it was  made  out  on  the
        evidence that the core activity was likely to lead to a  real  risk
        of persecution in the individual's home state. I  find  the  Judges
        findings on this point have not been shown to be irrational or ones
        not reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
    27. Ground 4 - paragraph 5 (d) asserts the  Judge  failed  to  consider
        material  evidence  by  reference  to  statements   made   by   the
        appellant's father and late mother referring to threats, which  are
        in the appellant's bundle.
    28. It is not disputed the Judge did not view the DVD, but I find  this
        is not a legal error as it was accepted that  the  transcripts  set
        out the text of what had been said in the  DVD  recordings  by  the
        appellants parents.
    29. The Judge at [36] specifically refers to letters and video evidence
        provided by the appellant's parents indicating that  this  material
        was clearly taken into account. Mr Tan in his submission stated the
        transcripts when read were almost in the form of a note  or  letter
        to the appellant. I find having considered the documents  that  the
        evidence from the parents made no reference to  any  direct  threat
        that  they  had  received  as  a  consequence  of  the   appellants
        activities. The Judge fully considered the evidence of the  attacks
        which was not found to  be  credible  and  found  an  inconsistency
        between the evidence provided by the parents,  a  letter  from  the
        brother, and a standard newspaper article at [34]; which is said by
        Mr Tan to be a finding which is not challenged, or the  finding  of
        posting of further material by the appellant soon after the alleged
        attack when he had knowledge of an alleged risk to  his  family  in
        doing so. The Judge  was  not  required  to  set  out  findings  in
        relation to each and every aspect of the evidence,  and  I  do  not
        find it made out the Judge failed  to  consider  material  evidence
        sufficient to amount to a material error of law.
    30. Ground five -paragraph 5 (e) assert the Judge  failed  to  consider
        the evidence of the witness Karzan Karim. The appellant accepts the
        Judge refers to the evidence but asserts he failed to consider  the
        reason the witness blocked the appellant was because he was worried
        that the appellant's posts may cause him problems.
    31. Having considered this evidence, the Judge gives  adequate  reasons
        for why limited weight was placed  upon  it  as  corroborating  the
        appellant's account. The weight to be given to the evidence  was  a
        matter for the Judge. This material does not undermine the  Judge's
        core findings that the appellant had not made out that his Facebook
        posts could be viewed by members of the public. Mr  Karim  had  the
        status of being a 'friend' on the appellant's Facebook and  so  may
        have been able to view the appellant's posts but  that  creates  no
        real risk for either the appellant or the witness. Mr Tan's Rule 24
        response also submits that the witness did  not  confirm  that  the
        posts were public.
    32. While some of the points raised by Mr Pipe  have  merit,  all  have
        been carefully taken into account, as have those of Mr Tan and  the
        decision read as a whole. Having done  so,  I  find  the  appellant
        fails to establish that the core findings of  the  Judge  that  the
        appellant had provided no evidence that his Facebook posts could be
        viewed in the public domain is a finding infected by legal error. I
        do not find the Judge's assessment of risk on return to be affected
        by arguable legal error sufficient to warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
        interfering any further in relation to  this  matter.  It  was,  in
        particular, not made out that in light of the  fact  the  appellant
        will be returning to Sulaymaniyah, where he has family, even if  he
        continued to post his views, this will expose him to a real risk of
        serious harm from representatives of the PUK, or that  anything  is
        made out that warrants the decision being set aside for  any  other
        reasons.
    33. The Judges findings have not been shown to be irrational or outside
        the range of  those  reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.

Decision

    34. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 December 2020
