

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA002382016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 June 2016                           |On 10 June 2016                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             AMIR PARSA CHOUBAR
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Designated Judge J G Macdonald allowed the appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of recognition as a refugee from Iran.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT are that  the  judge  failed  to
    apply the principles of Devaseelan (1) to the evidence of the appellant
    and (2) to the evidence of his wife.

 4.  Mr  Matthews  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not  fallen  into   the
    misconception that  the  appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity  was
    entirely a "new issue", a phrase used at paragraph 48 of  the  decision
    and criticised in the grounds.  However, Mr Matthews  argued  that  the
    judge overlooked the full significance of  the  determination  in  case
    DA/00531/2013 by a panel comprising Judge Cheales and Mr Jones MBE  JP,
    and failed to appreciate that  the  panel  did  not  find  against  the
    appellant only on his alleged involvement in Christianity in the UK but
    on claims dating back to before  he  left  Iran.   The  panel  rejected
    entirely that he had any prior  interest  in  Christianity,  and  Judge
    Macdonald should have taken that as his starting point.  The judge  did
    have evidence to consider beyond that which was before the  panel,  but
    it could not be said that he would have come to the same conclusion had
    he appreciated the extent of the findings in the  first  determination.
    There would have had to be a very strong explanation for departing from
    the prior finding that the appellant's  interest  in  Christianity  was
    entirely manufactured.  The case should be remitted for a fresh hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Mackay submitted that the judge's decision  was  rigorous,  thorough
    and well reasoned.  At paragraph 48 the judge explained  the  correctly
    sceptical approach to be taken to new issues raised by an appellant who
    had been a persistent criminal, who was liable to deportation and whose
    previous appeal had been dismissed.  The judge explained why  he  found
    it unsurprising that the previous determination had  not  accepted  the
    appellant was a  Christian  convert,  there  having  been  very  little
    evidence presented.  The judge explained clearly why  the  case  before
    him was quite different.   The  judge  did  not  fail  to  observe  the
    principles established in Devaseelan.  He adopted the correct  starting
    point, but found  a  considerable  body  of  new  evidence  to  justify
    different conclusions.  That new evidence could not  have  been  before
    the earlier tribunal,  being  of  later  date.   This  applied  to  the
    evidence of Pastor Palmer, which had particularly impressed the  judge.
    The judge had known  there  needed  to  be  good  reasons  to  come  to
    different conclusions, and he had given those reasons.

 6. Mr Matthews accepted that the second ground was rather weaker,  because
    it did not acknowledge that the evidence by the appellant's wife  which
    was not accepted in a separate earlier tribunal decision on  an  appeal
    by her went to the genuineness of her  relationship,  and  not  to  the
    genuineness of the appellant's conversion to Christianity.

 7. Mr Mackay pointed out that although Judge Macdonald did make a  comment
    on the evidence of the wife, this was not a core finding and not of the
    essence of the case.

 8. I observed at the end of the submissions that the permission to  appeal
    appeared to have been granted on a misconception, rather  than  on  the
    strength of the SSHD's grounds.  The  judge  granting  permission  said
    that if Judge Macdonald was right in his conclusion that the  appellant
    was a genuine convert, the question would have been  whether  he  would
    attract risk by bringing his Christianity to the attention of others or
    by  proselytising  upon  return,  when  he  did  not  do   so   before.
    Representatives agreed that this was  a  mistaken  view  of  the  case,
    because the respondent had conceded in the First-tier Tribunal that  if
    the appellant made out his case to be a genuine Christian  convert,  he
    would succeed.

 9. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  be
    dismissed.

10. I note that the appellant did not appear and was not represented before
    the First-tier Tribunal in 2013.  Of course that does not mean that the
    adverse conclusions are not to  be  taken  as  a  significant  starting
    point; the appellant's lack  of  interest  in  those  proceedings  went
    against him.  However, it was  open  to  Judge  Macdonald  to  come  to
    different conclusions when the case put to him  was  a  very  different
    one.  There is nothing to suggest that he did not appreciate and  apply
    the correct approach  to  the  earlier  determination.   As  Mr  MacKay
    pointed out, appreciation of the correct principle  is  made  plain  at
    paragraph 48.  The judge then explained why he found the  case  a  rare
    example, and why he found the evidence impressive.

11. The judge's conclusion that the appellant had proved his  case  to  the
    necessary standard was open to him, is  fully  explained,  and  is  not
    affected by any legal error of approach.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            9 June 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




