
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/00162/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 June 2019                      |     On 16 July 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    M A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Capel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  him  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, who claims his date of birth is  1
    January 2001.  He entered  the  UK  clandestinely  in  October/November
    2016.  He claimed asylum on 25 October 2016 but claimed asylum again on
    7 February 2017 under the name of M. H. date of birth 11 November 2000.

3.   He claimed that his father was sent to  prison  in  2014  and  died  in
    prison subsequently.  He claimed that  the  authorities,  that  is  the
    police, were looking for him because of his father's  association  with
    the Muslim Brotherhood.  That was why he left Egypt to come to  the  UK
    via Italy to claim asylum.

4.   Both parties agreed that the judge made errors of law for  the  reasons
    set out in the grounds of appeal upon which permission was  granted  by
    UTJ Blundell.

5.   I agree with UTJ Blundell that the  judge  arguably  misunderstood  the
    ratio of TK  (Burundi)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40  and  that  she  required
    corroboration of the appellant's account.  This is  with  reference  to
    ground 1 where it is said that the judge concluded that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence to support the appellant's claim that his father  was
    a member or supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood  and  was  arrested  or
    imprisoned  as  a  result.   It  was  argued  that  that  finding   was
    determinative of the appeal, leading to a finding  that  the  appellant
    was not a witness of truth.  In making that finding the judge  gave  no
    consideration at all to the appellant's own  account  of  past  events,
    given during his substantive  Home  Office  interview  or  his  witness
    statements.  There was also a report by Professor Ambrust submitted  in
    support of the appellant's appeal which the judge failed to  take  into
    consideration.  There was also a number  of  documents  from  Egypt  to
    corroborate the appellant's account of  past  events  which  the  judge
    failed to take account of.

6.   I further accept that the judge erred in conducting  her  own  research
    after the hearing,  since  the  background  material  she  relied  upon
    throughout the decision was not provided or cited by the respondent.

7.   In the light of the above, the judge's decision  is  materially  flawed
    and cannot stand.

8.   The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than FtTJ O'Garro.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 8 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
