
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA012342017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 June 2017                               |On 27 June 2017               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                     Khaled AHMED (aka Shamim Md Shamim)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant's case is that he  is  Mr  Khaled  Ahmed,  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh and his date of  birth  is  17  January  1979.   It  is  the
    Respondent's case that he is Shamim Md Shamim, a citizen of  Bangladesh
    with a date of birth of 8 January 1991.
2.   The Appellant made an application for asylum which was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 25 January 2017  and  he  appealed  against  that
    decision. His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Fox, in a decision promulgated on 30 March 2017, following a hearing on
    1 March 2017.  The  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  in  its
    entirety.  The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Keane, in a decision of 28 April 2017.

3.   At the start of the hearing before Judge Fox,  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for an adjournment to obtain a medical report.   The  judge
    refused the application, engaging with the issue at paragraph  18,  and
    concluding that the Tribunal could assess the  Appellant's  credibility
    independently,  noting  that  despite  two  previous  applications  for
    adjournments, this was the first occasion that the Appellant raised his
    wish to obtain medical evidence.

4.   The Appellant is not represented and the  grounds  raise  a  number  of
    issues.  The is that the judge erred in refusing to adjourn  the  case,
    in the light of a Rule 35 report of 7 April 2017,  which  according  to
    the Appellant, supports his evidence of mistreatment. Had the judge had
    sight of this, he would have adjourned the case. The refusal to adjourn
    resulted in unfairness.

5.      Mr Bramble conceded at the  hearing  before  me  that  there  was  a
    material error of law and he helpfully referred me to  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of 1 March 2017.  This witness statement is dated the
    day of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and  was  before  the
    judge. It gives an account of having been shot and cut  with  a  knife.
    There is no reference in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    this part of the Appellant's evidence.  The judge did not  engage  with
    it. Had he done so, he may have  decided  the  adjournment  application
    differently; notwithstanding, that he did not have before him the  Rule
    35 report.

6.   The Rule 35 report, which was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    capable of corroborating the Appellant's evidence.  The  judge  clearly
    did not have the benefit of the Rule 35 report; however, in  the  light
    of the contents of it, I  agree  with  Mr  Bramble  that  a  procedural
    irregularity arises resulting in unfairness.

7    I communicated the decision orally to the parties at  the  hearing  and
    the decision of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal is set aside and the appeal remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.  None of the findings of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Fox can be salvaged.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 21 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
