
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01257/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2017                             |On 2nd May 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    [t k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Proudman of Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a national  of  Sri  Lanka  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  29th
    January 2016 to refuse his  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection in the UK and deciding that his removal would not breach the
    UK's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moran dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  and  the
    Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan on 20th February 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that he  was
    working for a travel agency in Sri Lanka and that a friend  transferred
    money into his account over a four month period beginning  in  December
    2006.  The Appellant left Sri Lanka in October 2007 and entered the  UK
    with a student visa.  He extended his leave to remain on  a  number  of
    occasions until October 2014.   In  August  2014  his  application  for
    further leave to remain as  a  student  was  refused  and  he  appealed
    against that decision. On 31 July 2015, before his appeal was heard, he
    was arrested for working illegally and he claimed asylum. The Appellant
    produced a number of documents  which  he  says  establishes  that  the
    police in Sri Lanka have been looking for him on  suspicion  of  aiding
    and abetting an LTTE member by collecting funds for the  LTTE.   It  is
    claimed that the police came looking for the Appellant at his  father's
    address on three occasions and  that  his  father  attended  the  local
    police station on three occasions and was told that the Appellant risks
    arrest in Sri Lanka on the basis of suspicion that he was supporting an
    LTTE member.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  reviewed  the  evidence  including  the
    Appellant's screening and asylum interviews,  witness  statement,  oral
    evidence, the medical evidence and  other  supporting  documents.   The
    judge  concluded  that  the  delay  in  the  Appellant  seeking  asylum
    seriously  undermined  his  credibility.   The  judge  considered   the
    documentary  evidence  and  noted  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to how the money was provided to him by  his  friend  was  not
    consistent and undermined his credibility [26].  The judge went  on  to
    analyse the decision in GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and the groups of people at risk.  The
    judge  concluded  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities would perceive the Appellant to be an  ongoing  risk.   The
    judge said:

         "The height of the allegations against him appear to be that nearly
         ten years ago he obtained some visas for  people  and  allowed  his
         bank account to be  used  for  money  to  be  passed  on  to  those
         allegedly in the LTTE.  He has not been in Sri Lanka since 2007 and
         does not claim to have been involved in  any  diaspora  activities.
         His involvement even back in 2007 could not  be  said  to  be  high
         profile or critical to the LTTE's  activities.   Whilst  there  was
         some suggestion and argument that GJ did not  accurately  represent
         the true position in Sri Lanka I was not presented with  any  sound
         basis for displacing its thorough analysis of  risk.   I  therefore
         find that GJ fundamentally undermines the core of TK's  account  as
         it is not credible that there would be such interest in someone who
         played the role he allegedly did so long ago". [27]

    The judge concluded that the Appellant had not established that  he  is
    at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 4. The renewed Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  contend  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to  take  account  of  the
    documentary evidence and failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    decision  in  relation  to  that  documentary  evidence.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan said that  it  is  at
    least arguable that the judge may  not  have  made  sufficiently  clear
    findings relating to the evidence from the Appellant's father  and  the
    Sri Lankan attorney and that that may impact on the judge's conclusions
    in relation to risk on return with reference to  the  country  guidance
    decision in GJ.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Proudman submitted that the judge failed to
    say whether she was attaching any weight to the report from the  police
    station,  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney's  statement  or  the  Appellant's
    father's witness statement.  She referred to paragraph 23 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision where the judge referred to the letter from  the
    Sri Lankan attorney: the judge simply  says  that  she  considered  the
    documents from the attorney in the round.  Ms Proudman  submitted  that
    the judge made no other mention of this crucial piece of  evidence  and
    did not make clear whether or not it is accepted.  She  submitted  that
    this letter was material to the Appellant's claim of  involvement  with
    the LTTE and his claim to be on a stop list.   She  submitted  that  it
    could be implied from this evidence that as a  result  of  the  ongoing
    police interest in the Appellant his name would be on a stop list.   Ms
    Proudman relied on the decision in  MK  (Pakistan)  [2013]  UKUT  00641
    relying on paragraph  13  of  that  decision  to  submit  that  it  was
    incumbent on the Tribunal to explain why the letter from  the  attorney
    was not afforded any weight

 6. Ms Proudman submitted that the judge also erred at paragraph 24 of  the
    decision in her approach to the internal police  document.   The  judge
    concluded that she had not been provided with any explanation as to how
    this internal document could have come into the Appellant's  possession
    and concluded that it was improbable that it could  have  done  so.  Ms
    Proudman submitted that the judge had not given a clear explanation  as
    to whether she attached any weight to that  document  and  it  was  not
    clear where it factored into her reasoning.

 7. Ms Proudman submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into  account
    the witness statement from the Appellant's father.  It does not  factor
    at any point in the decision.  She  submitted  that  this  is  material
    because in that statement the Appellant's father said that  the  police
    came looking for the Appellant three times since he has come to the  UK
    and his father attended the police station three times and  that  there
    is a suspicion that the Appellant would be arrested for  supporting  an
    LTTE member.  She submitted that this shows that the Appellant  may  be
    on a stop list and would therefore be at risk  for  this  reason.   She
    submitted that the judge failed to direct herself to that document.  In
    her submission the judge had failed to consider these three  pieces  of
    evidence and that this was a material error.

 8. In his submissions Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response  dated  2nd
    March 2017  where  the  Secretary  of  State  noted  that  neither  the
    attorney's letter nor the Appellant's father's declaration are  capable
    of  rebutting  the  Respondent's  assertion  that  the  alleged  police
    document could not have come into the hands of the  Appellant  and  the
    judge was entitled to agree with the  Respondent's  position  in  these
    circumstances.  At the  hearing  Mr  Tarlow  referred  to  the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 27 in relation to GJ and submitted  that  this
    analysis was sufficient to dispose of the appeal.   He  noted  that  GJ
    highlights the risk to people who are suspected of  being  involved  in
    actions contrary to those of the state.  At paragraph 27 the judge took
    the Appellant's case at its  height,  noting  that  the  Appellant  had
    undertaken no diaspora activities and that even in 2007 his  activities
    were not a threat to the state.  He therefore submitted that,  even  if
    the judge had not dealt sufficiently with the letter from the  attorney
    and the Appellant's father's statement, the analysis of paragraph 27 is
    sufficient and any errors are not material.

 9. In response Ms Proudman submitted that any errors are material  because
    the judge failed  to  properly  analyse  three  pieces  of  documentary
    evidence which support the contention that the Appellant is  likely  to
    be on a stop list given the ongoing police enquiries.   Had  the  judge
    considered this evidence it could have changed her decision in relation
    to the analysis of GJ.

Error of Law

10. The police report and translation is dated 20th  October  2012  and  is
    entitled "Message Form" and indicates  that  the  Appellant  is  to  be
    informed that he should present to the police station on  24th  October
    2012 for an inquiry to  be  held  by  the  officers  of  the  terrorist
    investigation division.  The judge dealt with this report at  paragraph
    24, noting that she had not been provided any  explanation  as  to  how
    this internal document  had  come  to  be  in  the  possession  of  the
    Appellant.  I note that the Appellant's  father's  statement  does  not
    deal with that document and does not  specifically  refer  to  anything
    occurring in October 2012.  I note that the letter from the Sri  Lankan
    attorney refers to an inquiry on 20th October and an attendance at  the
    police station on 24th October 2012 but does not refer to the  internal
    document.  The Appellant's witness statement dated 12th July 2016 makes
    no reference to that document.  The judge's summary of the  Appellant's
    claim at paragraph 12 of  the  decision  makes  no  reference  to  that
    document.  In my view it was therefore open to the judge to conclude at
    paragraph 24 that no explanation had been put forward as  to  how  this
    internal document had come into the Appellant's possession.

11. The judge dealt with the letter from the attorney at paragraphs 16  and
    23.  At paragraph 16 the judge set out a summary of the contents of the
    letter from the attorney.  It is clear from paragraph 23 that the judge
    considered the letter from the attorney and  attached  some  weight  to
    that document.  It is also clear from the consideration of the internal
    police document at paragraph 24 and all of the other evidence that  the
    judge attached some weight to the letter from the  attorney  taking  it
    into account in the round in considering all of the other evidence.

12. It is further contended that the judge failed to take into account  the
    Appellant's father's statement dated 5th October 2015, the same date as
    the attorney's letter.   The  judge  summarises  the  contents  of  the
    Appellant's father's affidavit at  paragraph  12.   The  judge  further
    notes at paragraph 16  that  the  originals  of  these  documents  were
    produced at the hearing and refers there to the documents at pages 5 to
    8 of the Appellant's bundle which includes  the  letter  from  the  Sri
    Lankan attorney and the affidavit from the Appellant's father.   It  is
    clear in reading paragraph 23 along with paragraphs 12 and 16 that  the
    judge  referred  to  the  documents  emanating  from  the  attorney  as
    including the Appellant's father's affidavit.  In these circumstances I
    do not accept that the judge failed to consider this document  at  all.
    It is clear that the judge had this document before him and  considered
    it in the context of the attorney's letter.

13. I am satisfied that reading the decision as  a  whole  that  the  judge
    attached significant  weight  to  the  Appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum, the lack of evidence as to the origins of the police report and
    the inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account  in  relation  to  the
    transactions through his account from his friend  and  the  Appellant's
    failure to address this issue in his evidence. Accordingly I find  that
    the judge made no material error in his treatment  of  the  documentary
    evidence.

14. In any event I accept Mr Tarlow's submission that  the  judge  properly
    considered the Appellant's case in the context of GJ at paragraph 27 of
    the decision.  It is right to say that the height  of  the  Appellant's
    case is that nearly ten years ago he obtained some  visas  and  allowed
    his bank account to be used  for  money  to  be  passed  on  for  those
    allegedly involved in the LTTE.  The judge notes the Appellant has  not
    been in Sri Lanka since 2007 and has not been involved in any  diaspora
    activities. In those circumstances it was open to the judge to conclude
    at paragraph 27 that the  Appellant  does  not  come  within  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ.

15. Although Ms Proudman submitted that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk
    through being on a stop list there was no evidence  that  there  is  an
    extant court order or arrest warrant in respect of the  Appellant.  The
    internal police document produced, and rejected by the judge, does  not
    purport to be an arrest warrant. The judge therefore made no  error  in
    his assessment of any risk to the  Appellant  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance in GJ.

16. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge did not  make  any
    material error of law in his consideration of the documentary  evidence
    and in his assessment of the risk to the Appellant upon return  to  Sri
    Lanka in the context of the risk categories set out in GJ.

Notice of Decision

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a  material  error  of  law.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee paid, therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date: 28th April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

