
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01920/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2016                           |On 11 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    B E A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain, Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I have remade the decision having found, in a decision  promulgated  on
    24 October 2016, that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law.   My
    reasons for making that latter finding were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, BEA, was born in 1987 and is a  female  citizen
         of Nigeria.  She has a child (O) who was born in 2013 and who is  a
         dependant on her claim/appeal.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Manchester) against the decision of the  respondent
         dated 7 October 2015  refusing  to  grant  her  asylum/humanitarian
         protection.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on
         8 July 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Before the Upper Tribunal, Miss Pickering did  not  rely  upon
         grounds 1 and 2.  She did seek to rely upon grounds 3 and  4.   The
         appellant is  a  victim  of  trafficking  form  Nigeria  and  fears
         returning to that country on account of threats from her father and
         where her daughter may  be  compelled  to  undergo  female  genital
         mutilation (FGM).

         3.   Judge Manchester recorded at [34]:

             "However, there was in this case an accepted factual basis set
             out in the decision, namely that the appellant was a victim of
             trafficking to the United Kingdom and that, if her father were
             able to locate her, he would perform FGM on her daughter.   It
             is therefore taking that accepted factual basis that the issue
             of risk on return falls to be addressed and I propose to  take
             each of the aspects forming that factual basis in turn."

         4.   The judge went on to observe that the appellant  had  not  had
         any contact with her father for over twenty  years  including  over
         fifteen years when she had been living in Nigeria before coming  to
         the United Kingdom.  The father had, of course,  never  encountered
         the appellant's daughter.

         5.    Judge  Manchester's  assessment  of   the   internal   flight
         alternative is problematic.  He appears to have  assumed  that  the
         appellant would not return to the part of  Nigeria  where  she  was
         born and brought up and where her father is  living.   However,  it
         should, as a matter of good practise, have first considered whether
         the appellant might return to her home area of Nigeria.  Only if he
         concluded that she could not do so (and I assume  that  he  did  so
         conclude especially in light of the agreed factual matrix including
         the risk of FGM) that he needed to consider  whether  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate outside  her  home
         area.  Instead, the judge appears to assume [36] that in a  country
         the size of Nigeria the appellant's father would not be  likely  to
         discover that  she  had  returned.   The  judge  assumes  that  the
         appellant will return to an area of Nigeria where FGM  is  unlikely
         to be practised by strangers upon her daughter.   The  proper  test
         for exercising the internal flight alternative (undue harshness) is
         not referred to in terms.

         6.   The judge accepts that the appellant  and  her  daughter  will
         need to seek the shelter and support offered by strangers including
         the government agency (the National Agency for the  Prohibition  of
         Traffic in Persons -  NAPTIP).   In  a  pivotal  paragraph  in  the
         decision, Judge Manchester wrote:

             "Although I have been referred to various aspects of the  more
             up-to-date country evidence by Miss  Pickering,  it  is  clear
             from the EASO Report at page 125  that  NAPTIP  operates  mine
             shelters intended for victims of  human  trafficking  and  his
             task, inter alia, is identification and reception of  victims,
             sheltering,  counselling   and   training,   family   tracing,
             integration and empowerment and  follow-up.   Indeed,  despite
             continuing concerns as to the adequacy of  funding,  the  dual
             role of prosecuting traffickers and  possible  corruption,  it
             has reportedly rescued  and  rehabilitated  3,000  trafficking
             victims in ten years.  In this case, although it is clear that
             shelters may not be designed for long-term support,  there  is
             no reason why the appellant and her child or her two  children
             could not be given that support  and  protection  sufficiently
             long  to  assist  in  her  re-integration  given  her  obvious
             vulnerability including the risk of re-trafficking and, if she
             wishes,  being  reunited  with  her  elder  sister.   Further,
             although  there  are  concerns  about  the   availability   of
             assistance at the airport on arrival as  highlighted  at  page
             123, this appears to  be  resolvable  by  proper  notification
             being given to NAPTIP of a person's intended arrival."

         7.   The appellant argues that, given the number of years that  she
         has been absent from Nigeria, it would be virtually  impossible  to
         relocate her sister from whom she has  been  estranged.   I  agree.
         The reference to the appellant's elder sister at [45] is  the  only
         attempt made by the judge to consider the appellant and her child's
         medium and longer-term  re-settlement  in  Nigeria.   He  seems  to
         consider the question of the  appellant  being  reunited  with  the
         sister as a  matter  of  choice  ("if  she  wishes");  he  has  not
         addressed whether it is reasonably likely that the appellant  would
         be able to contact the sister at all.  There is also no  indication
         of what might happen to the appellant and her child if she  is  not
         reunited with her sister or if the sister were to reject the burden
         of caring for the appellant and her child in the longer term.  This
         is of concern given that the judge acknowledges that  the  shelters
         to which he believes the appellant and her child may reasonably  be
         expected to have access provide only short-term support.

         8.   There is a further problem.  The judge relied on PO  (Nigeria)
         [2011] EWCA Civ 132.  In that judgment, the Court of  Appeal  noted
         the conflict between the expert evidence adduced by both parties as
         regards the possibility that children under  the  age  of  8  years
         might be accommodated at NAPTIP shelters.  On the one  hand,  there
         appeared to be evidence that a young baby would be  admitted  to  a
         shelter "without delay" whilst other expert evidence suggested that
         only children aged 8 and above would be accommodated.  I agree with
         Miss  Pickering  that  Judge  Manchester  at  [45]  appears  to  be
         addressing only the appellant and that he has failed to acknowledge
         that particular problems might arise as regards access to  shelters
         because the appellant is accompanied by a young child. Any reasoned
         consideration of  the  child  in  the  context  of  the  background
         material is missing.

         9.   In the light of what I have said, I set aside  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision.  The decision  will  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal before Upper Tribunal Clive Lane on a date to be fixed.  I
         understand that the Upper  Tribunal  may  imminently  give  country
         guidance on the risk on return  to  Nigeria  of  single  trafficked
         women.  It is to be hoped that  that  guidance  will  be  available
         before the date fixed for the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8 July  2016
         is set  aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal  will  re-make  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane.  That
         hearing will be fixed on the  first  open  date  after  1  December
         2016."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 12 December 2016, I did not  hear
    any oral evidence although the appellant did  attend  with  her  child.
    The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.

 3. The Upper Tribunal has now provided country guidance in the decision of
    HD (trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC).  The guidance
    reads as follows:

         "1.  The guidance set out in PO (trafficked women)  Nigeria  [2009]
         UKAIT 00046 at paragraphs 191-192 should no longer be followed.

         2.    Although  the  Government  of  Nigeria  recognises  that  the
         trafficking of women, both internally  and  transnationally,  is  a
         significant problem to be addressed, it is not established  by  the
         evidence that for women in general in Nigeria there is a real  risk
         of being trafficked.

         3.   For a woman returning to Nigeria, after having been trafficked
         to the United  Kingdom,  there  is  in  general  no  real  risk  of
         retribution  or  of  being  trafficked  afresh  by   her   original
         traffickers.

         4.   Whether a woman returning to Nigeria  having  previously  been
         trafficked to the United Kingdom faces on return  a  real  risk  of
         being trafficked afresh will require a detailed assessment  of  her
         particular  and  individual  characteristics.  Factors  that   will
         indicate an enhanced risk of being trafficked include, but are  not
         limited to:

             a.   The absence of a supportive family willing  to  take  her
             back into the family unit;

             b.   Visible or discernible characteristics of  vulnerability,
             such as having no social support network to assist her, no  or
             little  education  or   vocational   skills,   mental   health
             conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences  of
             abuse  when  originally  trafficked,  material  and  financial
             deprivation such as to mean that she will be living in poverty
             or in conditions of destitution;

             c.   The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is likely
             to mean that she was then identified  by  the  traffickers  as
             someone disclosing characteristics of vulnerability such as to
             give rise to a real risk of being trafficked. On returning  to
             Nigeria,  it  is  probable  that  those   characteristics   of
             vulnerability will be  enhanced  further  in  the  absence  of
             factors that suggest otherwise.

         Factors that indicate a lower risk of being trafficked include, but
         are not limited to:

             a.   The availability of a supportive family willing  to  take
             the woman back into the family unit;

             b.    The  fact  that  the  woman  has  acquired  skills   and
             experiences since leaving Nigeria that  better  equip  her  to
             have access  to  a  livelihood  on  return  to  Nigeria,  thus
             enabling her to provide for herself.

         6.   There will be little risk of being trafficked if received into
         a NAPTIP shelter or a shelter provided by an NGO for the time  that
         she is there, but that support is likely to be temporary,  possibly
         for just a  few  weeks,  and  there  will  need  to  be  a  careful
         assessment of the  position  of  the  woman  when  she  leaves  the
         shelter.

         7.   For a woman who does face a real risk of being  trafficked  if
         she returns to her home area,  the  question  of  whether  internal
         relocation will be available as a safe and  reasonable  alternative
         that will not be unduly harsh will require a detailed assessment of
         her  particular  circumstances.  For  a  woman  who  discloses  the
         characteristics  of  vulnerability   described   above   that   are
         indicative of a real risk of being trafficked, internal  relocation
         is unlikely to be a viable alternative.

 4. For the  Secretary  of  State,  Mrs  Pettersen  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had been trafficked but submitted that there was no reason to
    suppose that she would be targeted again by her previous traffickers on
    return to Nigeria.  She also submitted that the circumstances in  which
    the appellant would return to Nigeria were not as bad as those  of  the
    appellant in HD.  It would be possible  for  the  appellant  to  obtain
    support from her sister in Nigeria.  Finally, she  submitted  that  the
    appellant is now more mature than at the time when  she  first  entered
    the United Kingdom having been trafficked.  She  did,  however,  accept
    that the appellant now has two very young  children  and  is  a  single
    mother.  Mrs Pettersen accepted that those circumstances are likely  to
    make the family more vulnerable on return.

 5. I agree with Ms Hussain that it is generally unhelpful to  compare  the
    facts of an appellant in a country guidance case with  those  of  other
    appellants; country  guidance  exists  to  provide  general  principles
    rather than to encourage comparisons with other appeals which  need  to
    be decided by reference to their own facts.  Ms Hussain submitted  that
    the appellant was very vulnerable.  I agree. She had no obvious support
    network available to her in Nigeria.  She has received little education
    and has two young female children who  are  in  her  sole  care.   With
    regard to paragraph 4(c) of the headnote in HD, the appellant may be  a
    little older now than she was when she came to the United  Kingdom  but
    she  still  possesses  the  characteristics  which  led  to  her  being
    trafficked in  the  first  instance.   Indeed,  her  vulnerability  has
    increased because she now has the care  of  her  two  young  daughters.
    Further, Ms Hussain submitted that the appellant falls firmly into  the
    category of [6] of the country guidance of  HD;  she  may  be  able  to
    access a shelter in the  short  term  but,  with  no  family  or  other
    support, her medium term prospects in Nigeria would be bleak.  I  agree
    with that submission also. As regards the presence of  the  appellant's
    sister in Nigeria, I refer to my error of law decision (see  above)  at
    [6].  The safety of this appellant and her  young  children  cannot  be
    predicated on the very flimsy basis that she would be able  to  contact
    and then be reunited with a sister from whom  I  accept  she  has  been
    estranged.  I find that it is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to find  any  family  support  available  to  her  in
    Nigeria.

 6. In the circumstances, I find that the appellant falls very firmly  into
    the category of returnee facing real risk as identified by the Tribunal
    in HD.  Consequently, her appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

Having set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  I  have  remade  the
decision.  This appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  grounds.   This  appeal  is
allowed on human rights grounds (Articles 2/3 ECHR).  The appellant  is  not
entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

