
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01918/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st September 2017                     |On 12th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    [x i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavero of Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Abebrese
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 2nd December 2016.

 2. Mr Melvin accepted that the decision could not stand.

 3. The appellant's appeal was listed  for  hearing  in  Bradford  on  23rd
    December 2016.  She moved to London and asked  for  her  appeal  to  be
    transferred. There was a case management hearing  at  Taylor  House  on
    29th July 2016 and a new notice of hearing was issued for 2nd  December
    2016 also in Taylor House.

 4. That notice of hearing was mislaid by the appellant's  representatives.



 5. On 12th December 2016 the appellant attended her solicitor's office  to
    prepare for her appeal on the assumption that it would be heard on 23rd
    December 2016.  In the course of that appointment the amended notice of
    hearing was discovered.

 6. The appeal had been heard by Judge Abebrese in the appellant's absence.



 7. The solicitors wrote to the Tribunal explaining the situation enclosing
    the appellant's bundle and asking for the appeal to be relisted so that
    the appellant could be present.  There was no response to that letter.

 8. On 23rd  December  2016  Judge  Abebrese  dismissed  the  appeal.   His
    decision was promulgated on 30th December 2016.  No mention was made in
    that determination of the correspondence of 12th December 2016.

 9. An appeal is not concluded until it is promulgated.  By the date of the
    judge's signature and of its promulgation there had been an explanation
    for the appellant's absence which he did not take into account.  It may
    well be that the correspondence never reached him.  Be that as  it  may
    the judge failed to take into account relevant evidence and  Mr  Melvin
    did not argue that the decision should stand.   He  accepted  that  the
    matter should be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House.

10. The judge erred in law and his decision  is  set  aside.   It  will  be
    remade at a hearing before a judge other than Judge Abebrese at  Taylor
    House on a date to be fixed.

11. Finally it was brought to my attention that the grounds of  application
    seeking to challenge the decision were served late.  Time is  extended.



No anonymity direction is made.






[pic]
Signed                              Date 11 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
