
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01358/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd July 2019                    |On 05th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                Osaretin [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson of Counsel, instructed by A B James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and he was born on  14th  August,
    1979.  The appellant made application for recognition as a refugee  but
    the respondent decided on 22nd December, 2017 that he did not  qualify.
    The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, Judge Siddiqi in Manchester on 25th March, 2019.

2.   The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal  and  that  dismissal
    has not been  the  subject  of  any  challenge.   The  judge  similarly
    dismissed the humanitarian protection appeal and that is not challenged
    either.

3.   In considering the appellant's human  rights  appeal  the  judge  heard
    evidence that the appellant had been married in the United Kingdom to a
    lady who on 4th April 2019 had been granted indefinite leave to remain.
     The judge dismissed  the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal  and  the
    grounds of challenge are quite brief and suggest that the judge  failed
    properly to consider the application of paragraph EX1(b)  and  EX2,  in
    that the judge did not use  language  that  even  appropriated  to  the
    language used in EX1 and EX2.

4.   EX1 and EX2  of  course  deal  with  the  question  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles".  The appellant's wife had  only  just  shortly  before  the
    hearing been granted settlement in the United Kingdom and at  paragraph
    9 of the determination the judge  noted  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    agreed that the question of the appellant's wife's grant  of  leave  be
    treated as a new matter, since she had been granted leave on 4th April,
    2019 and not at the date of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.   At
    paragraph 30 of the determination under the heading "Appendix  FM"  the
    first sentence says "It is not in dispute that the appellant  does  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  as  a  partner  as  he  is  an
    overstayer".  The appellant could not, therefore, at any stage meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

5.   It was forcefully argued by Mr Timpson that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the wording of EX1 and EX2 and had she done so she might  very
    well have found that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life
    with the appellant's partner continuing.  EX2 says

         "For the purpose of  paragraph  EX1(b)  'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the appellant or partner".

6.   In paragraph 30 the judge noted that  the  appellant's  partner  argued
    that she could not live with her husband in Nigeria and he would not be
    able to live in St Lucia.  Quite why she would not be able to  live  in
    Nigeria is not made clear.  It was submitted that the parties therefore
    met the requirements of EX1.  The judge made it clear that she was  not
    persuaded by that argument.  The judge  reminded  herself  of  Sections
    117A to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and noted that the  appellant  and
    his wife had been undergoing IVF treatment  over  a  number  of  years.
    Tragically the appellant's wife has suffered  seven  miscarriages  over
    the years.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant's  wife  had  given
    birth to twins who were stillborn.  They are buried in Liverpool and of
    course the parties have an attachment to the  grave.   The  judge  took
    that into account but found that it would be disproportionate to  allow
    the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom, solely for  the  purpose
    of enabling him to visit the grave.  In paragraph 37  the  judge  found
    that there was no reason at all why the appellant should not return  to
    Nigeria and make an application for settlement from  there.   Thus  not
    leapfrogging applicants who properly make their settlement applications
    from abroad.  The judge said

         "In assessing the reasonableness of the appellant  being  separated
         from [his wife] whilst he makes such an  application  I  take  into
         account that the appellant may only be returning to Nigeria  for  a
         short  period  of  time.    The   appellant's   scenario   can   be
         distinguished from Chikwamba and the Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2008] UKHL 40.  I remind myself  that  in  Agyarko
         [2017] UKSC 11 the Supreme Court held  that  if  an  applicant  was
         otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter then there might  be
         no specific interest in his or her removal even if  they  had  been
         residing in the  UK  unlawfully.   I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
         appellant's application is certain to  be  granted  at  this  time,
         taking into account that he has not established  this  nor  was  it
         considered by the respondent in the asylum  decision.   I  am  also
         reminded that in R on the application of Chen v  the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home  Department  (Appendix  FM  Chikwamba  temporary
         separation proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00187 (IAC) it was held
         that it will be for an individual to place before the Secretary  of
         State  evidence   that   temporary   separation   would   interfere
         disproportionately with his projected rights.  I consider that  the
         appellant has not established that any temporary  separation  would
         interfere disproportionately with his protected rights".

7.   Mr Timpson argues that if the judge had  properly  considered  EX1  and
    EX2 she might very well have come to a different conclusion in  respect
    of Article 8, because she would have focused then  on  whether  or  not
    there was going to be insurmountable obstacles faced by  the  applicant
    or their partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the
    UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship for the appellant or partner.

8.   With very great respect to Mr  Timpson  I  believe  that  there  is  no
    material error of law in this determination and  the  judge  has  quite
    properly  considered  whether  there  would  be  any   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights and  concluded  that
    there would not be.  Mr Tan confirmed today that were the appellant  to
    return to Nigeria and make an application for  leave  to  return  as  a
    spouse his application would be dealt with ordinarily in the course  of
    twelve weeks.  It might be unpleasant for the parties to  be  separated
    for that  length  of  time,  but  it  cannot  by  any  stretch  of  the
    imagination amount to an insurmountable obstacle  to  the  family  life
    with the partner continuing.

9.   The parties hold the key to their future  in  their  own  hands.   They
    could easily overcome any hardship that they might suffer as  a  result
    of being separated by the husband making an application for  settlement
    to return to the United Kingdom.  I  concluded  that  on  the  evidence
    before the judge, the judge was entitled to find as she  did  and  that
    her determination does not contain any material error of law.  I uphold
    her decision.  This appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


Dated 26 July 2019

















