
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01384/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th July 2016                        |On 22nd August 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    s a k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Mansfield
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as [ ] 1986.  He made application for  international  protection  as  a
    refugee but on 17th September 2015 his  application  was  refused;  the
    Appellant appealed.  On 5th May 2016 the appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Anstis  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   Having
    considered the evidence Judge Anstis dismissed the appeal.

 2. It  is  important  to  note  in  this  case  that  there  were  certain
    concessions made by the Secretary of State in the letter of refusal. Of
    particular importance were: the acceptance that the Appellant had  been
    abducted by the LTTE in 2003/2004; that he had been imprisoned  by  the
    Karuna group  in  2006  but  subsequently  released;  and  particularly
    importantly that the Appellant had been arrested but then  released  on
    bail by the Sri Lankan authorities in  2008.   What  the  Secretary  of
    State did not accept was that there was any continuing interest in  the
    Appellant and that was something with which the judge agreed in  making
    his findings.

 3. Not content with that decision  by  Notice  dated  3rd  June  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 24th June 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett
    granted permission on the basis that the judge had failed, arguably, to
    consider the risks to the Appellant of being stopped when  returned  to
    Sri Lanka as a person who had left the  country  unlawfully  whilst  on
    bail.

 4. On the basis of the evidence, as the judge appreciated it, there was no
    sufficient explanation as to why it was that all of a  sudden  in  2015
    the authorities had become interested in the Appellant.  The  Appellant
    in his witness statement had referred to "continuous interest" but  the
    judge found, given the immigration history, that the first  such  event
    was in April 2015 and was unwilling to accept that  it  was  reasonably
    likely that there was continuing interest; the judge spells this out at
    paragraph 35 of the decision.

         "His  evidence  as  to  the  recent  interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities in him is improbable, does not accord with  what  would
         be expected given the country guidance in GJ, and is not  supported
         by any other evidence - not even that of  friends  or  his  family.
         Accordingly, I do not accept what  the  Appellant  says  about  the
         recent interest of the authorities in him, and do not  accept  that
         he is at real risk of persecution on a return to Sri Lanka."

 5. I was grateful to Mr Paramjorthy who took me to the record of interview
    in this  case.   From  question  186,  the  interview  focused  on  any
    continuing interest in the Appellant but of particular  importance  was
    the answer given by the Appellant to question 197.  The question was as
    follows:

         "Do you not think that if they didn't do anything immediately after
         you stopped reporting they are not going to be  interested  in  you
         now?"

    The Appellant answered:

         "Because I was bailed out and I was not in Sri Lanka and my  father
         was reporting instead of me."

 6. In that answer is a point which it would seem the judge did not have in
    mind when making the decision in this case. It is important because  it
    at least explains why, if that part  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
    accepted, the authorities suddenly became interested in the  Appellant;
    his father had stopped reporting.  That is clearly a  matter  that  was
    deserving of further enquiry at the hearing.

 7. I am grateful to  Mr  Walker  who  accepts  that  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's claim rightly requires further consideration.  I make plain
    that he does not accept that the Appellant will necessarily be entitled
    to succeed in this appeal but he does accept that this decision  cannot
    stand because of a failure properly to engage with material evidence.

 8. In those circumstances, having identified, as I have, a material  error
    of law, I am required to consider whether it would  be  appropriate  to
    remake the decision in the Upper  Tribunal  or  remit  it  for  further
    consideration below.

 9. Both Mr Walker and Mr Paramjorthy urged me to remit the matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal but so far as Mr Paramjorthy is concerned with  the
    concessions preserved. Whether concessions are withdrawn or  not  is  a
    matter entirely for the Secretary of State.  I am not  suggesting  that
    for one moment that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  withdraw  those
    concessions, I am simply  indicating  what  the  position  is,  but  as
    matters stand, the matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

      1. There will be a Tamil interpreter.

      2. Time estimate - 3 hours

      3. Concessions  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  preserved  unless
         withdrawn and upon proper notice to the Appellant having regard  to
         the guidance in NR (Jamaica) [2005] UKIAT 0008.

      4. To be heard before any judge other than Judge Anstis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside. The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to
be remade in accordance with the Directions contained herein.


Signed                              Date 19 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
