

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01894/2016


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision promulgated         |
|on 10 October 2017                            |on 23 November 2017          |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Dr Mynott instructed by Immigration Advice Service.
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates- Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Lloyd-Smith promulgated  on  13  April  2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal on both protection and human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of  Iraq,  was  born  on  [  ]  1981.  His
        daughter, born in [ ] 2007, is a dependent  in  his  claim.  On  11
        February 2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellants  claim
        for international protection and/or leave to remain on human rights
        grounds against which the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.
     3. At [8] the Judge summarises the relevant history in  the  following
        terms:


             i) The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd who lived in Sulaymaniyah.
            ii) The appellant married in 1998/9 to a woman with whom he had
                four children.
           iii) The appellant also married a second lady in 2006 with  whom
                he has three children, the daughter who is dependent on his
                claim being one of those children.
            iv) In 2009 the appellant discovered that his  first  wife  was
                having an affair with his friend. The  couple  agreed  they
                would separate but kept the reason secret as they knew  the
                discovery of the affair would cause  shame  to  the  tribal
                family.  The  appellant  stated  it  was  agreed  that  the
                appellant's first wife would ask for a divorce so he  could
                keep the children.
             v) The divorce was granted on 15 July  2009.  Two  days  after
                that the appellant's first wife was killed by her  brothers
                because they  had  learnt  about  her  affair  and  it  was
                therefore an honour crime.
            vi) On hearing of the death, the appellant moved his family  to
                a neighbour's address.  He  stated  he  saw  his  ex-wife's
                family kick the front door of their  home  in  looking  for
                him. His friend asked what they were doing  and  they  told
                him they wanted to kill the appellant.
           vii) The family moved to another location, to a house found  for
                them by a Colonel [J] a friend of  the  appellant's  friend
                referred to above.
          viii) At the end of May 2014, the appellant's second wife's uncle
                died. The second wife took five of her children to Mosul to
                attend the funeral although the appellant and the  daughter
                he has with him remained in their home as the daughter  was
                not well.
            ix) ISIS entered their home town on 9 July 2014 after which the
                appellant moved on 12 July 2014 to Baghdad where they lived
                with Colonel [J] and where they remained for 5 to 6  months
                before making arrangements to flee the country.
             x) The appellant claimed  that  his  wife  and  children  were
                unable to leave Mosul. The  appellant  stated  he  had  not
                heard from his wife since she left for Mosul but had  heard
                that her father died eight months  before  his  substantive
                asylum interview.


     4. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge sets out the  analysis  at  [15  -  32]  of  the
        decision under challenge.
     5. It is recorded that it is not disputed that  the  appellant  is  an
        Iraqi national who lived in a contested area of Iraq but thereafter
        the Judge gives a number of reasons in support of  a  finding  that
        the appellant's account is rejected  and  in  relation  to  adverse
        credibility issues. The Judge accepted the appellant has a  genuine
        subjective fear of return to his home area but did  not  find  such
        fear to be objectively well-founded.
     6. The Secretary of State's position in the reasons for refusal letter
        was that the appellant could return to the IKR or to Baghdad  where
        he had lived prior to leaving  the  country,  which  the  appellant
        states is not feasible as he was asked to find a sponsor in Baghdad
        previously but could not find one.
     7. The Judge refers to the relevant country guidance case of AA before
        concluding that the appellant could return to Baghdad [22].
     8. At [23] the Judge notes that the respondent raised as an option the
        appellants return to the IKR. It is noted  that  the  appellant  is
        from Sulaymaniyah and that his sister in law lives there currently.
        It was acknowledged that his identity would have to be  pre-cleared
        with the IKR authorities but the country guidance case shows  there
        is not a risk to ordinary citizens in that area and it would not be
        unreasonable to expect the appellant to return to  Baghdad  or  the
        IKR meaning he will  not  qualify  for  a  grant  of  international
        protection.
     9. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge the First-tier Tribunal.
    10. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State.


Error of law


    11. The first ground relied on by Dr Mynott is an assertion  the  Judge
        failed to consider a diagnosis that had  been  provided  confirming
        the appellant was suffering from  mixed  anxiety  with  depression,
        psychosis, and PTSD in the assessment of  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant.  It  is  accepted  by  the  appellant  that  the   Judge
        considered that evidence and there is specific reference to  it  in
        the decision under challenge. It  was  argued  on  the  appellant's
        behalf that  there  was  no  consideration  by  the  Judge  of  the
        potential impact of PTSD upon those elements of  the  evidence  the
        Judge found to lack credibility.
    12. It was also conceded on the appellant's behalf that he  was  unable
        to pursue the ground of appeal  relating  to  the  ability  of  the
        appellant to obtain a CSID as a copy of this document  was  in  the
        evidence before the Judge.
    13. The appellant disputed the Judge's finding that he could return  to
        Baghdad as the previous support provided to him by Colonel [J]  was
        no longer available as a source of further  support.  Other  family
        members were not available in Baghdad.
    14. The appellant also asserted the Judge erred as he is a follower  of
        the Sunni sect of Islam. It is said the Judge erred when failing to
        consider the reasonableness of internal relocation in  relation  to
        which Dr Mynott make specific reference  to  the  decision  of  the
        Upper Tribunal in BA.
    15. The ability to internally relocate was considered at length in  the
        country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544
        (IAC) (unchanged by the Court of Appeal) in which it was held  that
        (i)  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
        harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
        City  or  (subject  to  comments  in  this  case  on   humanitarian
        protection and areas of the country  where  there  is  an  internal
        armed conflict) the Baghdad Belts; (ii)  In  assessing  whether  it
        would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for and Iraqi  national  (P)  to
        relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely  to
        be relevant: (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one
        (comments in this Chapter, this section, section on Iraq  generally
        and returns); (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot  are
        less likely to find employment); (c) whether P has  family  members
        or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate him; (d) whether P  is  a
        lone female (women face greater difficulties than  men  in  finding
        employment); (e) whether P can find a sponsor  to  access  a  hotel
        room or rent accommodation;  (f)  whether  P  is  from  a  minority
        community; (g) whether there is support available for P bearing  in
        mind there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
        provided with the support generally given to IDPs. (iii)  there  is
        not a real risk of an ordinary  civilian  travelling  from  Baghdad
        airport to the southern governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en
        route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).
    16. The Upper Tribunal in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG  [2017]  UKUT
        18 (IAC) held that (i) The level of  general  violence  in  Baghdad
        city remains significant, but the current evidence does not justify
        departing from the conclusion of the Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c))
        Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). (ii) The evidence shows  that  those
        who  worked  for  non-security  related  Western  or  international
        companies, or any other categories of people who would be perceived
        as having collaborated with foreign  coalition  forces,  are  still
        likely to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL control or  have
        high levels of insurgent activity. At the current time the risk  is
        likely to emanate from  Sunni  insurgent  groups  who  continue  to
        target Western or international companies as well as those who  are
        perceived to collaborate with the Government  of  Iraq.  (iii)  The
        current evidence indicates that the risk in Baghdad  to  those  who
        worked for non-security related Western or international  companies
        is low although there is evidence to  show  that  insurgent  groups
        such as ISIL are active and capable of carrying out attacks in  the
        city. In so far as there may be a  low  level  of  risk  from  such
        groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to show a real  risk  solely
        as a perceived collaborator. (iv) Kidnapping has been, and remains,
        a significant and persistent problem contributing to the  breakdown
        of law and order in Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping are likely to  be
        underreported. Kidnappings  might  be  linked  to  a  political  or
        sectarian motive; other kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity
        for a purely financial motive. Whether a returnee from the West  is
        likely to be perceived as a  potential  target  for  kidnapping  in
        Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has been away  from  Iraq.
        Each case will be fact sensitive, but in principle,  the  longer  a
        person has spent abroad the greater the risk. However, the evidence
        does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on  this  ground
        alone. (v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of
        US-led coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in
        2006-2007.  A  Shia  dominated  government  is  supported  by  Shia
        militias in Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more
        likely to be targeted as suspected supporters  of  Sunni  extremist
        groups  such  as  ISIL.  However,  Sunni  identity  alone  is   not
        sufficient to give rise to  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  (vi)
        Individual characteristics, which do not  in  themselves  create  a
        real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount  to  a
        real risk for the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article  15(c)
        of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed
        on a cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the  facts  of
        each case. (vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable,
        and in the case of Sunni complainants, are likely to  be  unwilling
        to provide sufficient protection.
    17. In relation to  the  finding  of  a  further  available  option  of
        internal relocation to the IKR, it was submitted that was this  was
        raised in the refusal letter it did not form part of the  case  and
        that Judge did not find that the appellant is from Sulaimaniyah. It
        was also argued that the appellant would have to return to  Baghdad
        which requires consideration of how the appellant will be  able  to
        travel to the IKR. It is argued that this matter was not adequately
        considered.
    18. The point in relation to the Judge's treatment of the evidence,  in
        light of the medical evidence, has not been shown to give  rise  to
        arguable legal error. The report was clearly taken into account  by
        the Judge but that report did not show  that  the  appellant  would
        have any problems giving evidence both in terms of attending before
        the  Tribunal,  engaging  in  appeal   proceedings,   or   in   his
        recollection of events. A reading of  the  determination  does  not
        demonstrate that any such problems were encountered.
    19. It also is correct, as indicated by Mr Bates,  that  the  psychosis
        and PTSD diagnosis is not described  in  relation  to  a  scale  of
        severity  which  is  of  importance.  Somebody  who  suffers   mild
        psychosis or mild PTSD is likely to be more able to go about  their
        business in a normal manner than somebody who  suffers  at  a  more
        severe level.
    20. It is also of note from the decision under challenge that a lot  of
        the discrepancies identified by the Judge  refer  to  documentation
        and the comparison between that and what was said  in  the  witness
        statements. No problem was  identified  with  the  content  of  the
        witness statements which were adopted, or the oral evidence given.
    21. It is also not made out that the Judge treated the appellant in  an
        inappropriate manner in light of the diagnoses in relation  to  the
        way in which the proceedings were conducted or the  appellant  gave
        his evidence. I find the appellant has failed to establish or  make
        out his argument that his health conditions provide an  explanation
        for  evidential  deficiencies.  The  Judge's  assessment   of   the
        credibility of  the  account  is  not  undermined  by  the  medical
        material. The weight to be given to the evidence was a  matter  for
        the Judge.
    22. In relation to the  issue  of  internal  flight,  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter at paragraphs 41 - 42 raise the  issue  of  internal
        relocation to either Baghdad or the IKR. This is  therefore  not  a
        new issue but a matter  of  which  the  appellant  was  aware  from
        receipt of the refusal letter.
    23. The focus of the decision under  challenge  relates  to  return  to
        Baghdad but even if a Kurd had to initially arrive in Iraq  through
        Baghdad he could always choose to relocate to the IKR.
    24. The Judge was aware  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  the  Sunni
        minority. The Judge noted the appellant had a friend in Baghdad who
        was still in Baghdad and the appellant had failed to make out  that
        he will be subject to sectarian violence sufficient  to  support  a
        finding that it was unreasonable to expect  him  to  relocate.  The
        Judge considered all aspects of the evidence that had  been  raised
        and the fact the appellant may not  like  the  conclusions  reached
        does not mean they are automatically  infected  by  arguable  legal
        error.
    25. The claim the Judge failed to make  a  specific  finding  that  the
        appellant was from Sulaimaniyah does not establish  arguable  legal
        error for the Judge accepted, as did  all  parties,  that  this  is
        where the appellant was born. This was never raised as an issue nor
        pursued as a point of contention at  the  hearing.  The  Judge  was
        therefore able to consider that  as  a  person  from  the  IKR  the
        appellant was able to return there. The appellant is an ethnic Kurd
        from Sulaimaniyah who has a nationality certificate with no  reason
        being made out before the Judge that the appellant would be  denied
        entry. The Judge properly referred to the guidance provided  in  AA
        that only those pre-cleared by  the  Kurdish  authorities  will  be
        permitted entry. That process is undertaken by the  UK  immigration
        authorities liaising with the IKR government, a process that can be
        undertaken on the appellant's behalf. If the appellant is  approved
        for entry he will not have to go to Baghdad. The  appellant  failed
        to make out before the Judge that there was any  issue  that  would
        prevent his being admitted.
    26. In respect of the reasonableness of this proposal, the Judge  finds
        that in the IKR the appellant has actual family members. In the IKR
        the appellant will be a member of the ethnic and religious majority
        as an ethnic Kurd and follower of the Sunni faith. There is also no
        evidence that the appellant will be at risk in the IKR.
    27. As the appellant has not established this option was  not  open  to
        him and the observation by the Judge  has  not  been  shown  to  be
        affected by arguable legal error, the appellant has not established
        any material error of law in the decision under challenge.
    28. The other option considered by  the  Judge  regarding  Baghdad  and
        onward travel to the IKR is said to be infected by legal error as a
        result of problems the appellant would  experience  within  Baghdad
        and difficulties in facilitating safe onward travel,  not  that  he
        would not be given entry to the IKR. The evidence before the  Judge
        did not establish that this finding was not available to the  Judge
        as financial support is available and there was  no  evidence  that
        the family would not be able to assist the  appellant  which  could
        ensure he has adequate funds to meet his basic needs and  the  cost
        of onward travel, in addition  to  the  voluntary  refugee  package
        available to returnees.
    29. It is relevant that the appellant has all the  necessary  paperwork
        such as his CSID which the Court Appeal when considering the  Upper
        Tribunal decision in AA confirmed is not a document relevant to  an
        ability to return but was relevant to enabling a person  to  access
        services within Iraq. This will ensure that the appellant will  not
        be abandoned or  destitute  and  will  be  able  to  establish  his
        identity within his home state.
    30. It was submitted in response that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
        appellant is a healthy man ignores his mental health issues and the
        presence of his daughter but, stated above, the core  finding  must
        be the ability of the appellant to return  to  the  IKR  where  his
        daughter will accompany him and in relation to  which  no  credible
        real risk was established.
    31. In relation to the IKR and Baghdad, the evidence does not support a
        claim that any treatment the appellant may  require  would  not  be
        available to  him  to  assist  with  medical  issues  or  that  the
        financial support  referred  to  by  the  Judge  would  not  be  so
        sufficient to meet the needs and requirements of both the appellant
        and his daughter.
    32. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out. The decision shall stand.


Decision

    33. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    34. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 17 November 2017

