
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01111/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|By Remote Hearing                             |                              |
|                                              |On 21 September 2020          |
|On 3 September 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     A G
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr   T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties, and neither party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan of Hazara ethnicity, born
         in 2000. He entered the UK and claimed asylum in  2016.  He  claims
         that the Taliban killed his father and present a continuing risk to
         him and his family; and that he is at  risk  in  Afghanistan  as  a
         Hazara.

      2. In 2016 the appellant's asylum claim was refused.  He  appealed  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal was heard by Judge of the
         First-tier Tribunal  McMahon.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  11
         January 2017, Judge McMahon dismissed the appeal. He did  not  find
         the appellant's account credible. Amongst other things, he did  not
         accept that the appellant's father was killed by the Taliban.

      3. The appellant made further representations to be  recognised  as  a
         refugee. These were refused by the respondent on 23  January  2020.
         The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his  appeal
         was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Watson ("the judge").
         In a decision promulgated on 16 March 2020, the judge dismissed the
         appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Watson

      4. The only evidence material  to  the  appellant's  protection  claim
         before the judge that had not been before  Judge  McMahon  was  the
         respondent's family tracing report (which  is  discussed  below  in
         detail) and the evidence of the appellant's foster carer. The judge
         found that this new evidence did not advance the appellant's  claim
         that his father had been killed by, and that he was at  risk  from,
         the Taliban. The judge  therefore  concluded,  applying  Devaseelan
         (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  *
         [2002] UKIAT 0070, that, inter alia,  there  was  not  a  basis  to
         depart from the  decision  of  Judge  McMahon  in  respect  of  the
         credibility of the appellant's claim that his father was killed  by
         the Taliban.

      5. The judge also found that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  by
         reason  of  membership   of   the   Hazara   ethnicity,   or   from
         indiscriminate violence. He also found that it would not be  unduly
         harsh for the appellant to relocate to Kabul, which is close to his
         village, if he wishes.

The respondent's family tracing report

      6. In the respondent's refusal letter of 23 January 2020 ("the refusal
         letter") reference is made to a family tracing report dated 30  May
         2018 ("the family tracing report"). Paragraphs 17  and  18  of  the
         refusal letter state:

             "17 "It is noted that you had a family tracing done and it  is
             stated that your family are in Kabul. A family tracing  report
             that is on file  dated  30/05/2018  states,  "the  information
             obtained  during  site  visit  from  residents  and  elder  of
             Jangalok village of Shikh  Au  district  of  Parwan  province,
             about the  identification  of  [the  appellant]  presented  as
             below:

             18  Jan  Ali...director  of  provincial  from   Jangalok   ...
             confirming my recognition with [the appellant]. He is resident
             of this village. His family is living Kabul."

      7.  On  7  February  2020  the  appellant's  solicitor  wrote  to  the
         respondent requesting disclosure of the family tracing  report.  In
         addition, the appellant's solicitor asked  whether  the  respondent
         had been told what happened to the appellant's father  and  for  an
         explanation of how the person referred to in paragraph  18  of  the
         refusal letter (Jan Ali) was connected to, or knew, the appellant's
         family.

      8.  No  response  having  been  received,  on  28  February  2020  the
         appellant's solicitors wrote to the First-tier Tribunal  requesting
         an adjournment of the hearing (scheduled for 9 March 2020)  on  the
         basis that respondent had not responded to their queries.

      9. On 3 March 2020, the request for an adjournment  was  refused.  The
         reason given was that the request could be considered by the  judge
         at the  hearing  where  the  Presenting  Officer  should  have  the
         relevant documents.

     10. Also on 3 March 2020,  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant's
         solicitors, enclosing a copy of  the  family  tracing  report.  The
         letter states:

             "This report was done after a family tracing letter  was  sent
             to yourselves on 22 February 2018.  On  27  March  2018,  your
             client had provided us with a telephone number for his mother.
             Information was then sent to the embassy to  help  in  tracing
             your client's family. It was people at the  embassy  in  Kabul
             that went out and found the applicant's  family  and  provided
             the report."

     11. The family tracing report states that the  information  in  it  was
         obtained during a site visit to Jangalak  and  that  Jan  Ali,  the
         "director of  provincial",  confirmed  that  the  appellant  was  a
         resident of the village and his family lived in Kabul. Two brothers
         were identified, the appellant's father was  recorded  as  deceased
         and the name of his mother was given.  The  family  tracing  report
         does not include any information  about  the  questions  that  were
         asked or provide any information about the appellant's father other
         than that he is deceased.

     12. At the hearing on 9 March 2020, the appellant's representatives did
         not renew the application for an adjournment.

     13. The judge's findings in respect of the family  tracing  report  are
         set out in paragraph 19 of the decision, where the judge stated:

             "The respondent has carried out family tracing. The  appellant
             explained that he had never asked for his mother to be  traced
             as he accepted that he was in contact with her and she was not
             missing at any time; he had wanted to trace his  brother  [  ]
             from whom he had not had contact. The document produced by the
             respondent is at p.37 of the appellant's bundle.  This  states
             that the official has inspected the Tazkera, confirms that the
             appellant's father is deceased and that  the  mother  and  two
             brothers  are  living  in  Kabul.  This   accords   with   the
             appellant's account in all important respects except  for  the
             name of a second brother [ ] whom the appellant  states  is  a
             person completely unknown to him. I accept this and find  that
             the name appears not consistent with the  known  ethnicity  of
             the appellant. However there is nothing in this document  that
             disturbs the findings  of  Judge  McMahon  noted  above.  This
             document does not give me any information that would  lead  me
             to depart  from  the  main  finding  of  the  judge  that  the
             appellant is not of interest to  the  Taliban.  S/he  accepted
             that the father was deceased, as noted on this report but  not
             that he had been killed as described  by  the  appellant.  The
             document does not assist the appellant in showing that  he  is
             of interest to Taliban.

Grounds of Appeal

     14. Mr Mukherjee, in the grounds of appeal, his skeleton argument,  and
         in his submissions, has advanced several  arguments  regarding  the
         family tracing report. These are that:

          a. The respondent, having taken the step of locating and speaking
             to the appellant's family, ought to have verified whether  the
             appellant's father was killed by the Taliban;

          b. The respondent was under an obligation to disclose information
             obtained about how the appellant's father was killed; and

          c. The judge should have either drawn a negative  inference  from
             the  respondent  not  disclosing  information  about  how  the
             appellant's father died or adjourned the hearing and  directed
             the respondent to obtain and/or disclose this information.  It
             is argued, in addition, that an adjournment  would  also  have
             enabled the appellant to instruct an external investigator  to
             the respondent's vague evidence.

     15. The grounds also argue that because the family tracing  report  was
         not before Judge McMohan the judge erred by treating  the  decision
         of Judge McMohan as a starting point in respect of the issue of how
         the appellant's father died.

New Evidence

     16. Shortly before the hearing, the appellant submitted a supplementary
         bundle. This included two items of evidence that  were  not  before
         the First-tier Tribunal. The first is a statement of the  appellant
         dated 19 August 2020. The statement states that it is not true that
         people from the British Embassy met his mother and family  members,
         and that a man called Jan Ali (the person referred to in the family
         tracing report) is not known to him or his family.

     17. The second item of new evidence is a  report  by  Dr  Giustozzi,  a
         visiting professor at the War Studies Department  KCL.  The  report
         states that, on his instruction, a researcher based in  Kabul  with
         whom he works met Mr Jan Ali who confirmed  knowing  the  appellant
         personally. It is recorded that Mr Ali stated that the  appellant's
         family now live in Kabul and that the appellant's father was killed
         by the Taliban. The report also states that Mr Ali did not  discuss
         the visits  carried  out  by  the  representative  of  the  British
         Embassy.

     18. In respect of new evidence, Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules requires provision of a notice to the  Upper
         Tribunal and the other party indicating the nature of the  evidence
         and explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
         No such notice was given,  even  though  the  directions  of  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Reeds (at paragraph 4(iii)) reminded the parties  of
         the need to comply with Rule 15(2A).

     19. I have considered the failure to comply with  Rule  15(2A)  in  the
         light of the guidance given in Hysaj v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1633.
         This is a serious default and no good (or, indeed, any) reason  has
         been given for non-compliance.  Mr  Mukherjee's  only  argument  to
         support the evidence being admitted was that it is highly  relevant
         to whether the judge erred. I do  not  accept  this.  Firstly,  the
         report and statement were not before the  judge  and  therefore  no
         error can arise from failing to  have  regard  to  the  information
         contained within them. Secondly, as explained  further  below,  the
         new evidence does not assist the appellant in establishing that the
         respondent breached her duty to not mislead by failing to  disclose
         material information about the  death  of  the  appellant's  father
         because the report and statement do not say  anything  relevant  to
         this issue.

Analysis

     20. The respondent has a duty to endeavour to trace family  members  of
         an unaccompanied minor as soon as possible after the minor makes  a
         claim for asylum: regulation 6 of  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception
         Conditions) Regulations 2005. Mr Mukherjee  argued  that,  in  this
         case, there was a further duty on the respondent, which was to make
         enquiries about how  the  appellant's  father  died.  Mr  Mukherjee
         argued that because the cause of the appellant's father's death was
         central to the appellant's case, the person sent by the embassy  to
         undertake family tracing could and should have taken the additional
         step of enquiring about how he died.

     21. Mr Mukherjee was unable to identify (and I am  not  aware  of)  any
         authority to support the existence of a duty on the  respondent  to
         broaden the scope of family tracing investigations to make enquires
         relevant to the basis of an asylum claim. I agree with  Mr  Lindsay
         that whilst the respondent had a duty to  endeavour  to  trace  the
         appellant's family she did not  have  a  duty  to  investigate  and
         attempt to verify the account the  appellant  gave  in  his  asylum
         interview. The burden of proof is on the appellant  and  this  does
         not  change  because  an  appellant  is  a  child  or  because  the
         respondent carried out family tracing. It  is  entirely  consistent
         with the respondent's duties that a  person  from  the  embassy  in
         Kabul compiled a report on the  identity  and  whereabouts  of  the
         appellant's  family  without  investigating  (or  asking  questions
         about) the reason the appellant's father died.

     22. The respondent has a duty not to mislead,  which  requires  her  to
         draw attention to information which might undermine her  case.  See
         BH (policies/information: SoS's duties) Iraq [2020] UKUT 189  (IAC)
         and Nimo (appeals: duty of disclosure) [2020] UKUT 88 (IAC). If the
         respondent obtained information about the cause of the  appellant's
         father's death and did not disclose it to the appellant a breach of
         the duty to not mislead might arise. However, there is no reason to
         believe the respondent obtained any such information as she had  no
         duty, or reason,  to  investigate  the  cause  of  the  appellant's
         father's death. The report of Dr Giustozzi, had it  been  admitted,
         would not have assisted the appellant because in the report  it  is
         stated that Mr Ali did not discuss the visits carried  out  by  the
         representative  of  the  British  Embassy.  Dr  Giustozzi's  report
         therefore  is  of  no  assistance  in  ascertaining   whether   the
         respondent  obtained  information  (that   was   not   subsequently
         disclosed) about the cause of the appellant's father's death.

     23. There is no merit to the contention that the  judge  erred  by  not
         adjourning the hearing. As emphasised by Mr Lindsay, neither  party
         sought an adjournment at the hearing. It  was  made  clear  to  the
         appellant, when his application for an adjournment was refused on 3
         March 2020, that if an adjournment was still  sought  it  could  be
         requested at the hearing. However, no such  application  was  made.
         Moreover, this is not a case where there was a  reason  to  adjourn
         that was, or ought to have been, apparent to the  judge.  The  main
         reason the adjournment had previously  been  sought  was  that  the
         family tracing report had not been disclosed. However, by that time
         the hearing took place it  had  been  disclosed.  I  am  satisfied,
         therefore, that no unfairness arose from the judge proceeding  with
         the hearing.

     24. The family tracing report neither supports nor  detracts  from  the
         appellant's claim that  his  father  was  killed  by  the  Taliban,
         because it is silent on the issue. It merely confirms what was  not
         in dispute - that the appellant's father is deceased. The judge was
         therefore entitled to find, as  he  did  in  paragraph  19  of  the
         decision, that the report did  not  provide  any  information  that
         would support a departure from the finding of Judge McMahon on  the
         issue of how the appellant's father died.

     25. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law.  The  appeal
         is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

     26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and stands.

     27. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Daniel Sheridan                     |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                              Dated:|
|                                    |15 September 2020                   |

