
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
PA/01819/2017


                                                  PA/14298/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2017                            |On 8 November 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    NYADE
                                    CYSDB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representative; the 2nd appellant's husband
                    acting as a McKenzie friend
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  El  Salvador.   They   were   born
    respectively on  21 October  1963  and  12  August  1986.   The  first
    appellant is  the  second  appellant's  mother.   The  first  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 February 2016 and claimed asylum.   Her
    application was refused on 13 February 2017.

 3. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on  12  November  2012,
    together with her husband.  He claimed asylum on 29 November 2012  with
    the second appellant as  his  dependant.   His  claim  for  asylum  was
    refused and his subsequent appeal dismissed.

 4. On 17 June 2016, the second appellant applied for  asylum  in  her  own
    right.  That application was refused on 16 December 2016.

 5. The basis of the appellants' claims for asylum  was  that  they  feared
    gang-based violence on return to El Salvador.  They  claim  to  fear  a
    gang known as "Mara 18" whom, they claim, had raped, "D"  who  is  also
    the daughter of the first  appellant  and  the  sister  of  the  second
    appellant.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 April 2017, Judge Powell  dismissed  each  of  their
    appeals.

 7. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 17  July  2017  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Finch)  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal.

 8. On 4 August 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice seeking
    to uphold Judge Powell's decision.

The Hearing

 9. The appellants were unrepresented before me.  Previously, including  at
    the hearing before Judge Powell, they were represented by Duncan Lewis,
    Solicitors.  They have, however, made a complaint against their  former
    representatives in relation to the conduct of  the  proceedings  before
    Judge Powell and are no longer represented by them.

10. The second appellant's husband (and first appellant's son-in-law) ("M")
    requested that he assist the appellants as a McKenzie friend.   Without
    objection from Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of  State,  I
    agree that he could do so.

11. At the outset of the hearing, I raised with "M" (the  McKenzie  friend)
    that no Spanish interpreter was available for the proceedings.   Having
    consulted with the appellants, I was informed that they were content to
    proceed in the absence of an interpreter in dealing with the  error  of
    law issues.  It was plain that "M" spoke (and indeed wrote) to  a  high
    level in English and that the second appellant was able  to  understand
    the proceedings in English.  Where necessary, either "M" or the  second
    appellant explained any matter to the first appellant in Spanish.

12. At the outset, I explained to "M" the purpose of  the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal which was to consider  whether,  on  the  basis  of  the
    grounds  upon  which  permission  had  been  granted,  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was unsustainable in law.   "M"  acknowledged  that
    fact and referred  me  to  detailed  written  documents  raising  legal
    challenges to Judge Powell's decision and to  which  he  added  further
    comments orally.

The Grounds

13. The appellants' grounds essentially  rely  upon  a  fairness  argument.
    Both in the supporting documents and orally before me,  M  argued  that
    the judge  had  unfairly  proceeded  with  the  hearing  (and  had  not
    adjourned it) when it became apparent that D's evidence was crucial  to
    the outcome of the appeals.

14. Initially, M also relied upon a contention that the judge had failed to
    consider  all  the  material  in  the  bundles  before  him.   However,
    following a short adjournment  in  which  he  sought  to  identify  the
    material that had not been considered, M accepted that the material  he
    relied upon had, in fact, not been put before the judge.

15. M also submitted that the judge had  been  wrongly  influenced  by  the
    respondent's position at the hearing that D had not been  truthful.   I
    need say no more about that ground other than to  state  it  is  simply
    unsustainable.  It  is  clear  on  any  fair  reading  of  the  judge's
    determination that he made his own decision  based  upon  the  evidence
    before him that the appellants had not  established  their  case  based
    upon the claimed rape of D by gang members which had been  reported  to
    the police.

16.  In granting permission UTJ Finch considered that it was arguable  that
    the judge's decision not to adjourn  the  hearing  was  unlawful.   Her
    reasons were as follows:

         "The Appellants' solicitor applied for an adjournment in order  for
         a decision to be reached on the daughter/sister's application.  The
         First-tier Tribunal Judge refused this application but then  relied
         upon the failure to provide further evidence about her claim  as  a
         reason to dismiss the appeal.

         When refusing the appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
         remind himself of the totality of the overriding objectives and the
         need to ensure that a hearing adhered to the principle of being  in
         the interests of justice. He merely  referred  to  the  delay  that
         would be caused by any such adjournment.

         It was also clear from the decision that the evidence that had been
         submitted  by  the  Appellants'  solicitors  was   incomplete   and
         disorganised. This also indicated that it was not in the  interests
         of justice to proceed.

         As a consequence, I am satisfied  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Powell's decision and reasons did contain arguable  errors  of  law
         and,  therefore,  it  is  appropriate  to  grant   the   Appellants
         permission to appeal."

17. For the reasons I give below, I accept that the ground that  UTJ  Finch
    found to be arguable is, in fact, established.

Discussion

18. Before Judge Powell, there was no evidence from D  and  the  judge  was
    told that D would not be called to give evidence.  At the time  of  the
    hearing, and indeed this remains the case, the Secretary of  State  had
    not reached a decision  on  D's  application  for  asylum.   The  judge
    identified with the  appellants'  legal  representative  "difficulties"
    given the Secretary of State's position that, having  not  decided  her
    application, there was no concession that D had been raped and, on  the
    basis of what he was told by the appellants'  legal  representative,  D
    would not give evidence and there was no  written  evidence  from  her,
    including any asylum interview record.

19. In the light of that, the judge was asked to  adjourn  the  hearing  in
    order that a decision could be reached on D's application.   There  was
    also an application to adjourn in order that further translations could
    be obtained of some documents.  The judge dealt with this at para 20 of
    his determination as follows:

         "20. I undertook case management at the start  of  the  proceedings
             having identified the difficulties to which I have alluded  in
             this part of my decision. The Presenting Officer did not  seek
             an  adjournment  to  provide  me  with  further  evidence  and
             maintained her position that the factual matrix involving  [D]
             was not accepted. Ms Davies invited me to allow  her  time  to
             file further translations of the police documents but did  not
             seek an adjournment in order to file evidence  from  [D],  her
             proceedings or from the first appellant's husband. She invited
             me instead to  adjourn  to  await  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision in [D's] case but having asked further  questions,  I
             was not satisfied that there was a realistic current timetable
             for the determination of her claim. Mindful of the  overriding
             objective  in  these  proceedings  I  did  not   consider   it
             appropriate to delay these proceedings to await that decision,
             particularly as a positive  decision  had  been  made  by  the
             appellants to proceed without [D's] evidence."

20. It is plain that the appellants' claims arose out of the  events  which
    were central to D's claim for asylum, namely her  rape  and  subsequent
    reporting to the police.  It is, therefore, a matter  of  some  concern
    that the Secretary of  State  did  not  decide  the  principal  asylum-
    seeker's claim before deciding the claims  of  these  appellants  which
    were, in  all  material  respects,  contingent  upon  D's  claim  being
    accepted.  It is apparent that no explanation was made available to the
    judge at the hearing, despite his concerns.  Before me, Mr Richards was
    able to provide no further assistance  on  this  issue.   However,  D's
    claim still remains undetermined by the Secretary of State.

21. In the light of that, it is perhaps not surprising that a decision  was
    taken not to call D to give evidence at the  hearing.   The  appellants
    have put into evidence documents relating to a complaint that they have
    subsequently made against their (then)  legal  representatives,  Duncan
    Lewis.  In the exchange of  correspondence,  it  is  made  plain  in  a
    response to the complaint from Duncan Lewis dated 21 July 2017 that D's
    own legal representatives, who were not Duncan Lewis, had  declined  to
    link D's case to the appeals of these appellants.  There is  also,  set
    out in that letter, a transcription from a telephone conversation  with
    the second appellant in which she said: "what worries me is how it will
    affect my sister when she would have to present evidence before she has
    received a decision in her own case.  I don't want to affect  her  case
    because she is likely to receive a positive decision".

22. It is apparent from that  correspondence  that,  in  consultation  with
    their legal representatives, the appellants decided not to  call  D  to
    give evidence.  Although the contrary was suggested before  me,  it  is
    plain from the correspondence that the appellants declined to call D on
    legal advice.  That legal advice was, no doubt,  highly  influenced  by
    the position of D's own legal representatives.

23. No doubt, also, that led the appellants' legal representative  to  make
    the application to Judge Powell to adjourn the hearing in order that  a
    decision could be made in  respect  of  D's  application.   As  I  have
    already set out, for the reasons in para 20  of  his  determination  he
    declined to do so.

24. The judge correctly identified that he  had  to  apply  the  overriding
    objective which is set out in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-
    tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014   (SI
    2604/2014).  That provides as follows:

         "2   (1) The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
                  Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

             (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -

                  (a)  dealing with a case in ways which  are  proportionate
                      to the importance of the case, the complexity of  the
                      issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of
                      the parties and of the Tribunal;

                  (b)    avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                      flexibility in the proceedings; and

                  (c)  ensuring, so far as practical, that the  parties  are
                      able to participate fully in the proceedings;

                  (d)   using  any  special  expertise   of   the   Tribunal
                      effectively; and

                  (e)  avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
                      consideration of the issues."

25. Sub-paragraph (4) goes on to state that:

         "Parties must -

         (a)  help the Tribunal to further the overriding objectives; and

         (b)  cooperate with the Tribunal generally."

26. Self-evidently, therefore, the overriding objective is fairness and the
    interests of justice.  That is entirely consistent with the approach to
    adjournments set out by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC).   In  that  decision,  the  (then)
    President (McCloskey J) said this at [7]:

         "7.  If a Tribunal refuses to accede  to  an  adjournment  request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law.  In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion."

    At [8], the President emphasised the cardinal requirement of "fairness"
    as follows:

         "Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve  to
         prevent judicial error.  Regrettably, in  the  real  and  imperfect
         world of contemporary litigation, the question of adjourning a case
         not infrequently arises on the date of hearing, at the doors of the
         court. I am conscious, of course, that  in  the  typical  case  the
         Judge will have invested much time and effort  in  preparation,  is
         understandably anxious to complete the  day's  list  of  cases  for
         hearing and may well feel frustrated by  the  (usually)  unexpected
         advent of an adjournment request.   Both  the  FtT  and  the  Upper
         Tribunal have demanding workloads.  Parties and  stakeholders  have
         expectations,  typically  elevated   and   sometimes   unrealistic,
         relating to the throughput and output of cases in  the  system.  In
         the present era, the spotlight on the judiciary is more acute  than
         ever before.  Moreover, Tribunals must consistently give effect  to
         the   overriding   objective.    Notwithstanding,   sensations   of
         frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how  legitimate,  must
         always  yield  to  the  parties'  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   In
         determining applications for  adjournments,  Judges  will  also  be
         guided by focussing on the overarching criterion enshrined  in  the
         overriding objective, which is that of fairness."

27. In my judgment, in para 20 the judge did not adequately deal  with  the
    issue of fairness derived from the overriding objective.   He  was,  of
    course, faced by the Secretary of State's position that no decision had
    been made on D's application and the "frankly, unhelpful position taken
    before him that  there  was  no  current  timetable  to  reach  such  a
    decision".  Given that D was the principal asylum-seeker, common  sense
    and fairness required a decision to be reached on her claim before that
    of these appellants.  I struggle to understand how the position of  the
    Secretary of State was compliant with rule 2(4) of the Procedure  Rules
    as  helping  the  Tribunal  to  further  the  overriding  objective  or
    cooperating with it.

28. However, the main point is that fairness, in my  judgment,  required  a
    decision in respect of D's application, otherwise the appellants  were,
    in effect, faced with a dilemma (even  with  legal  advice)  of  either
    seeking to lead evidence from D (probably implicitly against the advice
    of her legal representatives who did not wish her claim to  be  linked)
    or proceeding without the evidence of the principal  asylum-seeker  who
    could give the best evidence concerning the events relied upon - at one
    remove - by the appellants in  this  case.   The  latter,  of  course,
    effectively required the appellants to present  their  case  with  'one
    hand tied behind their backs'.  Indeed, the absence of D's evidence was
    repeatedly referred to by the Judge  in  his  reasons  leading  to  his
    adverse factual findings.

29. Further, in my judgment, the judge's  emphasis  in  para  20  upon  the
    "delay" to the proceedings,  whilst  a  relevant  factor,  was  not  of
    sufficient weight to overcome the patent unfairness to  the  appellants
    of proceeding with their appeals in the circumstances.

30. In the result, there was substantial prejudice  to  the  appellants  in
    proceeding with the appeals.  For those reasons, I am satisfied that it
    was unfair to proceed with the hearing and not to grant the adjournment
    as requested.

31. That was a material error of law and the judge's decision cannot  stand
    and is set aside.

Disposal

32. Given the basis for setting aside the decision,  the  only  appropriate
    disposal of this appeal is  that  it  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Powell.

33. The appeal should be listed in such a way that the Secretary  of  State
    is able to make a decision in respect of D's claim for asylum prior  to
    that hearing.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             7 November 2017


