
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No:  PA/01698/2020 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 2 February 2021           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRINBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     M A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                DETERMINATION AND REASONS (remit to FtT) (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, aged 35.   He  appeals  against
    the decision of FtT Judge Swaney, promulgated on 31 July 2020.

 2. After granting permission to appeal, the UT issued  directions  with  a
    view to deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law and
    (b) if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

 3. In a response dated 1 December 2020, the  SSHD  accepts  that  the  FtT
    erred, in light of the principles established in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC
    31, by failing to consider  whether  the  appellant  "would  in  future
    refrain, due to fear of persecution,  from  expressing  genuinely  held
    views in respect of religious matters if returned to Pakistan".

 4. The SSHD "takes a neutral stance on (i) the appropriate venue  for  any
    remaking and (ii) whether and to what extent findings of fact should be
    preserved."

 5. In a response  dated  11  December  2020  the  appellant  says  "as  to
    disposal" only that "paragraphs 31 and 32 of the FtT decision should be
    preserved".

 6. In those circumstances, the UT may now fairly decide issues (a) and (b)
    above without a hearing.

 7. The "HJ (Iran)" issue was canvassed only  faintly  on  the  appellant's
    behalf in the FtT and in the grounds of appeal to the UT, so the SSHD's
    position is astutely and fairly taken; but the  concession  is  plainly
    correct.  Also plainly, the error is one which requires the decision of
    the FtT to be set aside and remade.

 8. The findings at [31] and [32] are that the appellant wrote the articles
    he claimed  to  have  written;  expressed  opinions  on  political  and
    religious matters likely to put him at odds with the  public  and  with
    the authorities; and "may well", in consequence, have received  threats
    by internet and email.

 9. In accordance with the appellant's request and the respondent's neutral
    approach, the findings at [31] and [32] are "preserved", to the  effect
    that they stand  as a determination of those issues of fact, not to  be
    revisited  unless  some  good  reason  emerges  in  course  of  further
    proceedings; that is to say, along the lines  of  the  well-established
    "Devaseelan" principles (although this is not  the  usual  "Devaseelan"
    instance).

10. It is a little more problematic  how  to  deal  with  the  FtT's  other
    findings  of  primary  fact.   Some  of  those  were  negative  to  the
    appellant.  No reason has been established either to set them in  stone
    or to set them at naught.

11. The  appellant's  general  credibility  cannot  be  divorced  from  the
    question how he is likely to behave in  future.   He  seeks  to  adduce
    further evidence.  It would be difficult  and  artificial  to  tie  the
    hands of a future judge  by  findings  already  reached.   Accordingly,
    although error has been established on one issue only, I consider  that
    fairness requires an overall re-appraisal, which is  apt  for  the  FtT
    rather than for the UT.

12. Under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the
    case is remitted to the FtT. The next tribunal will require to  resolve
    the case on its merits, on all materials placed before  it,  not  being
    limited by the previous decision, other than to  the  extent  explained
    above.

13. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Swaney.

14. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which remains in place.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    8 January 2021


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
