
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01795/2020

                                                        PA/01796/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2021                               |On 6 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                  JA AND ka
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellants, citizens of  El-Salvador,  appeal  with  permission
         against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed their appeals
         in a decision promulgated on the 2 July 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them. This direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 16 June 2021, by means of Microsoft teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it  was  not  practicable
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing.  The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         both appellants who were able to hear and see the proceedings being
         conducted. I am satisfied both advocates were able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Holmes and Mr Diwnycz for their clear oral  and
         written submissions.


Background:

      5. The basis of the appellants' claim is summarised in the decision of
         the FtTJ at paragraphs 9-13. The appellants are nationals of El
         Salvador and are brothers.  Both were said to be in fear of the MS
         13 gang. All of their family still live in xx where his aunt works
         with the police.


      6. Four years ago when he was with his cousin he was threatened by
         gang members whilst visiting his grandmother in xxx. He did not
         visit for a while out of fear but then began to do so as he thought
         matters had improved.

      7. On 2 November 2019, JA and his brother went to a shop. JA stated
         that he and his brother went to the shop and KA did the shopping
         while he waited outside. At that time 3 men who appeared to be gang
         members and that when they approached him, they thought that he and
         his brother were sons of the police officer referring to their aunt
         and even mentioned her rank and the car she drove. He records in
         his witness statement at paragraph 9 that he and his brother were
         threatened by the 3 members of the MS 13 gang and they said they
         didn't want to see them ever again or they would kill them. They
         were accused of being the children of their paternal aunt who was a
         police officer.
      8. The 2 appellants did not report the incident to the police until
         24th of November 2019 and after they had informed their aunt what
         had happened. They provided a police report with an English
         translation as evidence in support.


      9. The appellants remained in El Salvador until 26 November 2019
         continuing to live at their home and carrying out their work
         commitments.

     10. They arrived in the UK on 27 November 2019 and claimed asylum on
         the same day.

     11. In a decision taken on 6 February 2020  the applications by both
         appellants were refused on all grounds. In considering their claims
         the respondent accepted that both appellants were nationals of El
         Salvador but set out in the decision letters the inconsistent
         accounts that had been given by the appellants and concluded that
         it had not been accepted that they had any problems in El Salvador
         from the gang members. Reference was made to the issue of
         sufficiency of protection in the light of the country materials
         which was set out in the decision letters. In the alternative it
         was asserted that the appellants could internally relocate. The
         remainder of the decision letters related to Article 8 which do not
         form the basis of any appeal to the FtT or to the Upper Tribunal.

     12. The appellants appealed that decision and both appeals came before
         the FtTJ on 29 June 2020.


     13. As set out at paragraph 1 of the decision, it had been agreed at
         the CMRH that the appellant's aunt is a policewoman and that if
         there is found to be a threat from the gang to the appellants
         requiring state protection, there would not be effective
         protection, and internal relocation would not be available or
         reasonable.


     14. For the purposes of the hearing the FtTJ had a bundles of
         documentation comprising of articles and reports relating to El
         Salvador which are set out in the appellant's bundle. There were
         also references to the objective material set out in the respective
         decision letters of the appellants.

     15. In a decision promulgated on 2 July 2020 the FtTJ dismissed their
         protection claims. The FtTJ had the advantage of hearing each of
         the appellants giving oral evidence and for their accounts to be
         the subject of cross examination. He set out his findings of fact
         at paragraphs[18] -[25] and for the reasons set out within those
         paragraphs concluded at paragraph [25] that the appellants had not
         established it was reasonably likely that they were threatened by
         any gang in El Salvador at any time despite its prevalence, or that
         they would be of any adverse interest to any gang in El Salvador on
         their return. The FtTJ therefore dismissed their appeals.

     16. Permission to appeal was issued on the 16 July 2020 and permission
         was refused on the 28 July 2020 and also on renewal to the Upper
         Tribunal by  UTJ Lane on  13 August 2020.

     17. An application was made to the High Court to challenge the decision
         of UTJ Lane ( a "Cart JR"), and permission was granted on 9
         November 2020. An order was made on the 8th of February 2021
         quashing the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to
         appeal.

     18. On the 22 March 2021, an order was made granting permission to
         appeal in light of the decision of the High Court. The decision
         sets out "the parties are reminded that the Upper Tribunal's task
         is that set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     19. Following the  grant  of  permission,  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions for a remote hearing on the  16  June  2021  which  took
         place by way of Microsoft teams.

     20. Mr Holmes, Counsel on behalf of the appellants and who had appeared
         on their behalf before the First-tier Tribunal, did not provide any
         further written submissions and relied upon the written grounds.

     21. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
         response filed.

     22. I also heard oral  submission  from  the  advocates  as  summarised
         below. I intend to consider the parties submissions when addressing
         the grounds relied upon by the appellants.

     23. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I
         now give.

    Decision on error of law:

     24. Mr Holmes on behalf of the appellant submitted that  there  were  2
         discrete reasons that were relied upon. Firstly, the FtTJ failed to
         address the risk to family members of police officers (ground  (a))
         and secondly, the issue relating to credibility  (grounds  (b)  (c)
         and (d).

     25. For the purposes of the decision I intend to first  deal  with  the
         grounds and the submissions made which  relate  to  the  issues  of
         credibility raised which are set out in grounds (b) (c) and (d).

    Ground (b):

     26. Dealing with ground (b) Mr Holmes submits the FtTJ failed to have
         regard to material matters when reaching his credibility findings
         relating to the appellants' claim. He refers to paragraph [22] of
         the decision where the judge reached a finding of fact based on the
         delay in reporting the threats made from gang members to the police
         and further as to the nature of the report made to the police.


     27. It is submitted that the judge did not take account of the
         appellant's evidence or the purpose behind the complaint where it
         was recorded at paragraph 11 of the decision that "the purpose of
         making the complaint was to protect (the appellants) family."

     28. In his oral submissions, Mr Holmes submitted that the FtTJ
         misunderstood the appellants' motivation for going to the police
         and therefore this affected the assessment of the evidence.

     29. Having considered the submission the light of the evidence given
         before the FtTJ I am satisfied that this ground has no merit.

     30. At [22] the FtTJ considered the appellants' account. The judge made
         a number of findings at that paragraph and not only related to the
         issue of delay in reporting the event to the police as relied upon
         in ground (b).

     31. The judge made the following findings at paragraph [22]:


         1) that it was not reasonably likely that they would report the
            threat to the police if they believed the police were corrupt
            out of fear of it getting back to the gang.
         2) The judge agreed with respondent's submission that if the
            incident in November 2, 2019 had taken place that it was not
            reasonably likely that they would have waited 24 days before
            reporting to the police as such a significant delay with such
            nebulous description would inevitably limit their ability to
            catch the alleged gang members.
         3) The judge found that the appellants had no problems for 24 days
            while living at home and continuing to work which indicated that
            it was not reasonably likely that they were of any adverse
            interest to the gangs.
         4) The appellant's account was that there were no ongoing problems
            for the family members remaining in El Salvador also
            demonstrated that it was not reasonably likely that they were of
            any adverse interest to the gangs.


     32. Ground (b) refers to the 2nd reason given by the FtTJ at [22]
         reaching an adverse credibility assessment of their claims and
         submits the judge did not take account of the appellant's evidence
         as to the purpose behind the complaint. It is therefore submitted
         that it was not the intention of the appellants that the gang
         members would be caught.


     33. There is no error in the FtTJ's or any failure to consider the
         appellant's factual claim. If it was the case that the appellant's
         evidence was that they had made the complaint to protect the
         appellant's family, as members of the family it must also be
         included protection for themselves.

     34. Furthermore the evidence given in cross examination of the
         appellant KA was set out in the type of written record of
         proceedings as follows:

         "Q; did you give a description of the men to the police?
         A; JPA did.
         Q: any contact with the police since JPA made the report?
         A; no.
         Q would you have given evidence against the gangs?
         A. Yes
         Q: so the purpose of making the report was to have them arrested?
         A; yes.


     35. That was the last set of questions in cross examination, and it is
         further recorded that there was no re-examination.


     36. Also recorded in the submissions made on behalf of the respondent
         the judge set out "JPA said the report was to get family protection
         KPA said to have them arrested. How police tracked down gang
         members given the description." This is also reflected in the
         summary of the respondent's case set out by the judge at paragraph
         [14] and [11].

     37. It is therefore the position from the evidence that the 2
         appellants had given inconsistent evidence as to why the report was
         made to the police. The evidence of KA was that the purpose of
         making the complaint to the police was to have the gang members
         arrested. Therefore the FtTJ did not misunderstand the evidence.
         That being the case, in my judgement it was entirely open to the
         FtTJ to reach the conclusion that it was not reasonably likely they
         would  have waited 24 days before reporting the incident, given
         that that was such a significant delay with such "nebulous
         descriptions", and this  would inevitably limit the ability to
         catch the gang members.

     38. Consequently there is no mistake of fact or the failure to take
         account of any material matter on the part of the FtTJ. I find no
         error in the way the grounds assert at ground (b).

Ground (d):

     39. The grounds also seek to challenge one of the strands of the
         credibly findings set out at paragraph [22] which I have summarised
         earlier.


     40. Mr Holmes submits that the challenge here is to the finding made by
         the judge that he did not accept that there was a reasonable
         likelihood of the appellants making a report to the police. He
         advances the challenge for 3 reasons. Firstly, the judge did not
         refer to the evidence that it was their aunt who persuaded them to
         make the report. Secondly, it is inherently dangerous for the judge
         to attempt to put himself in the shoes of the appellants and
         thirdly, the effect the finding is that no one El Salvador would
         report gang related threats.

     41. As set out earlier the factual findings made by the FtTJ which are
         the subject of challenge are only part of the factual assessment
         set out at paragraph [22] where the judge set out a number of
         reasons as to why he reached his adverse credibility findings in
         relation to the appellant's claim. Ground (d) concerns the 1st
         finding that he did not believe or accept their account that they
         would have reported the threat to the police given their evidence
         as to the repercussions upon themselves and the family members.
         Whilst Mr Holmes submits it was a wide-ranging finding which would
         mean that no one would have reported such threats, the finding has
         to be placed in the context of the appellant' claim and the
         objective evidence.


     42. The judge had a large amount of objective evidence before him which
         he had referred to and is set out in a brief summary at [17]. The
         objective material demonstrated gang members belong to 2 powerful
         gangs, MS13 and Barrio 18 in El Salvador and have relied on
         infiltrating state institutions to secure protection and further
         their criminal interests. Not only in the political system but it
         is recorded that between 2010 - 2011 nearly 500 gang members
         allegedly infiltrated El Salvador armed forces, and the police. In
         some cases gang members have corrupt police officers to run
         extortion rackets - their primary income source - or corrupt troops
         to obtain high-powered weaponry. The prison system is also seen as
         the headquarters of MS 13 and Barrio 18 for more than a decade.
         This was in part due to their "organisational skill and guile" (see
         p 35 - 36AB).


     43. At page 42AB reference is made to the complaints and reports of
         torture and ill-treatment and the use of excessive force by the
         police and the percentage of murders allegedly attributed  to the
         police which increased from 1% in 2010 to 5% in 2015 and more than
         10% in 2017 and that there was the existence of "death squads" were
         reported ( (see p42AB). Those who collaborated with the security
         services were reportedly subjected to brutal retaliation from the
         gangs (p 110AB).


     44. It is further reported that the police (even the elite
         anticorruption unit) in high-profile cases were usually not seen to
         offer a sufficient form of protection for those who had been
         threatened by gangs since their presence is only temporary and the
         gangs would return. The reports indicate that often the most the
         police are able to do is to provide an escort out of the
         neighbourhood for those who have received threats (at p. 116AB).


     45. The objective material indicates that even those in witness
         protection have been tracked down and killed by the gangs (P
         116AB).



     46. In my judgement the FtTJ was entitled to place the appellants'
         account against that background material and the appellant's own
         evidence that they believed the police to be corrupt. It was
         therefore open to the judge to conclude from the evidence that in
         the light of the material and the appellants evidence themselves
         that they had given that it was not reasonably likely that they
         would have reported the threat themselves as they believed the
         police were corrupt and out of fear of it getting back to the gangs
         who they claimed had threatened them. As the material set out, the
         gangs act swiftly after hearing of any such complaint.


     47. It is also important to take into account the 3rd finding of
         credibility set out at paragraph [22] which is not challenged on
         the grounds.


     48. The FtTJ made a finding that in the light of the evidence, the
         account given by the appellants that they remained living in their
         home and continuing to work for 24 days without any problems to
         them or any retaliation from the gangs undermined their account of
         being of interest to the gangs as asserted.


     49. That was a finding that was firmly evidence-based as there had been
         no dispute that they had remained in their family home and had
         continued to work.

     50. That finding was also one that was supported by the background
         material that I have just set out above.


     51. On their evidence they did not leave El Salvador until the 26
         November 2019. In his asylum interview KA was asked about that
         period of time.  The following is recorded:


         Q68; did you encounter any problems/threats in between being
         threatened on 2/11/2019 and leaving on 26/11/2019?
         A: after 2 November we didn't receive any direct threats against us
         but were very cautious and frightened for our lives.
         Q 69: in the time between receiving the threats and leaving El
         Salvador did you continue life as normal?
         A: yes we continued with our normal life but very frightened and I
         left my work for a week before leaving El Salvador.
         Question 70: why did you continue to work given that your life was
         in danger?
         A: sincerely I wanted to leave my place of work on good terms as I
         really liked the works I worked exactly my start and finish time
         straight home with a lot of caution.

     52. The background evidence refers to the large numbers of gang members
         operating in El Salvador and that they enforce their borders and
         gather intelligence on residents (see page 74). Killing is
         described as an integral part of their exercise of control and
         power and that they form part of the "deliberate strategy targeting
         those who complain about them". The MS 13 gang are described as
         "highly organised" (page 182).


     53. Drawing together that evidence, it was open to the FtTJ to find on
         the evidence before him that the appellants' account of being
         threatened with death by the gangs and their conduct in remaining
         at the home and continuing to go about their daily lives including
         work without any adverse interest being shown in them by the gang
         members was not consistent with their account of having been
         threatened earlier or consistent with that background evidence.


     54. The  FtTJ also made a finding on the evidence again which is not
         challenged in the grounds at paragraph [22] where the judge found
         that the lack of evidence as to ongoing problems for the family
         members remaining in El Salvador also indicated that it was not
         reasonably likely that the appellants were of any adverse interest
         to the gang members. The objective material before the judge
         demonstrated that witnesses/victim of the gangs have been
         reportedly killed to ensure their silence and those who cooperate
         with the authorities are reportedly pursued often alongside family
         members (see page 185).


     55. The evidence of KA was that since he and his brother left El
         Salvador none of the immediate family had any problems in living in
         El Salvador. The appellant's parents remain there, and his brother
         was attending school (question 80 of the interview). In relation to
         their aunt, KA was asked if she had had any problems in his absence
         since leaving El Salvador. He stated, "I don't know after we left I
         lost touch." The judge also recorded the evidence of JA at [10]
         that he did not have problems after reporting the death threats nor
         had the appellant's aunt. He spoke to her 2 or 3 weeks after he
         left El Salvador and gave evidence before the FtTJ that he had last
         spoken to her "2 or 3 weeks ago".


     56. In the light of the background evidence concerning gang activity
         and violence to remaining family members, it was open to the judge
         to reach the conclusion on the evidence that as there were no
         ongoing problems to the family members as a result of their actions
          that this was a further reason why he found the appellants  to be
         of  no adverse interest to the gangs in El Salvador.


    Ground ( c):


     57. I now turn to ground (c ). It is submitted on behalf of the
         appellant that the FtTJ reached an adverse credibility conclusion
         on a matter that was not put to the appellant. Mr Holmes directed
         the tribunal to paragraph 21 of the decision and the conclusion
         made by the judge that the appellants had given "wildly different"
         accounts to the judge than they had given to the police in El
         Salvador.


     58. Mr Holmes submits that the difference in the police report is not
         something they were ever asked to resolve and that they were cross-
         examined at some length and that it was not put to them that the
         discrepancy existed. Thus Mr Holmes submits the judge was unfair in
         placing weight on that.


     59. I indicated to the advocates during the hearing that the ROP dealt
         with this issue and read the relevant aspects of the ROP to the
         advocates. For his part Mr Diwnycz confirmed that that was
         consistent with the Presenting Officers record.


     60. I have therefore carefully considered the grounds. Paragraph [21]
         of the FtTJ's decision refers to the evidence given by the
         appellants concerning events on 2 November 2019.


     61. The FtTJ said this:


         "However, the discrepancy between the accounts given to the police
         in El Salvador some 24 days after the apparent event in November
         2019, and that given to the respondent interview on 30 January 2020
         and me in their statements of 19 March 2020 and orally is wildly
         different. They gave a signed statement to the police that KA was
         with JA when they were surrounded while going to the shop and they
         were threatened. They both gave signed statements and oral evidence
         here that KA was not surrounded as he was inside the shop when JA
         was surrounded and threatened. Both accounts cannot be true. This
         significantly undermines their credibility and would not occur if
         they were telling me an account that was reasonably likely to be
         true."

     62. The evidence of each of the appellants is set out in their witness
         statements at paragraph 9. JA stated that his brother went into the
         shop while he waited outside and that 3 men appeared who were gang
         members and threatened him. KA also set out that he was in the shop
         and his brother waited outside.


     63. The police report and translation are set out at page 19 of the
         bundle under the heading "narration of the facts". The following is
         stated:


         "it is stated today that the complainant has presented himself in
         this department for the purpose of filing a complaint and report an
         offensive threat that himself and his brother have received so that
         we can find out more information about it and investigate the
         following facts. Firstly he mentioned that himself and his brother
         reside in xx neighbourhood in the city, but they frequently go
         visit their grandmother in the neighbourhood named xxx and at a
         date and time mentioned above, they were walking towards a shop and
         they notice 3 suspicious persons. Those persons have the following
         physical characteristics: 2 of them were tall and slim and one was
         short, and fat and he was wearing a cap and they surrounded them
         and they told them that they did not want to see them again in this
         place and that they were the sons of a police officer and that his
         name was xxx and that if they did not do as told, they would face
         the consequences and 1 of them told them that they would kill them
         and they describe their aunt to them..."


     64. There is a clear discrepancy on the face of the 2 witness
         statements and the evidence given in the translation of the police
         report.  The FtTJ was plainly aware of the evidence given by both
         appellants and recorded it in his decision at [11] in relation to
         the appellant JA and it also recorded the questioning of KA at
         [12]. Further at [13] the judge set out the evidence in in the
         police report which I have set out above.


     65. As to the ROP the evidence of JA is recorded as follows:


         Q: did you wait outside the shop while KA went in?
         A: yes as it was full.
         Q: did KA come out of the shop with anyone?
         A; no.
         Q: So the people spoke to you while KA was in the shop?
         A: yes
         How long did conversation last?
         A: do not know how long - they threaten me - all I had was fear
         Q: did they speak to KA as well
         A; no."


         Later the appellant was asked.


         Q: in the police report it says you were surrounded by the gang
         members?
         A: yes
         Q: were you or were you and KA surrounded by the gang?
         A: only me as KA was in the shop.
         Q: did they move away when he came out?
         A: when he left they were already on their way.


     66. Contrary to the grounds, I am satisfied that there was a clear
         discrepancy set out in the written evidence of both appellants and
         recorded in their interviews compared with the written material in
         the police report which was apparent to all including the
         advocates. The judge recorded the respondent's submission at [14]
         that the police report did not match the interview record (which
         was the same as the appellant's witness statements). The
         description given by the judge that their accounts were "wildly
         different" is supported by the evidence that I have set out above.
         The judge was therefore entitled to reach the conclusion that this
         was a discrepancy which significantly undermined their credibility.
         It went the heart of their claim that they had been threatened by
         the gang which had led to them leaving El Salvador.


     67. I do not accept the submission made by Mr Holmes that there was any
         unfairness on the part of the judge. The police report is the
         appellant's own document and relied upon by them. It must have been
         apparent from the translation that it was not consistent with their
         account and no steps were taken prior to the hearing to deal with
         this issue. Nor was there any re-examination of the evidence as
         recounted in the ROP. Given the clear and obvious discrepancy there
         was no unfairness in the FtTJ having regard to the evidence before
         him which was the subject of cross examination and the submissions
         made on behalf of the respondent. In reaching that finding on what
         was the core issue he was entitled to find that the discrepant
         evidence in the police report significantly undermined their
         factual accounts. Consequently there is no error of law in the
         credibility assessment at [21].


    Ground (a):


     68. It is against that background that I consider ground (a). The
         grounds assert that the FtTJ failed to make any assessment of the
         risk that attached to the appellants owing to their family
         relationship with a police officer in El Salvador. Mr Holmes on
         behalf of the appellant submits that it had been accepted that the
         appellant's aunt was a serving police officer (see paragraph 1 and
         19 of the decision) and that the objective evidence made a case for
         family members constituting a risk category.


     69. In his oral submissions he pointed to the tribunal to passages
         within the objective material including the respondent's CPIN.

         'Members of the security forces and their families members are at
         risk of being killed, either because of specific problems with
         gangs or simply because of their work, and attacks have increased
         since the failure of the truce and political discourse in 2014 and
         2015' [150] 10.4.5 A Freedom House report on El Salvador published
         on 4 February 2019 noted that gangs 'continue to target members of
         security forces and their families.' [151] In a November 2018
         report, International Crisis Group reported 'Police officers always
         wear a gorro navarone, or face-covering balaclava, scared that gang
         members will come after them and their families' [152].

     70. He therefore submits that the appellants fall into the risk
         category and that the judge did not resolve this but focused on
         whether the appellants had received specific threats rather than
         their personal characteristics as relatives of a serving police
         officer.


     71. The rule 24 response relied upon by Mr Diwnycz submits that the
         judge rejected the appellant's claim that due to their association
         with their aunt that they had  been threatened and found at
         paragraph 25 that they would not be of any adverse interest to any
         gang in El Salvador. The judge was clearly aware of the evidence of
         family members of police officers could be at risk that the
         evidence clearly did not establish that all such family members are
         at risk. The Secretary of State submitted on the evidence and on
         the other findings of the FtTJ, that the appellant had not
         discharged the burden to show that there was a real risk of harm or
         that the situation was such that they could establish an article 15
         C risk. Thus the finding made at paragraph 25 is sound and
         adequately reasoned and does not amount to material error of law.


     72. Having considered the submission with care and in the light of the
         objective material before the tribunal to which I have had regard,
         I am satisfied that there is no error in the way that the grounds
         assert. Mr Holmes submitted that I should consider the skeleton
         argument submitted before the FtTJ and I was provided with a copy.
         In that document there are references to the country information
         relating to the police.


     73. In the submission made at paragraph 19 under the heading
         "submissions" the following is recorded:


         "the appellants have given credible and plausible reasons for
         claiming asylum. Both appellants accounts are mainly consistent
         with each other, which adds to their overall credibility. They fear
         the gangs of El Salvador, as they are threatened with serious harm
         and death by them as leverage against their aunt who is a police
         officer in El Salvador. The gang MS - 13 are one of the most
         powerful and territorial gangs. Therefore, both appellant fall into
         a risk category as highlighted above being family members of
         someone who works in the security force and are reasonably likely
         to face persecution as a result."


     74. Thus the case advanced on behalf of the appellants before the FtTJ
         was that the risk for them was based on having been threatened with
         serious harm and death as "leverage against the aunt who was a
         police officer" and that they fell into the risk category of family
         members of someone who worked in the security force.


     75. The skeleton argument also refers to the country material by
         reference to the UNHCR risk categories as set out at page 124. The
         following is set out:

         "members of the PNC and Armed Forces have long represented a target
         for attack by gang members and other organised criminal groups,
         especially since lower ranking officials often live in the same
         neighbourhoods as gang members stop however, since the breakdown of
         the gang truce, some local gangs have reportedly been ordered to
         kill a specified number of police officers living in their
         territories...
         Depending on the particular circumstances of the case, UNHCR
         considers that members of the PNC and Armed Forces may be need of
         international refugee protection on the basis of their membership
         of a particular social group, or on the basis of the convention
         grounds."


         It is further stated under section 13 "family members, dependents,
         other members of the households of individuals with any of the
         profiles above, as well as employees of such individuals, can
         reportedly also be a target for attacks and assassination by gangs,
         sometimes even of the person who was initially targeted by the gang
         in question has fled or has already been killed. Family members,
         dependents, other members of the households, and employees of
         individuals with any of the profiles above may also be need of
         international protection reasons of their association with
         individuals at risk on the basis of their (imputed) political
         opinion, or on the basis their membership of a particular social
         group, or other convention grounds."


     76. Drawing those matters together, it is plain that whether the
         appellants were at risk from the gang members as a result of their
         familial links was required to be seen in the light of the factual
         claim that they had been targeted by the gangs and threatened with
         serious harm on account of their familial link. As a UNHCR set out
         that was dependent on the particular circumstances of the case and
         by reference to family members may be in need of protection for
         reason of their association with individuals at risk.


     77. The FtTJ gave adequate and sustainable reasons for rejecting their
         factual account to have been threatened by the gangs whilst in El
         Salvador and found that they were of no adverse interest to the
         gang members. In particular  the finding that has not been
         challenged in the grounds was that none of the remaining family
         members, which included the appellant's parents, his sibling and
         other extended family members, had been threatened or otherwise
         been at risk of harm since the incident in November 2019 nor since
         the appellants had left El Salvador.

     78. In the light of the objective material which was also set out in
         the skeleton argument at page 3, and which cited the highly
         organised activities of the gang members and their ability to
         gather intelligence on the residence of those who gave evidence or
         complaints against them such as the appellants, that family members
         were related to them would be at risk. This evidence is not
         consistent with the factual account given by the appellants. There
         was no evidence of the remaining family members of the appellants
         who were also related to the appellant's aunt and who remained in
         El Salvador of being of any adverse interest of the gang. There
         were no allegations of being at risk of harm and this undermined
         the appellant's claim that as family members of their aunt they
         were at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

     79. In my judgement the  FtTJ was correct to focus on the particular
         circumstances the appellants and to determine whether the
         appellants were at real risk of serious harm and was entitled to
         take into account the appellants evidence of events that had
         occurred in El Salvador which he rejected and that despite being
         family relatives of the appellant's aunt, the remaining family
         members in El Salvador had not been at any risk of harm serious or
         otherwise.

     80. Having rejected their account for the reasons I have set out and
         which I am satisfied were open to the judge to make, their account
         demonstrated that the gang had no adverse interest in the
         appellants or the appellant's family members who remained in El
         Salvador despite the family relationship with their aunt as a
         police officer.


     81. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.




Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT  shall
    stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated     21 June 2021
