


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01845/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 22 October 2018                            |On 31 October 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     SA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as SA.

Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim  and  refers  to  his
          minor children.

Background


       2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh,  who  arrived  in  the
          United Kingdom ('UK')  on  5  February  2002  as  a  visitor.   He
          overstayed and has remained in the UK unlawfully. He made a  human
          rights application in  2009,  which  was  refused  in  2010.   The
          appellant continued to stay in the UK unlawfully after this.


       3. The appellant married his wife in the UK in  December  2011.   She
          had entered the UK as a student in  October  2011,  but  has  also
          overstayed.  They have two children, born in the UK  in  2015  and
          2017 respectively.

       4. The respondent has claimed that  the  appellant  was  served  with
          notice that he was an overstayer  on  25  July  2017  and  claimed
          asylum after this on 26 July 2017.    He  was  interviewed  on  26
          October 2017 and 15 January 2018.

       5. The respondent refused the asylum claim for reasons set out  in  a
          detailed decision letter dated 24 January 2018, and the  appellant
          appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT').  In a decision  dated
          6 August 2018 the Upper Tribunal set aside the  FTT  decision  and
          the matter was transferred to me for the decision to be remade.

Hearing

Issues in dispute

       6. At the beginning of the hearing  before  me  both  representatives
          agreed that the appeal raised the following issues:


              i) Was the appellant's claimed membership of the BNP  and  his
                 claim that he was attacked in September 2001 because of his
                 political activities credible?


             ii) Is the appellant at  prospective  risk  of  persecution  in
                 light of his claimed past persecution in Bangladesh and his
                 additional claim that his  wife's  family  do  not  support
                 their marriage?

       7. I clarified two matters with Mr Mustafa: (i) he confirmed that  he
          did not  seek  to  place  any  reliance  on  sur  place  political
          activities  in  the  UK,  notwithstanding   photographs   of   the
          appellant at party conferences in the  bundle  and  conceded  that
          "there is none" - see also the appellant's  confirmation  of  this
          at Qs 105-108; (ii) although  reliance  was  faintly  placed  upon
          Article 8 in his skeleton argument, Mr Mustafa conceded  that  the
          appeal could not  be  allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  given  the
          applicable legal framework and the factual matrix.

Evidence

       8. The appellant relied upon a 301-page  bundle  in  support  of  his
          case.  This included a witness statement  dated  15  October  2018
          and two letters from the BNP dated 12 February 2018.


       9. The appellant gave evidence through an interpreter and was  cross-
          examined by Mr McVeety.  There was no re-examination and no  other
          witnesses.

Submissions

      10. Mr McVeety relied upon the  decision  letter.   He  described  the
          appellant's evidence as vague, inconsistent  and  implausible  and
          invited  me  to  find  that  he   was   an   unreliable   witness,
          particularly given his delay in claiming asylum.  He also drew  my
          attention to deficiencies within  the  BNP  letters.   Mr  McVeety
          submitted that the appellant's claim  was  wholly  incredible  but
          that even if he was attacked in 2001 he would not be at risk  upon
          return given the passage of time and the absence of any  continued
          BNP involvement.


      11. Mr Mustafa  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument,  subject  to  his
          earlier acceptance that he no longer advanced submissions  on  the
          basis of Article 8 and wished to rely  solely  on  the  claim  for
          international  protection.   He  invited  me  to  find  that   the
          appellant had provided reliable  evidence  supported  by  the  BNP
          letters.   He  submitted  that  if  the  respondent  disputed  the
          reliability of these,  there  was  an  obligation  to  investigate
          their veracity.

      12. At the end of submissions, I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Findings

Credibility of account

      13. I must apply the lower standard of proof  when  assessing  whether
          the appellant has been the subject of past persecution  or  is  at
          future risk of persecution.   I  acknowledge  that  parts  of  the
          appellant's  claim  are  generally  consistent  with  the  country
          background evidence on the treatment  of  political  opponents  in
          Bangladesh.   I  also   acknowledge   that   the   appellant   has
          demonstrated basic knowledge of the BNP at  his  asylum  interview
          and there is a reasonable likelihood that he played a  minor  role
          in the BNP at a local level, prior to leaving Bangladesh.  I  also
          accept that it is reasonably likely that the appellant attended  a
          BNP meeting on 23 September 2001 and that this  meeting  may  have
          been subject to interference and attack by local  members  of  the
          Awami League, given the appellant's description of  this  incident
          at his interview, the imminence of the elections in Bangladesh  at
          the time and the country background evidence generally  supportive
          of such behaviour - see  in  particular  the  CPIN  on  Bangladesh
          dated January 2018.

      14. I do not accept that it is reasonably likely  that  the  appellant
          was specifically targeted, that a false case  was  lodged  against
          him or that it was necessary for  him  to  go  into  hiding.   The
          appellant  was  cross-examined  by  McVeety  about  all  of  these
          matters but provided vague responses and unreliable evidence.

      15. First, the  appellant  was  unable  to  credibly  explain  why  he
          believed he should continue to remain in  hiding  and  then  leave
          Bangladesh in February 2002 when the BNP were  successful  in  the
          October 2001  elections  and  were  in  power  shortly  after  the
          incidents he complained of and at the time of his departure.   The
          appellant merely reasserted that  a  false  case  had  been  filed
          against him by the previous administration but was  wholly  unable
          to explain why the new  administration  would  wish  to  pursue  a
          false case against one of its own supporters.

      16. Secondly, although the appellant claimed to  hold  a  position  of
          seniority at the local level he was unable to explain  why  others
          at the meeting who also held positions of seniority  were  ignored
          by the Awami League at the time, and why he was  targeted  in  the
          lodging of the false case against him.

      17. Thirdly, the appellant explained that he  made  contact  with  the
          leaders in the BNP at that time and they tried to assist but  were
          unable to do so.  When asked why the BNP letters entirely  omitted
          any reference to the appellant having sought assistance  following
          the September 2001 attack and in relation to the  false  case,  he
          said that he was unable to fully  explain  his  situation  to  the
          authors of the  letters.    This  is  difficult  to  follow.   The
          appellant appeared to say that  the  letters  included  only  that
          information which he considered it was important  to  include  and
          did not derive from the author's  own  knowledge  or  information.
          This in itself renders the information contained  in  the  letters
          only as reliable as the information that was  being  communicated.
          This does not explain  why  the  appellant  would  omit  the  only
          incidents that he claims caused him to  leave  Bangladesh  in  his
          communications with the BNP for the purpose of  preparing  letters
          in support.  I have placed very  little  weight  on  the  two  BNP
          letters.  They are signed  by  the  BNP's  General  Secretary  and
          President respectively, yet the three short  paragraphs  have  the
          exact same wording save for one refers to being Secretary and  the
          other President.  In addition, the contents are vague.  His  roles
          are  summarised  between  1993  and  2000  but  no  specifics  are
          offered.  No effort has been made to particularise his role  after
          2000.  He is described as a "strong advocate" for  the  party  who
          has regularly attended meetings, yet  no  timeline  is  given  for
          this.  This cannot be recent given Mr  Mustafa's  concession  that
          the  appellant  has  not  undertaken  any  sur   place   political
          activities.


      18. I reject Mr Mustafa's submission that there was an  obligation  on
          the part of the respondent to conduct further enquiries  into  the
          letters.  This submission was not expanded upon either in  writing
          or orally.  Having considered the BNP  letters  in  the  round,  I
          have come to the view that they do not provide a reliable  picture
          of the appellant's role with the BNP.

      19. In addition, the appellant's asylum claim  is  predicated  upon  a
          claimed event in Bangladesh in 2001 and his  consequent  departure
          in 2002, yet he delayed until 2017 before  claiming  asylum.   The
          explanation for this is  wholly  incredible.   The  appellant  has
          implausibly explained that  he  did  not  know  about  the  asylum
          process even though he claims to have gone to college  and  to  be
          educated to degree level.  Further, when asked why  he  felt  able
          to claim asylum in 2017 in cross-examination he said that  he  was
          afraid for his life and  the  situation  had  gotten  worse.   The
          appellant was unable to explain why he was unable to claim  asylum
          for the 15 years to July 2017.  I  reject  his  evidence  that  he
          genuinely believed that  if  he  made  himself  known  to  the  UK
          authorities he would  be  returned  to  Bangladesh.   This  wholly
          fails to address the fact that he made himself  known  to  the  UK
          authorities in 2009,  yet  did  not  claim  asylum  at  the  time.
          Contrary  to  the  submissions  in  the  skeleton  argument,   the
          appellant's explanation for the huge delay in claiming asylum  has
          been  inconsistent  and  is  implausible.    In   addressing   the
          credibility of the appellant's  claim  to  have  experienced  past
          persecution, I have considered the delay in  claiming  asylum  and
          the absence of any credible explanation  for  this,  as  a  factor
          alongside the other matters I set out above.

Prospective risk

      20. Even if I accepted that the appellant was targeted  at  a  meeting
          in 2001 and a false case was lodged against him  at  the  time,  I
          would still find that there is no reasonable degree of  likelihood
          of him being subjected to any harm for  reasons  relating  to  his
          political opinion upon return to  Bangladesh  at  this  point.   I
          have taken into  account  the  country  background  evidence  that
          there has been recent targeting of BNP leaders and  supporters  by
          the Awami League,  through  arrests  and  detention  in  order  to
          tighten its grip on power -  see  inter  alia,  the  Human  Rights
          Watch report dated July 2017 and the Dhaka Tribune's report  dated
          4 September 2018.  However, this appellant has not  been  involved
          in any political activities  of  any  substance  since  2001.  His
          support for the BNP is  now  of  some  vintage.   As  he  admitted
          during the course of his oral evidence  he  has  not  been  "doing
          anything" in the UK in the last 15  years.   It  is  therefore  of
          little  surprise  that  there  have  been  no  continuing  threats
          through family  members  or  otherwise.   Although  the  appellant
          claims that his wife's family disapprove  of  their  marriage  and
          would  be  interested  in  seeking  retribution  by  using   their
          political influence, this is based  on  mere  speculation  on  his
          part.  There is no credible evidence  that  they  have  threatened
          him in any manner whatsoever.  When all the evidence is viewed  in
          the round, there is no  real  risk  that  the  appellant  will  be
          subjected to persecution for reasons  relating  to  his  political
          opinion.

Article 8

      21. This was not pursued before  me.   If  it  was  I  would  have  no
          hesitation in concluding, having considered  the  public  interest
          considerations at section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
          and Asylum Act 2002, that  the  very  strong  public  interest  in
          removing the appellant (given his very  poor  immigration  history
          and blatant disregard for immigration law)  cannot  be  outweighed
          by the his private life or those of his  family  members  (as  the
          children are not "qualifying" and the family will be  returned  as
          a unit to a country the appellant and his wife are  very  familiar
          with).

Decision

      22. The appeal is dismissed.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 October 2018

