
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01267/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 October 2018                       |On 07 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                  mr s r m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Citizens
Advice Bureau
     (Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.    On 11 January 2018 the respondent made a  decision  to  refuse  the
      protection claim of the appellant,  a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity.  On 5 March 2018 Judge T R Smith of the First-tier Tribunal
      (FtT) dismissed his appeal against that decision.


   2.    The  appellant's  first  ground  avers  that  the  judge's  adverse
      credibility findings were unsafe because the judge used s. 8 of the AI
      (TC) Act 2004 as the "starting point".  This was said to  be  contrary
      to higher court authority,  JT  (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878  in
      particular.  The  appellant's  second  ground  alleges  a  failure  to
      consider risk on return in the light of the amended  country  guidance
      in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 in respect of internal relocation and
      also feasibility of  return.   In  connection  with  the  latter,  the
      grounds submit that the judge wrongly concluded that  the  appellant's
      relatives could feasibly obtain his CSID and forward it to him.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their  succinct  submissions.
    As the appellant was not granted permission on the first ground,  I  go
    straight to  the  appellant's  second  ground  first.   Insofar  as  it
    contends  that  the  judge  wrongly  assessed  internal  relocation,  I
    consider it is devoid of merit.  The judge proceeded on the basis of  a
    concession by the respondent that the appellant could not safely return
    to his home area of Kirkuk because it was a  contested  area.   (It  is
    true that the judge described this concession as being in  relation  to
    "internal relocation to Kirkuk" (paragraph 22) but its effect  was  the
    same insofar as lack of safety  was  concerned.)   The  judge  properly
    recognised that for the appellant the  internal  relocation  issue  had
    primarily to be examined in return to the IKR where the  appellant  had
    previously resided (albeit briefly).  The judge then gave a  series  of
    reasons at paragraphs 86-103 why he considered the IKR  would  be  both
    safe and reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to.   Mr  Brown
    contends that the appellant had to be taken as  someone  who  had  lost
    touch with his  family  in  Kirkuk  but  on  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 105 the appellant had a brother in Kirkuk involved  with  the
    security services and an uncle who was a wealthy trader.  It  was  open
    to the judge to make these findings notwithstanding that he  found  the
    core of the appellant's account  not  credible.   The  written  grounds
    wholly fail to identify any error in these reasons.  Mr Brown sought to
    argue that there is medical evidence showing the appellant has  cardiac
    problems which would affect his employment prospects in the IKR but the
    judge took these into account at paragraphs 93-96 and was  entitled  to
    assess that such problems would not affect his ability to work.

4.   Insofar as ground 2 asserts that  the  judge  wrongly  applied  country
    guidance on the issue of feasibility of return, it  is  true  that  the
    judge appears to have sought to apply an old country guidance case  (AA
    [2015] rather than AA [2017] EWCA Civ 904) but his analysis of the CSID
    was wholly consistent with the latter.  The judge stated at  paragraphs
    104-106 that:

         "104.    The Appellant has held a CSID card.  He said he left it in
                Kirkuk.  Given the Appellant's family still live  in  Kirkuk
                there is no reason why that document could not  be  provided
                to him.  The CSID card will allow the  Appellant  to  access
                benefits and housing.
         105. If the CSID card  has  been  destroyed,  (which  was  not  the
                Appellant's contention) given the Appellants (sic)  brothers
                (sic) involvement with the security services (the  Appellant
                described it as a specialist SWAT team member) and the  fact
                that his uncle is a wealthy trader he has relatives who  can
                vouch for him and act as his attorneys and it is likely  his
                brother will have the connections to assist in  obtaining  a
                replacement.


         106. In my judgement it  is  feasible  that  the  Appellants  (sic)
                relatives will be able  to  forward  to  him  the  necessary
                documentation or obtain replacement documentation."


     Although objecting to this  assessment,  the  grounds  wholly  fail  to
    identify any substantive error in it.

5.   As regards ground 1, I would state for completeness that  I  do  accept
    that the judge erred in describing s. 8 as a "starting point"  inasmuch
    that  this  tends  to  convey  that  he  treated  findings  on   s.   8
    considerations as of primary importance or as an  established  platform
    absent countervailing evidence.  However, I fail to see that the  judge
    in fact treated s. 8 considerations as primary.  It is  true  that  the
    judge devoted several paragraphs to his analysis of s. 8 considerations
    (paragraphs 66-71) and that he concluded  the  appellant's  conduct  in
    failing to claim asylum in Greece or France without a good or  credible
    explanation "damages his credibility"  (paragraph  70).   At  the  same
    time, read as a whole the judge clearly assessed the credibility of the
    appellant's account in the round, concluding at paragraph 34 that:

         "34. The Appellant claimed that he  would  be  killed  by  Hawnaz's
             family if he returned anywhere within Iraq."

6.   Immediately above that paragraph, the judge sets out numerous  reasons,
    quite unrelated to s. 8 considerations,  for  finding  the  appellant's
    account  deficient,  including  a  number   of   inconsistencies,   and
    implausibilities and a lack of a satisfactory explanation of  the  same
    (paragraphs 72-83).   I believe this background is  what  led  to  DUTJ
    Chapman to refuse permission on  this  point  and  I  concur  with  her
    decision on it.

Notice of Decision

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT Judge did not  materially
    err in law and that accordingly the judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
