
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/01899/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 26 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                          IZIEGBE BLESSING AMADSUN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Peter G Farrell, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 25 February  1975.   She
    sought asylum in the UK on the basis that her son  has  been  diagnosed
    with autism.  The respondent refused her claim for reasons given  in  a
    decision dated 11 February 2020.

 2. The appellant appealed to the FtT on grounds of "a well-founded fear of
    persecution due to membership of a particular social group, namely  the
    mother of a child who suffers from severe autism" and  because  removal
    would "breach my rights under articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR and those
    of my husband and 3 children".

 3. FtT Judge Prudham  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 14 October 2020.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  these
    grounds:

         (1)      The judge reaches the conclusion that although  the  child
         might be stigmatised ... and discriminated  against,  that  conduct
         will not  amount  to  persecution  ...  the  judge  considered  the
         objective  materials  ...  he  was  not  entitled  to  reach   that
         conclusion from a proper reading of those sources.

         (2)      ... the judge was asked  to  reach  conclusions  from  the
         different conclusions in 2 reports ... the ASD in  Nigeria  article
         by Project Muse and the EASO report.   The  judge  dealt  with  the
         Project Muse article ... at [26]:

             "... the article referred to  children  with  ASD  in  Nigeria
             suffering stigma and derogatory comments form neighbours.   As
             a consequence, it is said, many parents ... hide such children
             away ... depriving them of early  interventions  that  improve
             prognosis.  The article also refers to the Child's Rights  Act
             2003 which promises  equal  opportunities  to  every  Nigerian
             child.  Although it was noted not  every  Nigerian  state  had
             adopted the Act."

         (3)      ... the following criticisms can be made  of  the  judge's
         interpretation ... Firstly, [the article]  does  not  restrict  the
         consequence of failure to  act  as  depriving  children  of  "early
         interventions..." It specifically states,  "...many  children  with
         ASD are still being locked up or hidden away in their homes and ...
         prevented by desperate parents  ...  from  accessing  any  form  of
         intervention".  This is especially important since  the  respondent
         sought to distinguish the position of the child  here  because  ...
         having received treatment in the UK... he did  not  fall  into  the
         category of  somebody  who  had  not  received  early  intervention
         treatment.

         (4)      In the second place ... with  reference  to  the  Act  ...
         while the judge noted that it  did  not  apply  in  every  Nigerian
         state, he omitted to add that even among those that have  done  so,
         its implementation had been hindered by a number  of  cultural  and
         socio-political factors especially among ... children with ASD.

         (5)      Against that, the judge was  happy  to  attach  particular
         weight to [2 lines] in the  EASO  report  that  the  Act  "protects
         children against  all  forms  of  physical,  mental  and  emotional
         torture and abuse" ... while it might have been  the  objective  of
         the Act to provide that level of protection, there  is  nothing  in
         the report to demonstrate that the Act ... lives up to its  purpose
         ... Indeed, the Project Muse article states the opposite:

             'a mixture of stigma and psychological burdens  have  combined
             to prevent  many  children  ...  with  ASFD  from  having  the
             opportunity of  any  form  of  intervention  ...  despite  the
             existence of the law that  promises  equal  opportunities  for
             every Nigerian child.'

         (6)      ... a proper reading of these sources would  lead  one  to
         the conclusion that the appellant's child will  suffer  persecution
         on return to Nigeria.

 5. Mr Farrell submitted closely along the lines of the grounds.  He relied
    also on the grant of permission by FtT Judge Adio on 20 November  2020:
    ...

         "(3)     The definition of persecution  which  includes  systematic
         harm would also apply ... where a particular group is not protected
         from experiencing systematic harm and it is arguable that the  fact
         that children are being locked up and hidden away  in  their  homes
         and have no access to  any  form  of  intervention  can  amount  to
         persecution  in  the  situation  with  the  applicant's   children,
         particularly as there is  no  indication  that  the  law  is  being
         implemented in the states and ... is just a federal law."

 6. Mr Farrell said that the UT should set aside the decision  of  the  FtT
    and reverse the outcome.

 7. Ms Everett said that the evidence disclosed attitudes in Nigeria  which
    might lead to persecution in some instances, and  it  would  have  been
    misguided to find that the 2003 Act eliminated all such risk.  However,
    the judge had not erred on either point.   He  applied  the  background
    evidence to the circumstances of the appellant.  He noted that the main
    source of risk was from parents and families of children with ASD.   In
    this instance, the parents were supportive.  There  was  evidence  from
    teachers and from specialists that they had  engaged  with  the  issue,
    shown the desire and developed the skills to support their child.   The
    judge had been entitled to note that they were from Benin, a large city
    where there  were  facilities  for  children  with  ASD,  although  not
    equivalent to those in the UK.  The  judge  decided  the  case  on  its
    facts.  His decision should be upheld.

 8. Mr Farrell in reply said that a supportive family did  not  indicate  a
    lower likelihood of persecution.  The EASO  report  cited  churches  as
    well as parents as making witchcraft accusations.   Families  were  not
    exclusively or even mainly the source.  In an environment  where  there
    was also a risk of accusations from neighbours, it was easy to see that
    parents might opt to hide a child away.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. I am not persuaded  that  the  background  evidence  led  to  only  one
    outcome, or that there is any legal error in the  judge's  reasons  for
    finding no real risk in this case.

11. The passage in the EASO report which  was  the  subject  of  the  final
    submission for the appellant says:

         'Among the profiles of children at particular risk of accusation of
         witchcraft are children living with a psychological disorder.   The
         main accusers are reportedly  usually  members  of  the  church  or
         parents unable to care for their children.'

12. The judge at [29] found no risk from church or parents:

         "... the evidence made  it  clear  that  the  main  accusations  of
         witchcraft tended to come from  within  the  family,  usually  from
         parents who are unable to  care  for  a  child.  This  is  not  the
         position in [this child's] case as  ...  his  parents  have  sought
         assistance  and  treatment.   The  only  other  group  of  accusers
         referred to was ...  pastors  of  certain  churches.   I  heard  no
         evidence  from  the  appellant  of  any  link  with  Revivalist   /
         Pentecostalist churches and so did not consider this to be  of  any
         risk to her son."

13. No error has been shown in that clear analysis, in either respect.

14. The judge did not fall into the error of considering that the 2003  Act
    gave all children in Nigeria 100% protection against all abuse and  was
    a complete answer to the appeal.  The grounds at (5) take one  sentence
    out of context.  The judge was describing the purpose of the Act ,  not
    its effect.  It is hardly likely that the judge might have thought that
    Nigeria has attained a practical level of child protection which  would
    take it beyond any other country.  It is obvious from the decision as a
    whole that he recognised that implementation is patchy.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      15 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email.

