
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01530/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th April 2017                       |  On 3rd May 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Abdul Momen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Lawrence
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 26th October 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  1st  October  1997.
    He arrived in the UK in December 2009 and claimed asylum as a dependant
    of his brother, subsequently making a claim in his own right.   He  was
    refused but  granted  discretionary  leave  until  16th  December  2013
    extended to 1st August 2015.  His further application for discretionary
    leave was refused and his appeal came before Judge Lawrence.

 3. The sole issue before the judge was  whether  the  appellant  could  be
    returned to Kabul.  The appellant relied upon an expert report from Tim
    Foxley MBE.  The judge discounted it on the grounds that the author had
    just  correlated  information  available  in  the  public  domain.   He
    concluded  that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant integrating into Afghanistan on return and he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 4. Mr Bates conceded that the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    consider the report. He was right to do so.

 5. The author set out his expertise.  He  has  been  studying  Afghanistan
    since 2001 and runs his own political/military  research  and  analysis
    consultancy based in Sweden focusing on Afghanistan with an  associated
    analytical blog. From 2001 to 2012 he worked with the  UK  Ministry  of
    Defence and in 2005 was awarded the MBE for his work on Afghanistan. He
    was an Afghanistan insurgency research analyst in the UK Foreign Office
    in 2014.  He  lists  a  number  of  papers  which  he  has  written  on
    Afghanistan in the appendix.

 6. It was not open to the judge to refuse to engage with the report  which
    was plainly relevant to the issues under appeal.  Accordingly he  erred
    in law and his decision is set aside.

 7. It was agreed that the decision could be remade without the need for  a
    further hearing.

Submissions

 8. Mr Bates submitted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(iii), (iv) and (v) because he had  not  spent  long
    enough in the UK.  He also submitted that he  did  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) because there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Afghanistan.  The appellant had lived  for  the  first
    twelve years of his life there,  spoke  Uzbek  and  had  no  particular
    health problems.  He had not shown that it would not  be  possible  for
    him to adapt to the "cosmopolitan atmosphere" in Kabul  which  was  the
    point of return for many failed asylum seekers.  He could  not  succeed
    under Article 8 outside the Rules  because  there  were  no  compelling
    aspects to his case such as to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
    removal  of  failed  asylum  seekers.  The  starting  point   for   any
    consideration had to be the fact that he did not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. In  any  event,  his  relationship  with  his
    foster family here had always been of a precarious nature.

 9. Mr Hussain submitted that the appellant did meet paragraph  276ADE(vi).
    He relied on the report from Mr Tim Foxley and submitted that he  would
    not be able to integrate into Afghanistan having left there when he was
    only 12 years old.  He was not from Kabul and had no family connections
    there.  Alternatively the appeal ought  to  be  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds since the appellant enjoyed  a  relationship  with  his  foster
    father which amounted to more than the usual emotional  ties.   He  was
    still living with him, even though he was now 19, and dependent on him.



Findings and Conclusions

10. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) states that the requirements to be  met  by  an
    applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK
    are that, at the date of the application,  the  applicant  has  made  a
    valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in
    the UK, is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
    less than twenty years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)  but
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   applicant's
    integration into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
    to leave the UK.

11. In SSHD v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,  which  concerned  a  foreign
    criminal, the Court of Appeal said, as per Sales LJ at paragraph 14

         "In my view the concept of a foreign  criminal's  integration  into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported as set  out
         in Section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A is a broad one.  It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country.  It is not appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or Tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that parliament has chosen to use.  The idea  of  integration
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

12. The appellant comes from Takhar province and is of Uzbek ethnicity.  He
    cannot speak Pashtu and when he lived in Afghanistan he could  speak  a
    little Dari. However his main language is Uzbek.  There is evidence  in
    his bundle that a number of attempts have been  made  through  the  Red
    Cross to contact his family but none have been successful.

13. The respondent did not argue that the appellant would have  any  family
    support available to him on return to Afghanistan.

14. Mr Bates' main argument was that the appellant has had the benefit of a
    western education in the UK.  Indeed it is quite clear that he has been
    very successful here.  He  could  therefore  adapt  to  life  in  Kabul
    without difficulty.

15. However, according to the expert report, which Mr Bates did not seek to
    criticise, the appellant would be at enhanced  risk  as  a  westernised
    young person, particularly if he was to come across Taliban checkpoints
    where any westernised mannerisms, lack of fluency or lack of convincing
    local knowledge might mark him out for adverse attention.

16. He referred to the April 2016 UNHCR guidance which states

         "AGEs reportedly target  individuals  who  are  perceived  to  have
         adopted  values  and/or   appearances   associated   with   western
         countries, due to their imputed support for the government and  the
         international community.  There  are  reports  of  individuals  who
         returned from western countries having been tortured or  killed  by
         AGEs on the grounds that they had become foreigners  or  that  they
         were spies for a western country."

17. The expert also refers to the risk of  westernisation  by  placing  the
    returnee at risk of crime, theft or kidnapping.  He cited a  report  by
    Gladwell and Elwyn  "Broken futures: new young Afghan asylum seekers in
    the UK and on return to their country of origin,  new issues in refugee
    research," research paper 246 October 2012, which  gives  a  number  of
    examples of the difficult experiences  of  young  persons  having  been
    returned to Kabul.

18. At paragraph 40, Mr Foxley states

         "The main risks for your client in a major city such as Kabul would
         be from unemployment forms of exploitation destitution and lack  of
         family emotional and health support.  Moving to any unfamiliar part
         of the country would be difficult  and  expose  your  client  to  a
         spectrum  of  other  significant  risks,  finding   employment   in
         particular.  Local ethnic tribal economic and security issues in  a
         new area might provide significant challenges.   With  difficulties
         of accessing reliable information in  some  parts  of  the  country
         these might not be known before departure.   A  major  complicating
         factor will be the ongoing conflict.  Moving beyond his  home  area
         would deprive him of most of the advantages  and  support  networks
         needed to exist in an  unfamiliar  environment.   This  would  make
         relocation extremely difficult.  Additional risks  are  created  by
         the route by which your client would have to travel including risks
         on roads from Taliban or insurgent roadblocks and conflict."

19. The critical question, as set out by Sales LJ is the  extent  to  which
    the appellant  would  be  "enough  of  an  insider"  in  terms  of  his
    understanding of how life in Kabul works.

20. At paragraph 43 Mr Foxley states

         "In  Kabul  your  client  is  likely  to   experience   significant
         difficulties, given his lack of experience living in Afghanistan on
         his own and the time he has now spent in the UK.  He will  have  no
         street experience  of  Kabul:  his  environmental  and  situational
         awareness; safe places, no go areas, how to condition his behaviour
         to avoid unwanted attention will be  severely  limited.   In  Kabul
         attracting unwanted attention might mean involving trigger happy or
         corrupt  local  security  forces,  criminals  or  insurgent  groups
         looking for human assets to employ  in  their  campaign  and  would
         contain significantly greater risk than in  the  UK.   These  broad
         risks would just as easily apply in Takhar province Kabul or  wider
         Afghanistan and might even be greater in some areas."

21. Mr Foxley also highlighted the difficulty that the appellant would have
    in accessing housing and accommodation, which  is  in  extremely  short
    supply, and in obtaining work.  Being without regular employment  would
    render him at high risk of exploitation.

22. I have some difficulty in accepting  Mr  Bates's  submission  that  the
    appellant's experience  of  a  British  education  would  realistically
    assist him in integrating into life in Kabul, which clearly remains  in
    crisis, not only as a consequence of current terrorist attacks but also
    as a result of  past  ones.   More  than  2,000,000  houses  have  been
    destroyed or damaged beyond repair  in  a  city  of  4,000,000  people.
    500,000 youth enter the labour market each year but  according  to  the
    minister of economy the gap between supply and demand is cavernous.

23. The appellant has been fortunate to have been fostered since the age of
    12 in a loving family, he has attended school, obtained  his  A  levels
    and has a place at university.  It is not disputed  that  he  would  be
    without physical and emotional support. With absolutely no one in Kabul
    to assist him it is hard to see how on any normal meaning of  the  word
    he could not be facing very significant  obstacles  to  integration  on
    return.

24. On any view he is not enough of an insider to understand life in  Kabul
    or to be able to operate in it.  The appellant meets  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

25. With respect to Article 8, I have no doubt that he enjoys a family life
    with his foster father in the UK, with whom he still lives and is still
    dependent.  His emotional ties with him are more than the  usual  which
    one would expect between adults, made stronger  no  doubt  because  his
    foster mother died in 2013, three years after he joined the family.  He
    meets  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Removal   would
    therefore be disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and with respect to Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 1 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
