
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01759/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th August 2017                       |On 05th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  MR Z.B.H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Solicitor, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made because, as a protection claim, it is
appropriate to do so.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born [ ] 1989.  It is accepted  that
    he is of Kurdish ethnicity from Mosul in the Nineveh  governorate.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 23rd July 2014 and made a claim for  asylum
    the following day.  The Respondent refused  that  application  on  24th
    October 2014 and the Appellant's subsequent appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was heard on 13th February 2015 by  FtTJ  Devlin.   The  judge
    disbelieved the Appellant's core claim, which  was  that  he  feared  a
    return to Iraq on account of a blood feud  with  his  mother's  family.
    His father and mother had eloped before he was born and his  claim  was
    that his mother's family were in some way looking to harm him  and  had
    been since 2013.  The second strand of his claim was that  he  said  he
    feared to return to Iraq because he would be forced to join ISIS (or be
    killed by them) or killed by the Shia militia.

 2. Suffice to say that Judge Devlin found that the Appellant's claims were
    not credible and it is correct that those findings are not the  subject
    of any challenge. They therefore stand.

 3. Judge Devlin went on at the hearing on 13th  February  2015  to  assess
    risk on return to the Appellant and having done so found there to be no
    real risk. He dismissed the appeal on all counts.

 4. Following Judge Devlin's decision however the country guidance cases of
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC)  were  published.   Further
    submissions were lodged on behalf of the Appellant with the Respondent.
     Those submissions were refused and a JR application followed.

 5. By consent, the JR  decision  was  withdrawn  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent would issue a further decision to the Appellant in the light
    of the CG cases.  The further decision was issued on 2nd February 2017.
     Once again the Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  claim,  and  once
    again the Appellant appealed the refusal to the FtT.

 6. The appeal came before FtTJ E.M.M. Smith at Stoke.  By  this  time  the
    only issue before Judge Smith was whether the Appellant was entitled to
    humanitarian protection,  on  account  of  it  being  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant could not return  to  his  home  area  of
    Mosul.  Therefore the judge had to decide in  essence  whether  it  was
    safe to return this Appellant to Baghdad or  the  KRG.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 6th  April  2017,  Judge  Smith  dismissed  the  appeal,
    stating:

         "Having considered the findings of Judge Devlin and the authorities
         of AA and BA I am satisfied the appellant would not be at  risk  of
         persecution and could be returned to Baghdad and/or Erbil." [34]

    It is this dismissal which forms the basis of the instant appeal.

Onward Appeal

 7. Permission to appeal the  FtT's  was  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    following  a  refusal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  grant   of
    permission which is succinct in its terms reads as follows:

         "It is arguable that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         E M M Smith fails sufficiently to engage with  or  correctly  apply
         the country guidance in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
         00544 (IAC), as argued in the grounds.

         However, the Appellant's representatives must be prepared  to  deal
         with the findings that were made in the Appellant's  appeal  before
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin on 13th February 2015."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith discloses an error of law requiring  it
    to be set aside and remade.  No Rule 24  response  was  served  by  the
    Respondent.

Error of Law

 8. The grounds advanced by Mr Cole for  the  Appellant  state  in  general
    terms that the FtT failed to engage properly with and/or apply  current
    Country  Guidance  in  relation  to  Iraq.   Further,   inadequate   or
    inconsistent findings of primary fact were made on:

          i) whether it would be unreasonably harsh for  the  Appellant  to
             relocate to Baghdad

         ii) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the  Independent
             Kurdish Region.

 9. Mr Cole submitted that the judge, instead of looking  at  the  risk  on
    return to the Appellant afresh as he was tasked to do, fell into  error
    by relying upon the findings made  by  Judge  Devlin.   This  was  even
    though Judge Smith acknowledged that Judge  Devlin  did  not  have  the
    benefit of AA and BA.  This error led Judge Smith to improperly adopt a
    Devaseelan principle to the facts found by Judge Devlin.  It  has  been
    the case all along that the findings made by Judge  Devlin,  concerning
    risk on return, could not stand in the light of the guidance  given  in
    the current CG cases.

10. He said therefore that the decision of Judge Smith should be set  aside
    in its entirety, with nothing preserved, for the decision to be remade.



11. Mrs Pettersen on behalf of the Respondent accepted that she  could  not
    defend the FtT's decision on the basis  that  the  FtT's  approach  was
    unsafe in relation to the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  could
    physically be returned to the KRG or relocate to Baghdad.

12. In the circumstances, as the Respondent accepts, the decision discloses
    a material error of law then I find that the decision must be set aside
    in its entirety for being unsustainable.

13. I canvassed with both parties whether to remit this matter once more to
    the First-tier Tribunal or whether the decision could be remade in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Both parties were of the firm view that  as  it  would
    appear that relevant evidence has not been properly considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant has been deprived of the opportunity
    for his case to be properly considered by that Tribunal.   In  addition
    the extent of the judicial fact-finding exercise is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate that the appeal should be remitted  to  that  Tribunal.  Mr
    Cole requested that the appeal be heard in Bradford rather than  Stoke,
    on the basis that the Appellant lives in Sheffield.

14. I agree with the parties that remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    the appropriate course in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision promulgated on 6th April 2017 involved the  making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard.  Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    (not Judge E M M Smith) for that Tribunal to rehear the matter afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   C E Roberts                Date         04 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
