
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
   Appeal Number:  PA018332017
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
                                                     Promulgated on and sent
                                                              26th July 2017
                              Jamal Obeid Majid
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
   1. On 14 June 2017, the appellant was granted permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Clough who, by a determination promulgated on 17 May  2017,  dismissed
      his appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  3  February
      2017 to refuse his asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
      claims.

   2. The Upper Tribunal received a letter dated 24 July 2017 from  Loughran
      & Co Solicitors by which they stated that the  appellant  had  advised
      them that he wished to withdraw his appeal. The letter  also  referred
      to the fact that the respondent's Reply served under rule  24  of  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  stated  that  the
      appellant had applied for voluntary departure.  The letter stated that
      it was understood that the appellant  was  no  longer  in  the  United
      Kingdom. However,  I  noted  that  there  was  no  clear  evidence  or
      confirmation that the appellant had actually left the United Kingdom.

   3. Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides for a party to withdraw its case before the  Upper  Tribunal,
      only with the consent of the Tribunal.

   4. I hereby consent to  the  appellant  withdrawing  his  case.  This  is
      because it has been confirmed by the appellant's representatives  that
      he has stated that he wishes to withdraw his appeal.  In  addition,  I
      have seen the documents attached  to  the  respondent's  Reply,  which
      include a "Disclaimer in the case of Voluntary  Departure"  signed  by
      the appellant on 20 July 2017 by which he confirmed, inter alia,  that
      he wished to withdraw his appeal.

   5. Accordingly, with my consent,  and  pursuant  to  rule  17(5)  of  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is
      recorded as "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper  Tribunal".  This
      is a Notice pursuant to rule 17(5) to  inform  the  parties  that  the
      appellant's case is withdrawn.

   6. The effect of the appellant's case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
      Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are  at  an
      end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal and the decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clough decision shall stand.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date:  25 July 2017
