
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01411/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SSH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Islam, Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gribble, promulgated on 1 May 2019, in which she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

"It was contended at paragraph 2 of the grounds that the judge failed
adequately to assess whether the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID
or a passport.  The judge, however, was entitled to place weight on
inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, tendered at different times,
as to what became of his CSID.  In his witness statement, to which the
judge referred at paragraph 35 of the decision, the appellant stated that
his CSID was with his parents with whom he was not in contact.  In his oral
evidence he said that his CSID was lost in Turkey and had not remained with
his parents.  The judge on cogent grounds rejected the appellant's claims
as to the whereabouts of his CSID and accordingly the judge was justified
in finding, as the judge did at paragraph 39 of the decision, that his
mother or father could send him his CSID whereupon the appellant could
attend the embassy in the United Kingdom and obtain a replacement passport.


Nevertheless, for the reasons mentioned in the remaining grounds of the
application the judge's decision disclosed arguable errors of law but for
which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.  First, the
judge placed not inconsiderable weight on the omission of the appellant to
present certain claims of fact at his screening interview.  As the judge
acknowledged at paragraph 35 of the decision, "time is short in such
interviews", and the judge arguably had regard to an irrelevant
consideration in according weight to the appellant's omission to mention
facts on which he later relied.  The judge's arguable error was compounded
by the judge's somewhat cursory assessment of the appellant's credibility
upon which the Judge embarked at paragraphs 35 to 37 inclusive.  The judge
arguably did not embark upon that global assessment which is the essence of
an assessment of credibility.  The application for permission is granted."

 4. I note that although it appears that the judge granting permission did
    not consider ground 2 to be particularly strong, it does not appear
    that the grant has been limited.

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision.

Error of law

 6. I will consider first Grounds 1 and 3, which are connected, and which
    relate to the credibility assessment.  Mr. Islam submitted that there
    was a very brief consideration of the core of the Appellant's claim.
    The Judge did not expand on her credibility findings regarding the core
    of the claim and, had she done so, she would have reached a different
    conclusion.  He submitted that there was no adequate consideration of
    the three "major issues" with reference to [34] where the Judge found
    that the Appellant had failed to mention three "major issues" at his
    screening interview.  However, there was no consideration in the
    decision of the evidence relating to those three major issues.

 7. I have carefully considered the Judge's findings which are set out from
    [27] to [43].  The Judge states at [27] that whether there is a real
    risk of persecution depends on the credibility of the account
    presented.  She finds that the Appellant is from the IKR and of the
    Haruni tribe, as was accepted by the Respondent.  She then states at
    [28]:

         "I will begin my assessment of his evidence by looking at the
         credibility indicators of the account through the lens of KB & AH
         (credibility structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC).
          This case tells me among other things, that I should adopt the
         structured approach laid down in Article 4 of the Qualification
         Directive, itself adopted within paragraph 339L of the immigration
         rules.  It tells me also however that I should note that these
         factors are not an exhaustive list; the assessment is fact-
         specific, the evidence should be considered as a whole."

 8. There is no error in this statement of the approach that she is taking.
     However, I find that she has not followed this as she has not
    considered the evidence as a whole.

 9. From [29] to [38] the Judge has set out her reasons why the Appellant
    does not meet the credibility indicators, and should not be given the
    benefit of the doubt.  She has done this by reference to the factors
    set out in Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  However, as she
    set out at [28], the Qualification Directive makes clear that these
    factors are not an exhaustive list and that the evidence should be
    considered as a whole.  I find that the Judge has not done this.  She
    has not considered the Appellant's account.  At [34], the Judge states
    that she is considering his general credibility and the "core account".
     This is the only paragraph where the core of the Appellant's claim is
    considered. She refers to three "major issues" in the Appellant's claim
    which the Appellant did not mention at his screening interview.  The
    Judge has discounted these issues simply because they were not referred
    to at the screening interview.  She has not set out whether the
    Appellant gave any explanation for this, and she herself acknowledges
    that time is short in such interviews.

10. Although she lists the issues - the murder of D, the murder of his
    sister-in-law, and the fact that D's brothers were in the PUK - there
    is no consideration of the evidence relating to those issues, which
    clearly went to the core of the Appellant's claim, and which the Judge
    herself labelled as "major".  She has given weight to the fact that he
    did not refer to them at his screening interview, but has not
    considered the evidence which he did provide regarding these issues.

11. I find that the decision does not contain an adequate consideration of
    the Appellant's account.  There is only one paragraph in the Judge's
    conclusion which refers to the core of his claim.  While the Judge was
    entitled to adopt the approach she set out at [28], she did not in fact
    adopt this approach, as she did not consider the evidence as a whole.
    The decision does not contain an assessment of the core of the
    Appellant's claim, in particular the three issues which the Judge
    herself considered to be "major".

12. I find that the Judge's consideration of the evidence is inadequate.  I
    find that her failure properly to consider the evidence as a whole is a
    material error of law.

13. In relation to Ground 2 and the CSID, whereas I accept the points as
    set out in the grant of permission regarding the evidence of the
    whereabouts of the CSID, whether or not the Appellant can return to the
    IKR is dependent on whether or not his claim is accepted to be true.  I
    have found that this has not been properly considered.

14. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
     I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to and considered by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  de
    novo.

17. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Gribble.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 17 January 2020
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

