
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01280/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 18th December 2017              |On 21st December 2017                    |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     j a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge E.M.M. Smith of the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 14th March 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a Nigerian citizen born [ ] 1976.   She  travelled  to
    the UK in November 2012 having been granted a visit visa.  On 6th  July
    2016 she applied for asylum on the basis that she feared her husband in
    Nigeria.

 3. Her asylum and human rights application was refused  on  29th  December
    2016.  Her appeal was heard by the FtT on 8th March 2017 and dismissed.
     The Appellant was unrepresented before the FtT.

 4. The FtT noted that the Appellant had mental health  problems  and  that
    she produced medical evidence to  show  that  she  was  admitted  to  a
    psychiatric hospital for five weeks  in  September  2016,  having  been
    diagnosed with an acute and  transient  psychotic  disorder.   The  FtT
    found at paragraph 18 that the Appellant's mental health problems meant
    "I am satisfied that it makes it more difficult for this court  in  the
    absence of other evidence to support her case to assess  what  is  real
    and what is not."

 5. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant but at paragraph 19  recorded
    that "it proved almost impossible to obtain an order of  events".   The
    FtT found at paragraph 22 that the Appellant had not established to the
    lower level of proof that her husband tried to poison her or stab  her.
    It was recorded that there had been a steady rise in her mental  health
    problems.

 6. At paragraph 24 the FtT found that the Appellant  had  not  provided  a
    reliable account of her experiences.  With reference to Article  8  the
    FtT gave brief reasons at paragraph 36 for finding that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy either Appendix FM in  relation  to  family  life  or
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life.  The FtT found there  was
    no arguable Article 8 point outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. Following dismissal of her appeal the Appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that  the
    FtT was dealing with an unrepresented and  mentally  unwell  Appellant,
    and should have had regard to the relevant guidelines when dealing with
    a vulnerable witness.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtT  should  have
    considered  whether  an  adjournment  was  appropriate  to  enable  the
    Appellant to obtain representation, as legal aid may be available,  and
    also obtain further/better evidence as to the  Appellant's  ill-health,
    and her ability to properly give evidence.

 8. It was contended that the FtT  had  erred  in  failing  to  accept  the
    Appellant's account of events, because she was unable to give  details,
    and had found that this was likely to  be  due  to  her  mental  health
    difficulties but still found against her.

 9. It was submitted that the FtT had erred by failing to consider Articles
    3 and 8 in relation to the Appellant's mental health problems.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but a  renewed  application
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in the following terms;

         2.   The judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  serious  mental
             health  problems  which  was  supported  in  the   documentary
             evidence from the NHS.  The Appellant  was  unrepresented  and
             clearly had difficulties presenting her case.  It is  arguable
             that, in these circumstances, the judge should have considered
             adjourning  the  hearing  for  the  Appellant  to  seek  legal
             representation if she wished.  The judge does  not  appear  to
             have been alive  to  that  possibility.   For  these  reasons,
             permission to appeal is granted.

11. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending in summary that the FtT directed itself appropriately,
    and there was no request made for an adjournment.  The  author  of  the
    rule 24 response made the point that  she  had  not  seen  the  medical
    evidence which had been submitted by the Appellant to the FtT.

12. Directions were issued making provision for there to be an oral hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.


Oral Submissions

13. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that he  had
    received the skeleton argument dated 18th  December  2017  prepared  on
    behalf of the Appellant, together with the medical  evidence  that  was
    before the FtT, that being NHS letters dated 7th March  2017,  and  7th
    February 2017.  Mr Diwnycz conceded the FtT had materially erred in law
    for the reasons given in the grant of permission to appeal, and the FtT
    decision should be set aside.

14. I therefore did not need to hear from Ms  Mair.   Both  representatives
    submitted that the FtT decision should be set  aside,  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.


My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The concession made on behalf of the Respondent was appropriately made.
     I find the FtT materially erred in law for the following reasons.

16. The FtT did not have the benefit of the guidance given in  relation  to
    vulnerable witnesses and Appellants  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, which was published after  the  FtT
    decision.  At paragraph 27 of AM it is confirmed

         "... beyond argument that the Tribunal and the parties are required
         so far as is practicable to ensure that an  Appellant  is  able  to
         participate  fully  in  the  proceedings  and  that  there   is   a
         flexibility and a wide range  of  specialist  expertise  which  the
         Tribunal can utilise to deal with a case fairly and justly."

17. At paragraph 30 there is confirmation that  a  failure  to  follow  the
    Practice Direction in relation to Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive
    Witnesses issued on 30th  October  2008,  and  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010 would most likely be a  material  error  of
    law.

18. The FtT appreciated  the  Appellant  had  mental  health  problems  and
    therefore was a vulnerable Appellant.   I  accept  that  there  was  no
    application for an adjournment, and also  that  the  FtT  attempted  to
    assist the Appellant to enable her to  give  her  evidence.   There  is
    however no reference by the FtT to either the Practice Direction or the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note, and when dealing  with  a  vulnerable
    Appellant paragraph 5(vi) of  the  Guidance  Note  indicates  that  the
    Tribunal must identify and record  whether  the  Appellant  is  legally
    represented.  The FtT did so but then did not follow the  remainder  of
    the guidance, which indicates that  if  an  Appellant  is  not  legally
    represented, the FtT  must  consider  whether  an  adjournment  of  the
    substantive hearing would enable representation to be obtained.

19. As pointed out by the judge granting permission the FtT does not appear
    to have considered whether that would be appropriate.

20. I find that failure to consider the Practice Direction  and  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note  in  relation  to  a  vulnerable  Appellant,
    amounts to a material error of law.  In addition, I am  satisfied  that
    the FtT erred in law failing to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's mental health problems with reference to Article 8.   There
    was no indication that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was considered.

21. For the reasons given above the decision of the FtT is  unsafe  and  is
    set aside.

22. I have taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements, and  agree  with  the  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the
    FtT to be heard afresh.  There are no findings preserved.   The  reason
    for remittal is that substantial fact-finding needs to  be  undertaken,
    and this is more appropriately undertaken by the FtT  rather  than  the
    Upper Tribunal.

23. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    E.M.M. Smith.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I have made an anonymity direction because the Appellant has  made  a  claim
for international protection and because of the nature of her mental  health
difficulties.  Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 19th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is  made.   The  issue  of  any  fee  award  will  need  to  be
considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date: 19th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

