
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01830/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2017                            |On 4 July 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    H A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sinker, Counsel instructed by Arden Solicitors
Advocates

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                                  DECISION

Background

 1. The Appellant before this Tribunal is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for ease of reference, I refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing his asylum claim was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D. Alty in a decision promulgated on 22 June 2016  ("the
    First-tier Tribunal's  Decision").   Although  the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim was not accepted,  his  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  was
    accepted on the basis it would be unduly harsh for  him  to  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  By a decision promulgated on 7 February  2017,  I
    set aside paragraphs [50] to [58] only  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    Decision.  My error of law decision is appended to  this  decision  for
    ease of reference.

 2. The effect of my decision is that the Appellant does not have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to Iraq and is  not  at  risk  of
    being personally targeted ([26] to [32] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    Decision).  The Appellant has not challenged those findings.   Equally,
    the Respondent did not challenge the findings at [33] to  [35]  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's Decision that Article 15(c) of Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive") applies in relation to  risk
    on return to the  Appellant's  home  area  of  Tikrit.   Nor  does  she
    challenge [36] to [40] of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision  in  which
    Judge Alty found that the  Appellant  could  not  be  returned  to  the
    Kurdish area of Iraq (despite his residence in Erbil before  coming  to
    the UK) since he is not Kurdish and the Respondent does not return non-
    Kurds to that region.

 3. The basis on  which  I  set  aside  [50]  to  [58]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's Decision is that  Judge  Alty  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant does not have and would not  be  able  to  acquire  within  a
    reasonable period a Civil Status Identity Card  ("CSID").   His  appeal
    was allowed on that basis. The Respondent challenged that aspect on the
    basis that the Judge failed to consider whether the Appellant would  be
    able to obtain a CSID prior to return to Iraq  from  the  UK.   It  has
    since then transpired that the Appellant does in fact  already  have  a
    CSID which  is  held  by  the  Respondent.   The  issue  which  remains
    therefore is whether it  is  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    returned to Baghdad.

 4. Before turning to consider that issue, it is helpful to  remind  myself
    of the findings which are preserved in this regard which appear at [42]
    to [49] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Decision.   I  set  out  those
    paragraphs below:-
         "[42]    AA establishes that the  threshold  for  engaging  Article
         15(c) is not reached in Baghdad with the exception of certain parts
         of the Baghdad Belts.  The Appellant submits that he is at enhanced
         risk as a result of his lack of connections in Baghdad,  his  Sunni
         beliefs, as a government employee and a member of the  Al-Bu  Nasir
         Tribe.  In my judgement, the Appellant has not established enhanced
         risk.  I note the findings of AA in reaching  this  conclusion,  in
         particular, paragraphs 135 and 136  where  the  Tribunal  concludes
         that there is not a risk arising from  a  lack  of  connections  or
         Sunni beliefs.
         [43] The Appellant has submitted that the people of Tikrit are  now
         unable to access Baghdad.  Miss Bremang refers me to page 16 of the
         Supplementary Bundle.  The evidence to which I  am  referred  post-
         dates AA.  However, I am not satisfied following SG (Iraq), that it
         is  "cogent  evidence"  demonstrating  "very  strong  grounds"  for
         departing from the general position set out in AA  which  makes  no
         finding to this effect.
         [44] Under Article 8 of the Qualification Directive,  an  applicant
         "is not in need of International Protection if in  a  part  of  the
         country of origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted
         or no real risk of serious harm and the applicant can reasonably be
         expected to stay in that part of the country."
         [45] I have found that the Appellant does not have  a  well-founded
         fear of being persecuted and there is no real risk of serious  harm
         in Baghdad.  In deciding whether it would be unreasonable or unduly
         harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate there, I have  considered
         first, the feasibility of his return.  AA says that Iraqi nationals
         will not be returned to Baghdad by the Respondent if  they  do  not
         have in their possession a current or expired passport or a laissez
         passer.  It is not in issue that the Appellant used a  valid  Iraqi
         passport to enter the UK.  That passport is documented as  expiring
         on 9 April 2016 (details at D1 and E5 of the Respondent's  Bundle).
         This is not in issue.
         [46] I find that the Appellant has an expired Iraqi  passport.  His
         return to Iraq is therefore feasible.
         [47] Having found that his return is feasible,  I  have  considered
         the following factors in assessing whether it would be unduly harsh
         for the Appellant to return, as I am required to do, by AA:
         "(a) whether the Appellant has a CSID or will  be  able  to  obtain
         one;
         (b)  whether the Appellant can speak Arabic;
         (c)  whether the Appellant has family members or friends in Baghdad
         able to accommodate him;
         (d)  whether the Appellant is a lone female;
         (e)  whether the Appellant can find a sponsor to access  the  hotel
         room or rent accommodation;
         (f)  whether the Appellant is from a minority community;
         (g)  whether there is support available for the  Appellant  bearing
         in mind there is some evidence that returned failed asylum  seekers
         are  provided  with  the  support  generally  given  to  Internally
         Displaced Peoples."
         [48] The Appellant can speak Arabic  and  is  not  a  lone  female.
         Although the Shia are the majority in Baghdad, I find as  a  Sunni,
         he is not from a minority community as envisaged in AA.
         [49] However, I find  that  the  Appellant  does  not  have  family
         members or friends that can accommodate him under  (c)  or  sponsor
         him to access accommodation under (e). It is not in issue that  the
         Appellant and his family  are  from  Tikrit.   The  Appellant  gave
         evidence today that his parents are now in Turkey and his wife  and
         children are in Qatar.  There is no evidence that the Appellant has
         family or other connections in Baghdad to whom he  can  turn.   The
         Appellant  fled  to  Erbil  when  ISIL  invaded  Tikrit  which   is
         consistent with a lack of connections in Baghdad.   The  Respondent
         makes no submission that there is a  support  network  in  Baghdad.
         Consequently, I accept the Appellant's claim that he has no  family
         or other form of support in Baghdad."

Legal Framework

 5.   Article  8  of  the  Qualification  Directive  is  headed   "Internal
    protection" and provides as follows:
         "1.  As part of the assessment of international protection,  Member
         States  may  determine  that  an  applicant  is  not  in  need   of
         international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of  origin
         there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no  real  risk
         of suffering serious harm  and  the  applicant  can  reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.
         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.
         ......"

 6. The domestic Courts have had cause to consider the  issue  of  internal
    relocation in the cases of Januzi v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) & others v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] UKHL  49.   In  the  former  case,  Lord
    Bingham described the issue as being whether a person can reasonably be
    expected to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  him
    to  do  so.   In  the  latter  case,  Baroness   Hale   described   the
    reasonableness test as being "stringent" and confirmed that the  burden
    of proof remains on the Appellant.

 7. I have already set out the relevant part of the headnote in  AA  (Iraq)
    [2015] CG UKUT 00544 (IAC) ("AA") at [4] above by reference to [47]  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.  Paragraphs [151] to [203] of AA  set
    out the substance of the Tribunal's findings in  relation  to  internal
    relocation to Baghdad and I have  had  regard  to  that  guidance  when
    reaching my decision on this issue.

 8. I have also had regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in BA (Returns to
    Baghdad) Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC)  ("BA")  which  has  some
    relevance to the Appellant's position.

The Appellant's case

 9. In accordance with the directions given in my earlier decision, I  have
    received a letter dated 23 March 2017 from the  Appellant's  solicitors
    setting  out  the  Appellant's  position  in   relation   to   internal
    relocation.  That is accompanied by further evidence,  notably  letters
    from various healthcare professionals dated between October 2015 and 31
    May 2016.  The Appellant's submissions contained  in  the  letter  also
    refer to AA and two items of background  evidence  namely  Home  Office
    country information entitled "Country Information and Guidance -  Iraq:
    Sunni (Arab) Muslims (August 2016)" dated 14 August 2016  ("the  August
    2016 report") and "Country Policy and Information Note - Iraq: Security
    and humanitarian situation (March 2017)"  dated  20  March  2017  ("the
    March 2017 report").  The first of those two reports has in  fact  been
    considered by  this  Tribunal  in  BA  and  I  refer  to  the  relevant
    paragraphs of that decision when I turn to deal with that aspect of the
    Appellant's claim.

10. The Appellant says that it will be unduly harsh for him  to  return  to
    Baghdad  based  on  his  personal   profile,   including   his   family
    connections, profession and ethnicity.  This  encompasses  not  only  a
    submission that as a Sunni Muslim  he  will  be  targeted  and/or  ill-
    treated by Shia Muslims but also a repeat of the submission made before
    Judge Alty that, as a member of Saddam Hussein's tribe he  will  be  at
    increased risk due to that tribal connection which will  be  recognised
    by his place of birth and tribal name.   He  says  that  is  if  he  is
    targeted by Shia militias he will not receive effective protection from
    the police who are mainly Shia Muslims and who are unable in any  event
    to provide protection due to lack of resources.

11. The Appellant also points to a lack of any family or friends in Baghdad
    to  whom  he  could  turn  for  support  to  obtain  employment  and/or
    accommodation. He says that, as a result, he will be rendered destitute
    as he will be unable to find work because unemployment levels are  high
    and he will not be able to pay for accommodation.  Linked to this,  the
    Appellant says it is also unduly harsh to return him due to his medical
    conditions.  He says that even if healthcare is available  in  Iraq  he
    will be unable to afford it.

12. In summary, I am asked to allow the appeal under Article 3 ECHR on  the
    basis that the Appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.

The Respondent's Case

13. Also in accordance with my directions, the Respondent  filed  a  letter
    dated 7 March 2017.  In that letter, the Respondent confirms  that  she
    holds both an expired Iraqi passport belonging to the Appellant and his
    CSID card, copies  of  which  she  has  provided.   The  documents  are
    untranslated but the Appellant does not dispute that  he  has  a  valid
    CSID card; indeed, he raised this himself at the error of law stage.

14. The Respondent relies on the factors set out in AA.  She submits  that,
    although the Appellant has no family or friends in Baghdad, he would be
    able to access services and assistance, including healthcare treatment.
     She also points out that the Appellant has  relevant  work  experience
    and skills to enable him to secure gainful employment on return.

15. In summary,  therefore,  the  Respondent's  case  is  that  it  is  not
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect the  Appellant  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad and invites me  to  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

16. Both parties agreed in their written submissions that  a  further  oral
    hearing was not required in this case and that  I  should  re-make  the
    decision on the remaining issue based on the  written  submissions  and
    the documents before me.  I therefore proceed to do so.

Evidence relating to the Appellant's circumstances

17. Before turning to consider the impact of the country guidance in AA and
    BA and the additional background evidence to which I am referred, it is
    necessary to say something about the factual background  in  this  case
    including the health issues from which the Appellant suffers.


18. Although the factual background is set out in the preserved section  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Decision, it  is  relevant  to  note  that  the
    Appellant left Tikrit as  long  ago  as  12  June  2014  following  the
    invasion by ISIL.  Thereafter, he lived in Erbil until 30 May 2015 when
    he left  there  and  travelled  to  the  UK.   Although  the  Appellant
    describes in his witness statement the significant  difficulties  which
    he and his family faced there because they were not Kurds and  although
    there is no suggestion that the  Appellant  will  be  returned  to  the
    Kurdish region, I note that the Appellant was able to continue his work
    in that region.  He is a well-qualified man (a chemical  engineer)  and
    had been employed as an engineer at the Environmental Department before
    coming to the UK.


19. The Appellant's health difficulties stem it  appears  from  a  shooting
    incident in 2007.  The Appellant was treated for that injury  in  Iraq.
    He was taken to Syria for further treatment, undergoing four operations
    there between 2007 and 2010.  He had another operation in Iraq in  2012
    which it appears may be the root cause of his health problems since  he
    contracted hepatitis B.  He has however been treated for  hepatitis   B
    whilst in the  UK  and  the  Appellant  himself  says  in  his  witness
    statement at [59] that:
         "I continue to suffer minor health setbacks; however, my health has
         improved significantly since I arrived to the United Kingdom".


20. As I note at [9] above, I have been provided with  documents  regarding
    the Appellant's health.  The latest of those  is  dated  31  May  2016.
    That is written by the Appellant's GP and not a consultant.   It  reads
    as follows:-
         "I hereby certify  that  [HA]  is  a  patient  registered  with  Dr
         Alistair Partnership.  I am writing this letter to  answer  several
         issues in relation to his immigration matter as  requested  by  his
         solicitors.
         He  is  currently   under   the   care   of   the   Department   of
         Gastroenterology  and  Hepatology  in  Royal  Liverpool  University
         Hospital.  He has background  of  Hepatitis  B  infection  and  has
         previously  undergone  right  hepatectomy  and  left  colocutaneous
         fistula  secondary  to  gunshot  abdominal  injury.   He  was  also
         diagnosed to have early portal hypertension secondary to a  chronic
         portal vein thrombosis.
         He  is  currently  on  Carvedilol  which   was   advised   by   the
         gastroenterologist to keep his portal pressures low and is due  for
         repeat blood tests including his liver function tests and a  follow
         up clinic in September 2016.
         In view of his medical history, the treatment that he is having  at
         the moment is vital to prevent worsening of his portal hypertension
         which  could  potentially  lead  to  complications  such  as  liver
         failure, bleeding varices and death if  left  untreated.   He  also
         needs regular follow  ups  by  the  Liver  Clinic  to  monitor  the
         progression and management of his liver disease.
         Should you require any further information, do not hesitate to  get
         in touch with us."
    There then  follows  a  summary  of  the  Appellant's  current  medical
    conditions as being a hepatitis B virus and varices and  a  summary  of
    his medication which is a daily dose of Carvedilol and Omeprazole.

21. Letters from the Department  of  Gastroenterology  dated  October  2015
    confirm that the Appellant suffered from hepatitis B and  was  reviewed
    for that and other symptoms until January 2016 but the letter dated  13
    January 2016 confirms that the hepatitis had by then  cleared  and  the
    Appellant was well.  The medical records, read  as  a  whole,  disclose
    regular reviews by the Appellant's GP and ongoing medication but do not
    show any further surgery since the Appellant has been in the UK.

22.  More  importantly,  the  records  cease   in   May   2016,   therefore
    approximately one year ago and no effort has been made to provide an up-
    to-date report on the  Appellant's  current  condition.   Nor  has  any
    evidence been produced by the Appellant about the availability  of  the
    medication he takes in Iraq nor its cost.

23. I deal with the general  position  in  relation  to  healthcare  below.
    However, based on the evidence  which  the  Appellant  puts  forward  I
    accept that the Appellant has some health issues but those are  not  at
    such a level as to reach the Article 3 threshold.  It appears  that  he
    requires regular reviews and monitoring and daily  medication  to  keep
    his symptoms under control but there is  no  specialist  opinion  that,
    without such monitoring and medication, he would  suffer  very  extreme
    consequences (the GP speaks only of  "potential"  consequences  if  his
    hypertension is not controlled). I accept though that  availability  of
    healthcare is a factor which I need to  take  into  consideration  when
    looking  at  internal  relocation  although  I  also  note   that   the
    Appellant's medical condition pre-dates his arrival  into  the  UK  and
    that he was either able to obtain treatment then or to  manage  without
    it for a period.

Position as a Sunni Muslim in Baghdad

24. I turn then to the Appellant's claim that he will be targeted  by  Shia
    militias as a Sunni Muslim and additionally because he is  from  Saddam
    Hussein's  tribe.   The  evidence  in  this  regard  is  based  on  the
    Appellant's own evidence which was before Judge Alty.   The  Judge  did
    not accept that evidence and found at [31] that the Appellant  was  not
    personally targeted due to his tribal connections.   That  finding  was
    not challenged.  It is preserved as part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision to which I refer at [4] above.  The Appellant has not produced
    any further background evidence to show that he would be targeted based
    on tribal connections. He is not at enhanced risk on that account.

25. The Appellant has produced further background material  concerning  his
    position as a Sunni Muslim.  He relies, in particular,  on  the  August
    2016 report as support for an assertion that he would be at risk or  at
    the very least it would be unduly harsh for him to  return  to  Baghdad
    because, as a Sunni Muslim, he will be targeted  by  Shia  militia  and
    that the Iraqi authorities  will  be  either  unable  or  unwilling  to
    protect him against the threat from those organisations.

26. Although it was found by the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant  is
    not at enhanced risk because of his Sunni beliefs and that  is  one  of
    the findings which I preserved (referred to at [4] above),  it  remains
    incumbent on me to consider the position as at the date of my decision.




27. The August 2016 report was considered by the Tribunal in  BA.  Although
    that appeal focussed principally on the risk to those who are perceived
    to have collaborated with the foreign coalition  forces,  the  Tribunal
    also considered the position of Sunni  Muslims  in  Baghdad.   In  that
    context, it considered the August 2016 report under the  heading  Sunni
    identity at [84] to [101] of the decision. That  section  concludes  at
    [101] with the following summary of the August 2016 report:-
         "The respondent's most  recent  policy  statement  recognises  that
         Sunnis may face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  from
         Shia militias in Baghdad.  It goes on to state that tribal,  family
         or political links, might mean a person is  not  at  risk  and  can
         return or relocate to Baghdad.  We find that the significance of  a
         person's  religio-political  identity  to  risk  on   return   will
         inevitably  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  each   case.    The
         increasing levels of sectarian  violence  in  Baghdad,  albeit  not
         sufficient  if  taken  alone,  are  likely  to  be   an   important
         consideration  in  assessing  whether  a  person  can   demonstrate
         individual characteristics that would place him or her at real risk
         of serious harm."


28. That then finds its way into the headnote in relation to the risk based
    on Sunni identity as follows:-
         "(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal  of  US-
         led coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in 2006-
         2007.  A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias in
         Baghdad.  The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely  to
         be targeted as suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups  such
         as ISIL.  However, Sunni identity alone is not sufficient  to  give
         rise to a real risk of serious harm.
         (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create
         a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a
         real risk for the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article  15(c)
         of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed
         on a cumulative basis.  The assessment will depend on the facts  of
         each case.
         (vii)    In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and  in
         the case of Sunni complainants,  are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to
         provide sufficient protection."

29. As is accepted in BA, the risk arises from the Shia militia rather than
    the Shia government itself.  It is though relevant in this case because
    of the existence of checkpoints  throughout  Baghdad  (said  to  number
    approximately 200 - [89]).  Although the Tribunal refers at [90]  to  a
    Finnish Immigration Service report which rejects  the  suggestion  that
    Sunni Muslims are likely to be capable of identification by name alone,
    and finds at [98] that the evidence does not disclose a real risk based
    on religious identity alone  on  return  to  Baghdad,  the  Appellant's
    religious background as a Sunni Muslim is clearly a factor which is  of
    some significance when considering whether it is unduly harsh  for  him
    to return to Baghdad.

30. Before leaving the decision in BA, it is worthy  of  mention  that  the
    Tribunal there found that, although the level of  general  violence  in
    Baghdad city remains significant, the background evidence at  the  date
    of the hearing in that case (August 2016) did not justify  a  departure
    from the conclusion of the Tribunal in AA.

Humanitarian situation in Baghdad

31. I turn then to consider the humanitarian situation in Baghdad based  on
    the Appellant's lack of  family  and  friends  in  that  city  and  the
    problems facing the Appellant of  obtaining  employment,  accommodation
    and healthcare.

32. My starting point is what is said in  AA.   The  Tribunal  there  based
    itself on evidence dating back to 2014.  At that time, the unemployment
    rate was said to be 18% to 24% for 2013/14 ([189]).   The  Iraqi  state
    was the dominant employer and the  economy  was  in  a  poor  position,
    principally because of the depletion of oil revenues due to  the  price
    of oil and a number of the facilities being  in  the  contested  areas.
    Healthcare was said to operate better  in  Baghdad  than  elsewhere  in
    other  places   ([192]).    The   Tribunal's   consideration   of   the
    accommodation available ([194]) was taken  from  an  IOM  snapshot  for
    September 2014 which divided the IDP statistics into those staying with
    relatives (60%), those hosted by  Mosques  and  holy  sites  (all  Shia
    muslims) and over 130 staying in  vulnerable  housing.   It  was  noted
    however that a majority of internally displaced persons  ("IDPs")  live
    in rented houses although were struggling to  pay  rent.   It  is  also
    there noted that IDPs receive food assistance through  local  NGOs  and
    other groups  and  generally  have  access  to  water,  sanitation  and
    healthcare.


33. Having drawn together  the  evidence  in  relation  to  employment  and
    accommodation, the Tribunal concluded as follows:-
         "[197]    There  are  a  number  of  relevant  features  in   these
         statistics for decision-makers determining whether,  in  any  given
         case, it is reasonable for a person to relocate to Baghdad.  First,
         a significant proportion of displaced persons live in host family's
         accommodation.  This accords with evidence set out above  regarding
         the 'draw'  factors  of  Baghdad  for  displaced  persons.  Careful
         consideration will have to  be  given  by  decision-makers  to  the
         question of whether an individual being  returned  to  Baghdad  has
         family there to accommodate them.  If this is so then consideration
         will have to be given to the issue of whether those family  members
         will provide sufficient assistance to render relocation  reasonable
         irrespective of whether the applicant has a CSID.
         [198]    The  second  significant  feature  is  the  percentage  of
         displaced persons who reside in rented  accommodation  in  Baghdad.
         Although we have no evidence to show how such persons obtained  the
         financial capability to fund their accommodation, we do  not  think
         it beyond the realms of reasonableness to draw from this that there
         are opportunities available in Baghdad  for  displaced  persons  to
         earn sufficient funds to enable them to rent accommodation if  they
         have a CSID.
         [199]    The third relevant feature  of  these  statistics  is  the
         small percentage of displaced persons who are recorded as living in
         places other than a host family's or rented accommodation.
         [200]    In addition to that which we have observed above, we  have
         also been provided with evidence regarding  numerous  organisations
         operating in Baghdad that provide assistance to displaced  persons.
         However we take cognisance of the fact that a staff member  at  the
         Ministry of Displacement  and  Migration  informed  Dr  Fatah  that
         failed asylum seekers are not treated as IDPs by the  Ministry  and
         that the Ministry only  had  an  obligation  to  assist  IDPs.   An
         organisation named Harikar also told Dr Fatah that they focused  on
         IDPs and not failed asylum seekers.   UNHCR  and  the  Ministry  of
         Interior were not able to provide any information about whether  or
         not failed asylum seekers  would  be  able  to  access  support  or
         assistance provided to IDPs.
         [201]    As identified above, evidence from UNHCR-Iraq reveals that
         as of April 2015 it had a branch office in Baghdad and that it  had
         established a network of Protection and Assistance Centres  through
         its partner agencies, which include:
         (i)  the Norwegian Refugee Council,  which  is  funded  by  USAID's
         Iraq's access to justice programme and  provides  cash  assistance,
         food distribution and shelter;
         (ii) the International Organisation for Migration ("IOM") which has
         implemented  several  projects  directed  towards  IDPs   in   Iraq
         including; income generation  projects,  emergency  response  in  a
         crisis,  and  livelihood  projects,  which  were   implemented   in
         conjunction  with  the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and   Migration
         ("MoDM"); and
         (iii)    the International Rescue Committee ("IRC") which  provides
         a number of services for, and on behalf of, IDPs, including:  legal
         assistance,   protection   monitoring,   capacity   building    and
         development, protection interventions and referrals,  advocacy  and
         information dissemination.
         [202]    It is clear  from  the  evidence  before  us  that  Arabic
         speaking males with family connections to Baghdad and a CSID are in
         the strongest position.  At the other end of the scale, those  with
         no family connections in Baghdad who are from minority  communities
         and who have no CSID are least  able  to  provide  for  themselves.
         There are a wide range of circumstances falling between  these  two
         extremes.  Those without family  connections  are  more  vulnerable
         than those with such connections.  Women are more  vulnerable  then
         men.  Those who do not speak Arabic are less likely to be  able  to
         obtain employment.  Those from minority communities are less likely
         to be able to access community support than those  from  the  Sunni
         and Shi'a communities.
         [203]    On the evidence before us, whilst we  accept  that  for  a
         person who has no family or other support in Baghdad and  who  also
         does not have a CSID, and cannot obtain one reasonably  soon  after
         arrival, it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to  relocate  to
         Baghdad, for the generality of Iraqis,  despite  difficulties  that
         may be experienced in respect of such matters  such  as  access  to
         health care, education and jobs, we  consider  that  relocation  to
         Baghdad is safe and not unreasonable or unduly harsh -  one  reason
         being that a person can only be returned to Baghdad if such  person
         has a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer"


34. I turn then to consider the background  evidence  as  to  the  position
    since AA.  The Appellant relies on the March 2017 report.  That  report
    is not specific to Baghdad.  Having made reference to the  findings  in
    AA at [2.3.11] in relation to the humanitarian situation at that  time,
    the report continues as follows:-
         "[2.3.11]....Humanitarian coverage expanded significantly in  2016,
         although partners remain disproportionately located in the north of
         the country...Although it is one of the highest funded  appeals  in
         the world, gaps  do  exist.   The  number  of  those  targeted  for
         assistance in 2017 (5.8  million)  is  lower  than  the  number  in
         humanitarian need (11 million projected in  2017)...The  experience
         of  humanitarian  assistance  varies  depending  on  location   and
         need....
         [2.3.12] Sources differ in their assessment of the effectiveness of
         humanitarian  support.   The  ...UNHCR  in  their  returns   paper,
         assessed that support  had  deteriorated  and  that  partners  were
         struggling with displacement, but the more recent OCHA Humanitarian
         Response Plan assessment observed that humanitarian assistance  was
         impressive and effective...
         [2.3.13] In general, the humanitarian situation is  not  so  severe
         that a person is likely to face a breach of Articles 15(a) and  (b)
         of the Qualification Directive/ Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR.
         However, decision makers must consider each  case  on  its  merits.
         There may be cases where a combination of circumstances means  that
         a person will face a breach of Articles 15(a)  and/or  (b)  of  the
         Qualification Directive/ Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  on  return.
         In assessing whether an individual  case  reaches  this  threshold,
         decision makers must consider:
            . where the person is from (as humanitarian conditions are more
              severe in some areas than others, and this may also impact on
              whether the person becomes an IDP on return, if they were not
              already prior to leaving the country);
            . a person's individual profile, including, but not limited to,
              their age, gender and ethnicity;
            . whether the person can access a support network."


35.  In relation to general living standards  and  conditions,  the  report
    provides the following information:-
         "[7.1.1] In 2015 (the latest assessment), the UN Human  Development
         Index, which measures length and health of life, level of education
         and standard of living, ranked Iraq as 121st out of 188  countries,
         in the category of 'medium human development'.
         [7.1.2]  The ...IMF's World Economic  Outlook,  issued  in  October
         2016, noted that 'higher-than-expected oil production has pushed up
         the projected growth for 2016'.  From a decline of 2.4% of  GDP  in
         2015, it was projected as 10.3% rise in 2016, and a  0.5%  rise  in
         2017.
         [7.1.3]  Using 2015 data (their latest at the time of writing)  the
         UN Development Programme noted that:
            . 99% of government revenue comes  from  oil  but  only  1%  of
              Iraqis are employed in the oil industry;
            . 40% of people are employed in the public sector (45% in urban
              areas, 28% in rural areas)
            . 17% of the workforce are women;
            . 11% of people (653,000) are unemployed (7%  of  men;  13%  of
              women, with youth unemployment (15-24 year olds) at 18%,  and
              higher among the higher-educated);
            . 23% of people live on less than US$2.2 a day;
            . 75% of surveyed  Iraqis  identified  poverty  as  their  most
              pressing concern
         [7.1.4]  The UN categorised the situation in  Iraq  as  a  Level  3
         emergency.   Level  3  emergencies  are  defined  as  'the   global
         humanitarian system's classification for the response to  the  most
         severe, large-scale humanitarian crises'."

36. Of the 11 million people assessed by the OCHA as requiring humanitarian
    assistance, 1.9 million are said to be returnees and 400,000 of current
    returnees.  A table at [8.3.1] of the report shows that of the  overall
    numbers in need, 650,000 are in Baghdad.   The OCHA  in  December  2016
    noted   that   "[10.3.1]..'   Humanitarian   coverage   has    expanded
    significantly in 2016, supported strongly by the Joint Coordination and
    Monitoring Centre (JCMC) in Baghdad and the Joint  Crisis  Coordination
    Centre (JCC) in Erbil'.  The report notes that "By  the  end  of  2016,
    partners were active in more than 25 major  operational  locations,  an
    increase of 67% from 2015.   However,  they  remain  disproportionately
    concentrated in  the  north  of  the  country."  It  appears  from  the
    statistics  provided  that  the  OCHA  has  targeted  7.3  million  for
    assistance as against 5.8 million people that it aims to assist.


37. A humanitarian assessment of IDPs carried out by  REACH  in  June  2016
    reported that:-
         "[9.11.1] IDP households outside camps have  often  depleted  their
         financial resources and  are  resorting  to  increasingly  negative
         coping mechanisms to  afford  basic  needs.   Taking  on  debts  to
         satisfy basic needs has increased by over one third to a  total  of
         30%  of  all  households...whilst  relying  on  savings   decreased
         drastically...indicating  a  depletion   of   resources.    Limited
         financial means have negatively affected access to basic  services:
         whilst overall reported access to basic services such as healthcare
         or education remained constant...financial costs are currently  the
         single most reported barrier to accessing these services."
    The assessment is also reported at [10.5.1] as showing that there is  a
    wide variation in the frequency  and  amount  of  humanitarian  support
    available to IDPs with IDP households in Baghdad being less  likely  to
    receive support than some other areas.   The  OCHA   in  December  2016
    however is reported (at [10.7.2]) to have noted a dramatic expansion in
    access and coverage.


38. In relation to employment, the same assessment noted that:
         "[9.11.2]     Employment was the second most reported  need  across
         Iraq, reported by 52% of  IDP  households.   The  majority  of  IDP
         households reported not  having  access  to  a  regular  source  of
         income,  primarily  relying  on   seasonal   work   or   short-term
         employment. The lack of sustainable livelihoods negatively affected
         households' ability to access food, health and education  services,
         with more than three out of four IDP households reporting that they
         did not generate sufficient income to meet their basic  needs.   In
         addition, 17% of IDP households reported not having had any  source
         of income in the month prior to the assessment."

39. Food security is stated to be  a  problem  (2.9  million  people  "food
    insecure"); it is also noted that 8.3 million people  are  in  need  of
    water and sanitation.  Those in need of health care  has  been  revised
    upwards from 8.5 million in April 2016 to 10.3  million.   Due  to  the
    destruction  of  primary  health  facilities  the  number   of   health
    consultations in health clinics has "increased eightfold".  It is noted
    that "the average household is just over 20  minutes  away  from  their
    nearest health facility".  The REACH assessment noted that "Whilst  the
    reported presence of functioning health services increased, the ability
    to afford these services has steadily decreased.."


40. In terms of accommodation of IDPs, the report notes that 12% are hosted
    in Baghdad.  In terms of shelter, the statistics are set out at [9.5.1]
    as:-
         "the majority of identified IDPs (61% or 1,853,892 individuals) are
         reportedly  housed  in  private  dwellings.   Of  the   total   IDP
         population, 46%  (1,387,518)  are  living  in  rented  houses,  16%
         (456,432) are with host families, and less than 1% (9,942)  are  in
         hotels/motels;
         . 16% or 495,840 individuals are in critical shelters.  Of  these,
           8% (245,802) are in unfurnished buildings, 4% (127,614)  are  in
           informal settlements, 3% (98,682) are  in  religious  buildings,
           and 1% (17,328) are in school buildings;
         . IDPs living in camps represent 20% of the total  IDP  population
           (603,084 individuals).  Those  whose  shelter  arrangements  are
           unknown represent 3% of the total IDP population (77,190)"
    The report goes on to note a report from OCHA dated December 2016  that
    "4.7 million need 'shelter and non-food items'" and that  "2.7  million
    people are in need of 'camp coordination and camp management' support".

41. The March 2017 report is not limited to the situation  in  Baghdad  and
    therefore it is  not  possible  to  discern  the  exact  scale  of  the
    difficulties faced in that city.  It is clear from the report that  the
    situation is challenging.  The report does not though show a materially
    different position to that faced by returnees in Baghdad at the time of
    AA. A large percentage of returnees live in rented accommodation in the
    city.   Finding  employment  is  difficult.   Healthcare  services  are
    available but their provision is patchy and cost may be  a  barrier  to
    access.  Food security remains a problem. There  is  some  humanitarian
    assistance but the scale of that in comparison with need  is  difficult
    to assess and it is not clear whether returnees are entitled to  it  in
    the same way as IDPs.  Having carefully considered the updated position
    as set out in the March 2017 report, I consider that the guidance in AA
    remains valid and it is therefore that  guidance  which  I  apply  when
    considering the humanitarian position on return for this Appellant.



Decision and Reasons

42. The issue for me then is whether the background evidence as  considered
    within the guidance in BA and AA  shows  that  the  position  for  this
    Appellant on return to  Baghdad  would  be  unduly  harsh.  I  need  to
    consider the position which this Appellant  will  face  in  Baghdad  in
    terms of the security  and  humanitarian  position,  coupled  with  his
    personal characteristics, particularly as a Sunni Muslim with no family
    support in Baghdad and with some health problems.  That I now  turn  to
    do.


43. As I note at [30] above, the Tribunal in BA accepted that, although the
    generalised violence in Baghdad  remains  significant,  the  background
    evidence there considered did not disclose that a  departure  from  the
    position in AA is appropriate. Accordingly, [3] of the headnote  in  AA
    continues to apply.  That reads as follows:-
         "3. The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c)."


44. I have preserved the finding that the Appellant is not at enhanced risk
    because of his tribal connections.  I also preserved the  finding  that
    the Appellant is not at enhanced risk because  of  his  Sunni  beliefs.
    Unlike the Appellant in BA, the Appellant  is  not  someone  with  past
    associations with a Western company.  As the Tribunal noted at [118] of
    BA:
         "There is a significant minority of Sunnis living in Baghdad.   The
         incidents of targeted violence against Sunnis, albeit  of  concern,
         are not of such a persistent or widespread nature to create a  real
         risk on return just by virtue of a person's Sunni identity."
    As noted at [(v)] of the headnote:
         "...A Shia dominated government is supported by  Shia  militias  in
         Baghdad.  The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely  to
         be targeted as suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups  such
         as ISIL.  However, Sunni identity alone is not sufficient  to  give
         rise to a real risk of serious harm."


45. On the other hand, as the headnote in BA continues at [(vi)]:
         "Individual characteristics, which do not in  themselves  create  a
         real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount  to  a
         real risk for the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article  15(c)
         of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed
         on a cumulative basis.  The assessment will depend on the facts  of
         each case."
    It is accepted in that case that a Sunni complainant cannot look to the
    authorities in Baghdad for protection since they would be either unable
    or  unwilling  to  offer  protection.  The  Appellant's  ethnicity   is
    therefore a relevant factor when considering the situation  facing  him
    on return to Baghdad.

46. As a person with no family support but with a CSID, the Appellant falls
    between the two ends of the spectrum identified at [202] of AA.  On the
    one hand, the Appellant has a CSID which will enable  him  to  take  up
    employment if he is able to find a job and to access  services  in  the
    meanwhile.  He speaks Arabic and has  a  qualification  as  a  chemical
    engineer and an employment history which may assist him to find a  job.
    On the other hand, he has no family or friends in Baghdad who would  be
    able to accommodate him immediately on return and might help him find a
    job.  He would therefore be forced to rent accommodation  if  he  could
    find it and to fall back on the willingness of other Sunni  communities
    in Baghdad and/or organisations affording  humanitarian  protection  to
    find somewhere to live and the wherewithal to  support  himself  moving
    forward.  As recorded at [119] of BA, "there  are  a  large  number  of
    Sunnis living in Baghdad who are 'living adequately'".   The  Appellant
    may therefore be able to rely on some support from the Sunni  community
    to assist him to find accommodation.

47. I have accepted that the  Appellant  has  medical  problems  which  are
    currently controlled by regular monitoring and medication although ones
    which are insufficient in themselves to lead to a real risk of  Article
    3 treatment on return.  He may be able to manage without medication and
    monitoring in the short term but he still has a medical condition which
    is likely to require some treatment in the medium  or  longer  term  to
    avoid a downturn in his condition.

48. Akin to the position of the Appellant in BA, the Appellant is likely to
    need to travel around Baghdad to find employment (and possibly also  to
    secure support to find accommodation).  To do  so,  he  would  have  to
    cross checkpoints at which there is a potential risk  of  targeting  by
    Shia militias. Whilst that risk alone does not reach the threshold of a
    real risk because the evidence does not show that such attacks  are  so
    persistent or widespread to give rise to that level of risk, it remains
    a factor to take into consideration  when  looking  at  whether  it  is
    unduly harsh for this Appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

49. I find the issue whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant  to
    relocate to Baghdad  to  be  finely  balanced.   The  risk  to  him  of
    travelling around Baghdad and having to cross checkpoints to do so is a
    significant factor in terms  of  the  difficulties  he  would  face  in
    finding employment.  The difficulty in  finding  employment  given  the
    rates of unemployment and despite  his  qualifications  and  employment
    history, is in turn a barrier to him funding  accommodation  given  his
    lack of family and friends in Baghdad.  Although he might  be  able  to
    look to one  of  the  Sunni  communities  to  find  accommodation,  the
    evidence as to what support is available is unclear and although  large
    numbers of Sunni Muslims are able to live in Baghdad "adequately" it is
    not clear to what extent they have resources to help others.

50. In addition, the Appellant has medical problems  which  are  likely  to
    need some treatment in the medium to longer term.  The  evidence  shows
    that, although the Appellant has a CSID in order  to  access  services,
    the provision of healthcare in Baghdad is  limited  and  cost  of  that
    healthcare may be a barrier to access.

51. In summary, the need for the Appellant to travel around Baghdad to find
    employment and possibly accommodation and the  risk  which  that  might
    entail of targeting by Shia militias, coupled with the lack  of  family
    or friends to support him on return,  his  medical  condition  and  the
    challenging humanitarian conditions in Baghdad, leads  me  to  conclude
    that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate to Baghdad.
     For those reasons, his appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision
By my decision promulgated on 7 February 2017, I found a material  error  of
law in the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge D Alty at [50] to  [58]  of
his decision promulgated on 22 June 2016.  I therefore set aside  that  part
of the First-tier Tribunal decision by my earlier decision.  I  now  re-make
the decision.  I allow the appeal for the reasons given above.



Signed   [pic]    Dated:  3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01830/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mr HAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sinker, Counsel instructed by Arden Solicitors
Advocates

Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Although an anonymity order was not made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
this is a protection claim it is appropriate to make that order.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Background

52. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    However, for ease of reference I refer below to  the  parties  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal.

53. The Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    refusing his asylum claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  D.
    Alty in a decision  promulgated  on  22  June  2016  ("the  Decision").
    Although the Appellant's asylum claim was not accepted, his  claim  for
    humanitarian protection was accepted on the basis it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for him to internally  relocate  to  Baghdad.   The  Respondent's
    appeal is on one ground only and that is the judge's  failure  properly
    to apply the terms of the country guidance case of AA (Iraq) [2015]  CG
    UKUT 00544 (IAC) ("AA").  The Judge found that the Appellant  would  be
    unable to obtain a Civil Status Identity  Document  ("CSID")  within  a
    reasonable time of return.  It is this finding which is  challenged  by
    the Respondent.

54. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    13 July 2016.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  the
    Decision contains a material error of law  and  if  so  to  remake  the
    Decision or remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-tier  Tribunal.



Submissions

55. The Judge accepted that the Appellant could not return to his home area
    of Tikrit based on the findings in AA as  he  would  be  at  real  risk
    there.  That finding is not  challenged.    The  Respondent's  position
    though is that the Appellant can internally relocate to  Baghdad.   Mrs
    Aboni directed my attention to what is  said  at  paragraphs  [173]  to
    [177] of AA.  It was accepted by the Judge that the  Appellant  has  an
    expired passport ([45] of the Decision).  The  Judge  found,  based  on
    what is said at [178] to [187] of AA, that the Appellant would  not  be
    in a position to obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable  period  following
    return. The Appellant has no family in  Baghdad  or  anyone  who  could
    sponsor him in relation to obtaining accommodation.  He  also  requires
    medical treatment which he could not obtain without a CSID.  The  Judge
    therefore found that it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  Mrs Aboni submitted, however, that the  passport,
    albeit expired, would have reference to the details which were required
    in order to obtain a CSID. Based on what is said in AA,  she  submitted
    that the Appellant could in fact obtain a CSID prior to  return  whilst
    in the UK.  The Judge failed to consider this argument.

56. Mrs Aboni submitted that the error is material because even though  the
    Appellant does not have family in Baghdad, it would not be unduly harsh
    for him to return there if he is supplied with a CSID.  He is  educated
    and has worked in Iraq in the past and would be  able  to  re-establish
    himself even without family support.

57. In response Mr Sinker contested the Judge's factual  finding  that  the
    Appellant does not in fact have a CSID.  That is based on  instructions
    obtained from his client.  The Appellant says that he does have a  CSID
    which he gave to the Secretary of State with his expired passport.   No
    document has been produced before the First-tier Tribunal and Mrs Aboni
    indicated that documents such as these would not be held  on  the  Home
    Office file so she had no way of checking at the  hearing  whether  the
    Appellant has in fact produced a CSID in the past.

58. Mr Sinker fairly accepted that if the Appellant does have a  CSID  then
    there is an error in the Decision.  However, based  upon  the  evidence
    which the Judge had before him, he submitted that there is no  material
    error based on the Judge's failure to consider what is said at [173] to
    [177] of AA.  First, he pointed out that at [173] one of  the  criteria
    for obtaining a CSID  whilst  in  the  UK  requires  the  applicant  to
    authorise a person in Iraq to act as his representative.   It  is  also
    said at [174] that if an individual has lost his CSID and does not know
    the relevant page and book number for it, then  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London will not be able to obtain a CSID without a person going to  the
    local office in Iraq which is clearly not an option in this  case.   Mr
    Sinker did accept that this appeared to be somewhat at odds  with  what
    is said at [177] of AA which appears to  set  out  the  requirement  as
    either an expired passport or the  book  and  page  number  for  family
    registration details and not necessarily  both.   He  referred  however
    also to the summary at  [204]  and  [11]  of  the  headnote  where  the
    following is stated:


         "11. Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
             feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide  whether  P
             has a CSID, or will be able to  obtain  one,  reasonably  soon
             after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in  order
             for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance   from   the
             authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
             treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or  other  members
             likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in general
             likely to face  a  real  risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to
             serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P  by  the
             Secretary of State or her agents to  assist  P's  return  have
             been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have
             no CSID."

    Mr Sinker submitted,  based  on  this  paragraph,  that  there  was  no
    obligation on the Judge to consider also  whether  the  CSID  could  be
    obtained prior to return whilst in the United Kingdom.

59. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision in relation to
    whether there is an error of law which I indicated that I would provide
    in writing with reasons.

Discussion and Conclusions

60. The Judge directed himself at [47] to the factors to which  AA  refers.
    The judge's findings at [49], that the Appellant does not  have  family
    members or friends in Baghdad able to  accommodate  him  and  that  the
    Appellant does not have a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or  rental
    accommodation, are not disputed.   What  is  disputed  is  the  passage
    beginning at [50] which reads as follows:

         "50. With regard to  the  Civil  Status  Identity  Document  (CSID)
             paragraph 11 of AA provides that where an  appellant's  return
             to Iraq is found by  the  Tribunal  to  be  feasible  it  will
             generally then be necessary to decide  whether  he/she  has  a
             CSID or will be able  to  obtain  one  reasonably  soon  after
             arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in order for an
             Iraqi to access financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;
             employment; education; housing; and medical treatment.

         51.  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  the  Respondent  does  not
             make a finding that the Appellant  has  a  CSID.   Rather  she
             concludes at paragraph 41 that official documentation  can  be
             replaced and a lack  of  civil  documentation  will  not  make
             return to  any  part  of  Iraq  unsafe  or  unreasonable.   Mr
             Malarkey submits today that a CSID would allow  the  Appellant
             to re-establish himself in Iraq.  However, I am  not  directed
             to a CSID nor am I addressed on the  Appellant's  prospect  of
             obtaining one.

         52.  Paragraphs 2.5 and 2.6 of the screening interview refer to the
             Appellant's passport and identity documents.  It is not  clear
             whether these documents include a CSID.  Copies have not  been
             provided  by  the  Respondent.   When  questioned  today   the
             Appellant  said  that  he  had  provided  a  "Certificate   of
             Nationality" to the Border  Force  along  with  his  passport.
             However, this could be an Iraqi Nationality Certificate.  Miss
             Bremang was asked to address me on the CSID but did not assist
             me in establishing whether the Appellant had or  could  obtain
             one.

         53.  Taking everything into account, I am not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has a CSID.  I have therefore gone  on  to  consider
             whether he could obtain one reasonably soon after  arrival  in
             Iraq as required under paragraph 11 of AA.

         54.  Paragraphs 12 and 13 of  AA  provide  that  "where  return  is
             feasible but  [the  appellant]  does  not  have  a  CSID  [the
             appellant] should as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one
             from  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office   for   [his]   home
             Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether  current  or
             expired)" ... [the appellant's] ability to obtain  a  CSID  is
             likely to be severely hampered if [he] is unable to go to  the
             Civil Status Affairs Office of [his] Governorate because it is
             in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.   As
             a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices  for  Mosul,
             Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in  Baghdad  and
             Kerbala.  The evidence does not demonstrate that the  "Central
             Archive", which exists in Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
             provide CSIDs to those in need of them.  There  is  however  a
             National Status Court in  Baghdad  to  which  [the  Appellant]
             could apply for formal recognition of identity.   The  precise
             operation of this court is, however, unclear".

         55.  The appellant is from an Article 15(c)  area.   Following  AA,
             any attempt to  obtain  a  CSID  in  Iraq  would  be  severely
             hampered by that and I find that there is a real risk he could
             not obtain one reasonably soon after arrival.

         56.  At paragraph 203 of AA, the Tribunal concluded  that  although
             generally relocation to Baghdad is not unreasonable or  unduly
             harsh, where a person does not have family or other support in
             Baghdad; does not  have  a  CSID  and  could  not  obtain  one
             reasonably soon after arrival then it  would  be  unreasonable
             and unduly harsh to expect that person to relocate.

         57.  I find that those circumstances apply in this case.   Although
             AA does envisage a scenario where  an  appellant  is  able  to
             support themselves without connections in Baghdad and  without
             a CSID, I am not satisfied that the  Appellant  in  this  case
             would be able to do so given his evidence in  respect  of  his
             financial difficulties.  I note  in  particular  his  evidence
             that his assets in Tikrit are frozen.  Mr Malarkey  says  that
             he could get a job given his  qualifications.   However,  this
             would be difficult without a CSID.

         58.  In conclusion, I find that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
             Appellant to be returned to Baghdad until  either  a  CSID  is
             obtained or it  is  demonstrable  that  he  could  obtain  one
             reasonably soon after arrival.  I have taken into  account  in
             reaching this decision that without  a  CSID  the  Appellant's
             access to medical services could be restricted and  he  is  in
             receipt of ongoing medical treatment."

61. I am unable to find an error based on Mr Sinker's submission  that  the
    Appellant may well have a CSID.  It is quite clear that the  Judge  has
    considered that but was unable to take the matter any  further  because
    neither side could produce the document.  It appears that the  document
    is held by the Respondent and it was for the Respondent  to  produce  a
    copy if that was relied upon.

62. However, I am satisfied that there is an error in the  Judge's  failure
    to have regard to the totality of  the  guidance  about  CSIDs  in  AA.
    Whilst I accept that there may remain some difficulties in the  way  of
    this Appellant, in particular based on what is said about the  need  to
    provide the page and book number for family  registration  details,  it
    does appear from [177] of AA that this is an alternative to  having  an
    expired passport.  On the face of  what  is  said  in  AA  the  expired
    passport ought to be sufficient.  At the very least  it  was  necessary
    for the Judge to refer to that part of the  guidance  when  considering
    whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad.

63. I have considered carefully whether it could be said that the error  is
    not  material  because  of  the  other  difficulties  standing  in  the
    Appellant's way.  It did not seem to me from  Mr  Sinker's  submissions
    however that this was the basis on which he sought to persuade me  that
    the error was not material.  Mr Sinker did urge me however, if I  found
    an error of law, to preserve the  findings  set  out  at  [49]  of  the
    Decision.  Those are not challenged in the Respondent's grounds and Mrs
    Aboni did not dispute that that was the appropriate course.

64. Both representatives agreed that if I found a material error of  law  I
    could  remake  the  decision  following  further  submissions  and   if
    necessary evidence.   In  that  regard  Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  the
    Respondent  should  check  the  identity  documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant to see whether there is in fact a CSID which  would  put  the
    matter beyond doubt and if not what details are given  in  the  expired
    passport.


Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that the  Decision  contains  a  material  error  of  law  in
relation to the Judge's findings at [50] to [58].  I set aside that part  of
the Decision.  The remainder of the Decision stands.  I make  the  following
directions in relation to the remaking of the decision so  far  as  concerns
the issues which remain:-

 1) Within 28 days from the date when this decision is sent, the Respondent
    is to file with the Tribunal and serve  on  the  Appellant  a  position
    statement setting  out  what  evidence  is  held  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's identity and annexing copies of those identity documents.


 2) By the same date she is also required to set  out  her  submissions  in
    relation to AA and whether (if the Appellant does not already have one)
    a CSID could be obtained in the UK or shortly following return to Iraq.
     Those should include also her submissions regarding whether  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

 3) By the same date the Respondent shall indicate whether she  requires  a
    further hearing prior to the remaking of the decision.

 4) Within 28 days  from  service  of  the  Respondent's  submissions,  the
    Appellant shall file with the Tribunal  and  serve  on  the  Respondent
    submissions and any further evidence  dealing  with  any  documentation
    produced by the Respondent and the question of whether, if he does  not
    have a CSID, he could obtain one in the UK or shortly following  return
    to Iraq and whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  him  to  return  to
    Baghdad.


 5) By the same date the Appellant shall indicate whether  he  requires  an
    oral hearing prior to remaking of the decision.

 6) If neither party requests an oral hearing  by  the  dates  stated,  the
    Tribunal will proceed to remake  the  decision  based  on  the  written
    submissions and any further evidence without an oral hearing.



Signed   [pic]    Dated:  6 February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


