

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01261/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 July 2019                      |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  HIRUL [H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M. Hashim instructed by MBM Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  14  January
    2019 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge K. Swinnerton ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds. Having heard from the appellant and her
    partner, he did not  accept  that  they  produced  sufficient  reliable
    evidence  to  be  satisfied  that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting. In his reasoning, he pointed out a number of  discrepancies
    between the evidence given by the appellant and her partner.

3.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. Rule 40(3) provides exceptions to the rule if the decision
    is made with the consent of the parties or the parties  have  consented
    to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.  In  this  case  both
    parties consented to the decision at the hearing so it is not necessary
    to give detailed reasons.

4.    In summary, the judge  referred  in  general  terms  to  the  evidence
    contained in the  appellant's  bundle,  which  included  a  psychiatric
    report diagnosing the appellant  with  Post-traumatic  Stress  Disorder
    (PTSD) and medical correspondence relating to fertility treatment, both
    of which mentioned her partner. Although he referred to the evidence in
    the appellant's bundle at [17] it was agreed that the judge  failed  to
    conduct an evaluative assessment of the evidence, which was relevant to
    a proper assessment of the appellant's ability to give evidence and was
    capable of supporting her claim to  be  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

5.    At the hearing, some discussion ensued as  to  whether  the  error  in
    assessing the genuine nature of the  relationship  was  material  given
    that the evidence, even if taken at its highest, had not been  prepared
    in a way that would address all the relevant legal issues. For example,
    despite  the  fact  that  she  was  legally  represented,  the  witness
    statements were inadequate and failed to deal with the central issue of
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  continuing
    their family life outside the UK. Mr Tufan recognised that it would  be
    important to have a proper finding on the nature  of  the  relationship
    even if the outcome might not have been any different because it  might
    affect future applications for entry clearance or leave to remain.

6.    In addition, Mr Hashim expressed concerns  about  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's protection claim was not  advanced  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal even though relevant documents, including an  arrest  warrant,
    were prepared in support of the appeal.  After  consultation  with  his
    client  in  conference  he  took  a  different  view  to  counsel   who
    represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Although
    the appellant has had more than sufficient  time  to  put  forward  her
    protection claim, and it was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal,
    I reluctantly agreed that it was appropriate to remit the matter to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. Given the  importance  of  the
    issues involved in a protection claim, and the relevance that it  might
    have to whether there are  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  the  couple
    continuing their family life outside the UK for the purpose of  Article
    8, it is not appropriate to make findings relating  to  the  protection
    claim for the first time in the Upper Tribunal. However, the  appellant
    should be aware that the best evidence should be produced in support of
    the protection and human rights  claims  in  good  time  for  the  next
    hearing.  If, after this, the appellant does not advance the protection
    claim, the Tribunal may draw an appropriate inference from the fact and
    take it into account in assessing her overall credibility.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a
    point of law. The decision is set aside and is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Signed   [pic]   Date 24 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








