
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 December 2020                          |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     s k
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to a Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  18
    September 2015 refusing an application for further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom which incorporated an asylum claim.

2.   His appeal against that decision was dismissed by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal, but subsequently in a  decision  dated  21  August  2019
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan found a material error of law in the
    First-tier Judge's decision with regard to risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return in his home area, Nangarhar Province and with regard to internal
    relocation.

3.   Deputy Judge Jordan dismissed the  challenge  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's Judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility,  however.
    The First-tier Judge had accepted that the appellant had  a  degree  of
    depression, low mood and anxiety, based on a report of a  Dr  Bargiela,
    but did not accept that criterion B for a diagnosis  of  PTSD  existed.
    The judge also found that the appellant had not taken or  attempted  to
    take any steps to contact his family members in Afghanistan.  This  was
    on the basis that the judge found he did not need to do so  because  he
    had contact with or the ability to contact family members at will.   He
    made this finding on the basis that the appellant's cousin Mr Jabarkhyl
    had said in re-examination when asked whether if the appellant  arrived
    at Kabul Airport his father and/or brothers would collect him  that  of
    course they would do so because he was a relative and they would  treat
    him as a guest for a day or two.

4.   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  stated  at  paragraph  25  of  his
    decision that he was firmly  of  the  view  that  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Jabarkhyl was an expressed and unequivocal rejection of the appellant's
    claim that the appellant had no family or other  support  available  to
    him on return to Afghanistan.  He did not accept  that  the  judge  had
    made adverse credibility findings against the appellant simply  because
    he rejected his own evidence.  He had also relied upon the fact that an
    earlier judge had rejected the appellant's account  of  this  important
    element of the claim.  That finding had  not  been  the  subject  of  a
    successful appeal and  as  Judge  Jordan  put  it,  on  any  view  that
    conclusion was the starting point (if no more).   The  judge  had  also
    considered the appellant's vulnerability in coming to  his  credibility
    findings.  He noted also that the judge had made copious references  to
    Dr Bargiela's opinion.  He had not disputed the finding  of  depression
    but pointed out that her use of the diagnostic criteria were based on a
    misconception of  the  appellant's  circumstances,  given  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant would be able to contact family  members  on
    return to Afghanistan.

5.   There was subsequently  a  directions  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Blum, the matter having been delayed to await the promulgation of
    the country guidance decision in AS [2020] UKUT 00130  (IAC).   It  was
    accepted that further medical evidence was likely to be relevant to the
    issue of internal relocation and  also  though  the  challenge  to  the
    finding that the appellant had family support mechanisms  available  to
    him had been rejected,  a  further  year  had  passed  and  Judge  Blum
    considered that fairness was likely to  require  the  appellant  to  be
    given an opportunity  to  adduce  any  new  evidence  relating  to  the
    continued existence of family support mechanisms.

6.   On that basis the appeal came before me.

7.   The only oral evidence was from the appellant's  cousin  Mr  Jabarkhyl.
    He provided a further statement.  He relied on it as being true to  the
    best of his knowledge and belief.  He  made  one  correction.   In  his
    statement it said that he had travelled to Afghanistan on  23  February
    2020 following the sad news that his parents had passed away.  In  fact
    they had been ill when he travelled to Afghanistan.  He had been taking
    care of them as he was the oldest son.  His  father  had  had  a  heart
    attack and his mother was fine at the time.  His father  had  gradually
    recovered and then suffered from COVID-19 as did the  witness  and  his
    mother.  They were in the hospital.  After  another  heart  attack  his
    father died and his mother died a few weeks later.

8.   The  fresh  evidence  put  in  included  photographs  of  his  father's
    funeral.  As regards his remaining family in  Afghanistan,  his  sister
    now also lived in the United Kingdom.  His parents, as recorded  above,
    had died, and his younger brother was also in the United Kingdom.

9.   He was asked who therefore was in Afghanistan and said just an aunt  of
    his and she lived in Pakistan.  Also there was  a  paternal  uncle  who
    lived in Pakistan but nobody lived in Afghanistan  except  two  of  his
    brothers who he said were in France.  Their wives and children were  in
    Afghanistan, in Jalalabad.

10.  He was asked whether if the appellant was sent back to Afghanistan  his
    sisters-in-law could help him and he said that based  on  the  cultural
    norms they could not unless the woman  was  related  to  you.   He  was
    related to his brother's wife but the appellant was not so related.

11.  When cross-examined by Mr Tufan he said that his mother had  also  died
    when he was in Afghanistan.  He agreed that someone else had taken  the
    photographs put in of his father's funeral but there were none for  his
    mother.  A friend had sent them to him.  You did not  take  photographs
    when your father died.  He was asked whether he was in the  photographs
    and he looked at them and identified himself in the photograph  in  the
    bundle at page 30.

12.  He was asked whether there was any documentation otherwise  to  confirm
    that his parents had died and he  said  that  there  was  none  at  the
    moment.

13.  He had claimed asylum when he came to the United  Kingdom  and  he  had
    been  refused  but  was  granted  exceptional  leave  to   remain   and
    subsequently indefinite leave to  remain.   It  was  put  to  him  that
    despite his asserted fear in respect of living in  Afghanistan  he  had
    been back several times, in 2020 and also in 2018.  He had gone back in
    2018 for 45 days. At home he spoke Pashto and the appellant  did  also.
    He was asked whether the appellant spoke any other  language  and  said
    that he himself knew Farsi as well but  not  the  appellant.   He,  the
    witness, also spoke Urdu.

14.  There was no re-examination.

15.  In his submissions Mr Tufan identified the two issues which were:  risk
    to the appellant in his home area which was Nangahar  Province  and  if
    not whether it would be reasonable for him to relocate to Kabul.

16.  It seemed from the most country guidance decision in AS and the  latest
    background evidence that there  appeared  to  be  a  higher  number  of
    casualties in Nangahar than  in  Kabul.   The  figures  suggested  that
    twelve and a half times more people were casualties  there.   The  EASO
    Report cited in the CPIN suggested that there would be an Article 15(c)
    violation in the case of a person returned to Nangarhar.  This was just
    one piece of background evidence and it was argued that the figures did
    not show Article 15(c) risk in Nangarhar.

17.  The country guidance case referred to Nangahar  at  paragraphs  94  and
    95.  There were also references at paragraphs 105 and 106  showing  the
    top destinations for returnees in Nangahar and Kabul.  They had a third
    of all returnees of  the  total.   Mr  Tufan  also  drew  attention  to
    paragraph 115 which  referred  to  the  high  number  of  returnees  to
    Nangahar as 798,000.  He argued that  therefore  despite  the  asserted
    risks, a large number of Afghans were returning to Nangahar.  It  could
    be seen from paragraph 115 that Nangahar hosted 50% of  all  returnees.
    The annex at paragraph 52 showed the figure with  regard  to  Kabul  as
    0.22 casualties per 100,000, and 0.5 in Nangahar.  As a consequence  it
    was argued that the appellant could return  to  Nangahar  as  had  been
    found by the previous Tribunal.  He would have family support.

18.  With regard to the witness statement, the appellant's cousins'  parents
    were said to have died.  The Tribunal  was  asked  to  find  this  late
    evidence not to be credible.  The appellant's cousin claimed to be  the
    eldest son, but in the photograph where he identified  himself  he  was
    not carrying the coffin.  The only identification of him was at page 30
    and it was a distant figure and the face could not be said to represent
    the witness.  There was therefore no documentary  evidence  to  suggest
    that the deaths had occurred.

19.  If this evidence were true, you would think there would be  documentary
    evidence and witness statements would have been  obtained.   No  weight
    should be given to this.

20.  If the Tribunal disagreed then  the  appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Kabul.  According to the latest country guidance  Kabul  was  safe  and
    reasonable for relocation and the  only  proviso  was  the  appellant's
    mental health condition and the only reason he could be said not to  be
    able to go back.

21.  There were two medical reports.  In  her  report  Dr  Bargiela  clearly
    stated at page 38, paragraph 72 that the appellant  did  not  meet  the
    full criteria for PTSD.  The psychologist had met the appellant face to
    face so she could observe him.

22.  From the latest report,  which  was  done  on  the  basis  of  a  video
    examination, again it was not a psychiatrist  but  a  psychologist  who
    provided the report, there was an oddity at paragraph 30  referring  to
    an English Farsi interpreter whereas it was clear  that  the  appellant
    spoke Pashto only, as confirmed by his cousin  today.   It  was  rather
    curious as to whether the appellant had completely understood what  was
    said and could  meaningfully  engage.   It  was  not  a  face  to  face
    interview but it had been concluded that he suffered from PTSD  and  it
    was unclear why.  It was her personal opinion, for example at paragraph
    64.  There was no background evidence or academic  footnotes  provided.
    Paragraph 78 referred to the appellant's depression.  Paragraphs 77 and
    88 had no academic footnotes to support what was  said  but  were  just
    based on what the appellant had told her.  Paragraph 93 referred to the
    cause.  The appellant had been found not  to  be  credible  by  earlier
    First-tier Judges.  The findings at paragraph 94 to 97  suggested  that
    the depression was largely caused by his asylum claim.   There  was  no
    finding of self-harm previously and it was said at paragraph 102 to  be
    low risk.  Paragraph 109 was rather curious and it was unclear why this
    was said.  Paragraph 113 contained matters outside her  limits.   As  a
    consequence it was argued that the earlier psychologist's findings that
    the appellant did not suffer from PTSD stood.  He had depression.   The
    decision in HA still applied and referred to mental health issues.   At
    paragraph 20 it was said that around 60% of the Afghan  population  had
    mental health problems.

23.  Mr Tufan referred also to the latest CPIN of December  2020  concerning
    medical and healthcare provision in Afghanistan.  Section 12  addressed
    mental health issues in Afghanistan.  He relied on  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 12.1.1.  There was treatment available in  Kabul  for  mental
    health patients and it was affordable.  AK  considered  the  matter  in
    some detail at paragraph 212 to  224  as  to  what  awaited  those  who
    returned.  Paragraph 224 was concerned with the available assistance to
    returnees and paragraph 225 was concerned with mental  health  matters.
    The latest country guidance did not appear to say otherwise.  It  would
    therefore be reasonable for the appellant to  relocate  to  Kabul.   He
    would have access to family support as his cousin had previously  said.
    The appeal should be dismissed.

24.  In his submissions Mr Spurling relied on the  points  set  out  in  his
    skeleton argument and in his submissions addressed  the  arguments  put
    forward by  Mr  Tufan.   He  agreed  that  they  were  the  two  issues
    identified.

25.  With regard to the issue of risk in the home area, there was  the  CPIN
    and the 2020 country guidance case which, as Mr Tufan accepted,  showed
    two and a half times the level of casualties in Nangahar in  comparison
    to Kabul.  The evidence as set out in the skeleton showed from the CPIN
    and the EASO Report that there was a change in the situation and a  lot
    of violence in 2018 to 2019.  The government had  got  the  upper  hand
    during 2019.  There was the reference in the EASO Report, pages 10  and
    11, as referred to in the skeleton at paragraph 23.   Hesarak  was  the
    appellant's home area and reference to that was made at paragraph 24 of
    the skeleton.  It showed that Nangahar was very much still an  actively
    contested area.

26.  Mr Spurling referred to Mr Jabarkhyl's evidence  as  to  the  situation
    when he was in Nangahar and that was consistent with the  EASO  Report.
    It was necessary to take into account the level  of  violence  and  the
    fact that it was a contested area and the volatility was important  and
    there was also Dr Giustozzi's report at page 65 paragraph 6 as  to  the
    situation in 2018.  Page 66 brought  the  matter  more  up-to-date  but
    paragraph 7 was important also.  There was risk in the local  area  and
    the appellant would stand out if he  settled  in  a  rural  area.   The
    authority of Januzi of [2006] UKHL 5 was of clear relevance.

27.  With regard to Article 15(c) risk and the circumstances  in  particular
    of the appellant, the question was not just of numbers per  100,000  of
    wounded or killed but regard to the insecurity in the area  in  general
    was of relevance.  There was a general state of chaos when added to the
    casualty rate which was relevant with regard to the safety of the area.
     It seemed on the evidence to be currently the most dangerous  area  in
    Afghanistan.  This was also  the  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi.   Health
    centres had been closed down and the appellant had no  news  of  family
    members there for years, and would be without local connections to help
    out.  The Article 15(c) threshold was therefore crossed.  The views  of
    EASO did not bind the Tribunal but had to be taken  into  consideration
    as respectable sources of information including being  referred  to  by
    the Secretary of State in the CPIN and this added to its weight and was
    persuasive.  The home area was  too  dangerous  for  the  appellant  to
    return to.

28.  With regard to Mr Tufan's reference to paragraphs 106 and  115  in  the
    latest country guidance case, and the significant numbers of  returnees
    to Nangahar, in any situation where a lot of  people  fled  and  a  lot
    returned this would increase volatility and also we did  not  know  why
    they returned and it did not mean it was because it was safe but  could
    be because there was nowhere else  to  go  and  no  other  option.   Mr
    Spurling referred to the source at paragraph 106(c) in the 2018  report
    which covered the figures since 2002 and told  one  nothing  about  the
    peaks and troughs of the flow of returnees.  It was unclear whether  it
    was a steady rate or a lot earlier and few later and little  assistance
    could be derived from that.   The  same  point  could  be  observed  at
    paragraph 115, but with regard to 2012 to 2018 it was again  a  lengthy
    period.  So it did not take one very far.

29.  With regard to return to Kabul, in essence the  country  guidance  case
    in 2020 reiterated the analysis from 2018 and updated  it  and  it  was
    essentially the same.   It  was  necessary  to  assess  the  particular
    vulnerabilities of the person.  Generally return would  be  reasonable.
    Mr Spurling referred to paragraph 27 of his skeleton and  the  findings
    in the country guidance case set out there.   The  appellant  had  left
    Afghanistan at the age of 14 and was now 22.  He spoke Pashto  and  was
    familiar with elements of the culture but had  never  lived  in  Kabul.
    There was a contrast between coping in a village in Nangahar and living
    in Harrow in the United Kingdom and this did not set down a  sufficient
    foundation for effective coping in Kabul  when  he  had  mental  health
    difficulties.  It was not suggested that he had connections  to  Kabul,
    although he was said to have connections in Afghanistan.  The  Tribunal
    had heard Mr Jabarkhyl's evidence.  It was quite  detailed  information
    and credible and there was no supporting documentary evidence,  it  was
    true, but Nangahar was chaotic and difficult along  with  the  COVID-19
    difficulties also, so it was not surprising.  The  guidance  in  Kasolo
    was relevant.  The Tribunal should find that to the  relevant  standard
    the evidence was credible as Mr Jabarkhyl said  that  there  were  only
    wives and children  of  his  brothers  who  were  in  France  who  were
    remaining in Nangahar.  They were in Jalalabad and not Kabul.  Also  as
    they were women there were the cultural complications that that brought
    and they were not directly related to the appellant and had  their  own
    children to care for.

30.  It would be all right if the appellant was a single, healthy  male  but
    the medical evidence was important.  As  regards  what  Mr  Tufan  said
    about the latest report and the appellant being said to have spoken  in
    Farsi, Mr Spurling did not know about that.  He did not know  what  the
    situation  was  but  the  expert  should  not  be  seen  to  be  trying
    intentionally to mislead.  In all likelihood it was just  a  slip.   It
    was clear from the rest of the report that there was  no  reference  to
    difficulties in communication or understanding and she would have  said
    so if that had been the case.  The appellant had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2012 so he could express himself in English.   It  was  a
    point to note but not significant as undermining the expert.

31.  Mr Tufan had cast doubt on the diagnosis of PTSD  in  contrast  to  the
    earlier report, but the time between the two should be  borne  in  mind
    and there could be a variation in intensity, but more, the  expert  had
    said why she  came  to  a  different  conclusion.   Her  findings  were
    summarised in detail at paragraph 8 of the  skeleton.   She  had  noted
    differences and had also explained why.  She diagnosed PTSD rather than
    depression.  She had gone into this in some  detail  engaged  with  the
    differences of view.  As regards Mr Tufan's point about  paragraph  109
    and the lack of explanation  there  was  and  that  could  be  seen  at
    paragraph  108.   Also  there  was  a  link  between  the   appellant's
    conditions as clearly set out.  It should  be  found  that  the  second
    report was more  reliable  than  the  first.   The  evidence  had  been
    carefully assessed and fabrication had been considered.

32.  As regards available  treatment  in  Kabul,  Mr  Spurling  referred  to
    paragraph 14 of his skeleton, again quoting  from  the  expert  report.
    The real difficulty was as set out at  paragraph  126  of  the  report.
    This should  be  added  to  what  Dr  Giustozzi  said  about  obtaining
    accommodation and work in Kabul.  Mr Tufan  had  made  the  point  that
    there was evidence that 60% of the population of Afghanistan had mental
    health problems  but that did not help the Secretary  of  State's  case
    and made it more difficult for the appellant to fit  in  and  establish
    himself.  The question was of the impact  on  his  life  and  available
    assistance.  With  regard  to  the  CPIN  at  section  12  it  did  not
    significantly change the situation from the  two  AS  country  guidance
    cases.  It was the case that there were some counsellors  and  the  WHO
    evidence and the appellant did not currently need in-patient  treatment
    but with his current vulnerabilities and the lack of available  support
    this would accelerate  his  condition  and  there  was  little  medical
    support in Kabul or in Afghanistan generally.   The  evidence  did  not
    show  he  would  get  the  support  he  needed.   In   his   particular
    circumstances, going from his cousin's family to Kabul, and bearing  in
    mind the changes in the evidence since the judge's decision, relocation
    to Kabul would not be reasonable.  The appeal should be allowed.

33.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

34.  As set out  above,  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Judge  that  the
    appellant has family members available to meet him on return  at  Kabul
    was found not to be legally flawed.  Specifically it was said by Deputy
    Judge Jordan that the finding that the  appellant  has  family  support
    mechanisms available to him and would be collected at Kabul Airport was
    a sustainable finding of fact.

35.  The most recent evidence of Mr Jabarkhyl is that his mother and  father
    both died during his recent visit to Afghanistan between  February  and
    June 2020 and the only relatives left in Pakistan are his own  sisters-
    in-law with their children who would not be able to offer the appellant
    support.   In  support  of  his  claim  that  his  parents  have   died
    photographs have been provided which purport to show him attending  his
    father's funeral.  He says in his witness statement that  unfortunately
    due to the  infrastructure  in  Afghanistan  deaths  are  not  normally
    registered.

36.  I do not find this evidence to be  credible.   It  is  clear  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he found significance in
    the evidence given by  Mr  Jabarkhyl  as  to  the  reception  that  the
    appellant would obtain on return to Afghanistan.   The  photographs  of
    the funeral could be of any funeral and the  person  identified  by  Mr
    Jabarkhyl as himself is completely  unidentifiable  as  him  or  indeed
    anybody in particular.  There is no  supporting  evidence  provided  to
    attest to the two deaths.  Even bearing in mind the lower  standard  of
    proof applicable in asylum cases, I do not consider it has  been  shown
    to that standard that Mr Jabarkhyl's parents have died and  that  there
    is no-one to provide family support to the appellant on his  return  to
    Afghanistan and in particular to meet him at the airport at Kabul.

37.  I bear my findings in this regard in mind and my assessment of the  two
    issues in this case, that of the real risk of Article 15(c) breach  for
    the appellant on return to his home area in Nangahar Province  and  the
    second issue being, if I accept that there is such a risk,  whether  he
    can reasonably be expected to relocate to Kabul.

38.  Though the focus in AS [2020] UKUT 00130  (IAC)  was  on  Kabul  as  an
    internal relocation alternative, there is, as both representatives have
    addressed, evidence considered there which is relevant to  other  parts
    of the country and in  particular  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal
    Nangahar.  Thus it is noted at paragraph 94 in AS  that  the  total  of
    casualties in Nangahar  recorded  in  the  SIGAR  report  is  0.81  per
    thousand and there were 1,517 casualties, only slightly less  than  the
    figure for Kabul which is twice as large  as  Nangahar.   It  was  also
    noted from the UNAMA figures, extracted from the  2019  EASO  guidance,
    that the casualty rate for  Nangahar  for  2018  was  111  per  100,000
    inhabitants and in contrast to 38 per 100,000 inhabitants in Kabul.

39.  Also quoted is the IOM Community-Based Needs Assessment of May to  June
    2018 recording that the proportion of the population affected by safety
    and security in the last three months in Nangahar was 15%,  the  second
    highest, and that the number of fatalities  and  injuries  due  to  the
    conflict in the previous three  months  showed  1,579  in  Nangahar  as
    opposed to 604 in Kunduz and 151 in Kabul.

40.  It would appear from the evidence  addressed  in  AK  [2012]  UKUT  163
    (IAC) that there has been  a  significant  worsening  in  the  security
    situation in Nangahar since that time.  Nangarhar is referred to  there
    simply as one of a number of provinces and there were  significant  low
    fluctuating levels of violence.

41.  It is also relevant  to  note  in  the  May  2020  CPIN:  "Afghanistan:
    Security and Humanitarian Situation" that in  comparison  to  2017,  in
    2018 Kabul saw a 2% increase in civilian casualties, whereas there  was
    a 111% increase in Nangarhar.  The Islamic State in  Khorasan  Province
    (ISKP) was primarily active in the provinces of  Kunar  and  Nangarhar.
    It was one of four provinces cited in the UN Secretary General's Eighth
    Report of February 2019 as one of the  areas  of  ISIL  strongholds  in
    Afghanistan.  In the EASO country guidance for Afghanistan it  is  said
    that Nangarhar was the only area of the map marked  as  "mere  presence
    would be considered sufficient in order to establish  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm under Article 15(c) QD".  It is  also  said  in  the  EASO
    Country of Origin Information Report Afghanistan Security Situation, of
    September 2020, that UNAMA  documented  1,070  civilian  casualties  in
    Nangarhar in 2019, and it was said that  although  this  represented  a
    decrease of 41% compared to 2018, the province ranked  second  only  to
    Kabul in this regard.  Whilst as regards the position between 1 January
    and 30 June 2020, Nangarhar ranked third with 281 casualties,  Resolute
    Support recorded between 101 and 125 civilian casualties  in  Nangarhar
    in the first quarter of 2020 and in the  second  quarter  it  indicated
    Nangarhar as the  province  that  experienced  the  highest  number  of
    civilian casualties countrywide with 259 civilian casualties  recorded,
    this representing a 236% increase compared  to  the  previous  quarter.
    Nangarhar was listed as one of the most active areas of conflict by the
    UN secretary general in September 2019  and  March  2020  reports.   In
    January 2020 it was reported that the Taliban  had  closed  all  health
    centres in a number of parts of Nangarhar, including Hesarak  which  is
    the appellant's home.

42.  As against this Mr Tufan makes the point that  there  were  significant
    numbers of returnees to Nangarhar although Mr Spurling  countered  this
    with the point that it is not known why these people  returned  and  it
    may simply be that they could not settle elsewhere.  I take the  point,
    which is not without relevance, though in the absence of evidence as to
    why people returned it is not  in  my  view  a  matter  of  significant
    weight.

43.  The appellant if he  returned  to  Nangarhar  would  therefore  find  a
    situation where there has been an increase in violence since  2019,  on
    the basis of the figures set out above. I bear in mind  the  views,  in
    particular of EASO as  to  the  situation  and  Article  15  (c).   The
    population of Nangarhar is as set out in the Special Inspector  General
    for Afghanistan and Reconstruction (SIGAR) Reports is  1,864,582.   The
    number of 1,070 civilian casualties documented for 2019 was a  decrease
    of 41% compared to 2018.  In 2020 it would appear that there  were  281
    casualties in the first  six  months  of  2020.   No  doubt  these  are
    significant figures, but in my view the situation  is not such, bearing
    in mind the proportion those figures  bear to  the  overall  population
    number the background evidence set out above and the  general  security
    situation,  as to show real risk of  an Article 15(c)  breach.   In  my
    view the appellant would not face conditions amounting  to  an  Article
    15(c) breach on return to Nangarhar, and he would have the  support  of
    family members as I have set out above.

44.  However it is necessary for me to consider what the position  would  be
    for the appellant in Kabul if I am wrong in the above findings.

45.  In the guidance in AS it was said, at paragraph 230,  that  it  is  not
    generally unsafe or unreasonable for a single healthy man to internally
    relocate to Kabul.  The Tribunal however emphasised that a case by case
    consideration of  whether  internal  relocation  is  reasonable  for  a
    particular person  is  required  by  Article  8  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and domestic  authorities,  including  Januzi  and  AH  Sudan
    [2007] UKHL 49.  The relevant factors to be considered include;

    (i)  age, including  the  age  at  which  a  person  left  Afghanistan;




    (ii) nature and quality of connections  to  Kabul  and/or  Afghanistan;




    (iii)    physical and mental health;


    (iv) language, education and vocation and skills.

46.  As regards the first of these,  the  appellant  was  14  when  he  left
    Afghanistan and is now 22.  During his years up  to  departure  he  can
    reasonably be assumed to be a person who was fully immersed  in  Afghan
    culture, although inevitably that will have  diminished  to  an  extent
    since coming to the United Kingdom, though he has been living with  his
    cousin and his family which again it is reasonable to assume will  have
    maintained those cultural links.

47.  As regards the nature and quality of his connections  to  Kabul  and/or
    Afghanistan, it has not been suggested  he  has  any  links  to  Kabul.
    However he does have the family links as set  out  above  in  his  home
    area, including the finding that he would be met on arrival in Kabul.

48.  The third issue is that of his physical and mental health.   There  was
    before the judge and also before me a report from Dr Bargiela who is  a
    chartered clinical psychologist who had prepared a report on  6  August
    2018.   Her  assessment  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  was,  not
    surprisingly, predicated upon instructions that the appellant's account
    was truthful and in particular that there were  no  support  mechanisms
    available to him to  overcome  a  hostile  environment  in  Kabul.   He
    expressly told her that he feared what might happen if the Taliban knew
    he was coming and that he would be accused of  being  a  spy  and  thus
    putting his life at risk.

49.  In the body of her report Dr Bargiela  stated  the  appellant  met  the
    criteria for a diagnosis of major depressive disorder.  As was observed
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan, her  assessment  of  the  effect
    upon the appellant of his return to Afghanistan was predicated  on  his
    being separated from his cousin in the United Kingdom in the absence of
    family support networks in Afghanistan.  As a consequence  her  summary
    at paragraphs 91 to 93 was based  upon  a  misconception  of  his  true
    circumstances.  She was not asked whether  his  depression  might  have
    been related to another cause,  for  example  the  uncertainty  of  his
    immigration status, his expressed wish to remain in the United Kingdom,
    the failure of his previous attempts to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
    the length of the legal process in which he had been involved and  that
    he had been found not to have told the truth.

50.  There is now a report of Dr Sarah Whittaker-Howe dated 7 October  2020,
    who saw the appellant via video link on 11 August 2020.

51.  I should say in passing that I attach no weight to the  fact  that  her
    report records that the appellant was assisted by a Farsi  interpreter.
    It is clear from the evidence that he does not speak Farsi,  and  there
    would have been clear issues of misunderstanding  had  the  interpreter
    been a Farsi interpreter and accordingly I agree with Mr Spurling  that
    this is probably best regarded as simply a typographical error.

52.  Dr Whittaker-Howe diagnosed the appellant as suffering from  PTSD  that
    was "moderate in severity".  She had noted that she  differed  slightly
    from  Dr  Bargiela  in  the  attribution  of  particular  symptoms   to
    particular diagnoses, observing however that it could be  difficult  to
    determine how symptoms fit together when there is a comorbid  diagnosis
    of PTSD and depression.  She also diagnosed a major depressive disorder
    that was "moderate in severity".

53.  I see no reason not to accept the diagnosis of Dr Whittaker-Howe  whose
    report is clearly careful, thorough and took into account the  previous
    report of Dr Bargiela.  She concluded that his depression was  "largely
    caused by his asylum case" but also noted that many of his symptoms  of
    PTSD and depression overlapped which both  exacerbated  and  maintained
    each diagnosis.  She considered that the separation of his family would
    be a significant  and  distressing  loss  which  would  result  in  his
    depression  being  more  severe  compared  to  now.   A  diagnosis   of
    depression and PTSD would make it more difficult for him to obtain work
    and safe accommodation and  form  relationships,  compared  to  someone
    without those diagnoses.  PTSD would result in him  overestimating  the
    risk of situations and reduce his ability to cope  with  the  risks  of
    living in Afghanistan and his depression resulted in reduced energy and
    motivation which made it more difficult compared to others to  function
    day-to-day.  Her opinion overall was that he would need to be supported
    to find accommodation and seek employment.

54.  As regards available facilities for  a  person  suffering  from  mental
    health problems in Afghanistan, the Tribunal in  AS  set  out  in  some
    detail evidence of Dr Ahmad, a lecturer in global health at St George's
    University in London.  Mr Tufan made the point that the evidence  shows
    that  some  60%  of  people  suffer  from  mental  health  problems  in
    Afghanistan, against which Mr Spurling argued that hardly assisted  the
    Secretary of  State's  case.   It  is  however  a  factor  not  without
    relevance in assessment of the situation for the appellant as  a  whole
    since the evidence does not show a similar proportion of people  simply
    being unable to cope in Kabul.

55.  Bringing these matters together, I accept  the  medical  evidence  that
    has been provided on behalf of the appellant and this must be  factored
    into his ability to relocate in Kabul.  He has mental  health  problems
    but at the same time he has support in the form  of  family  who  would
    meet him in Kabul,  which  is  of  relevance  to  the  findings  of  Dr
    Whittaker-Howe, and, though there is no evidence to show that there are
    other family members in Kabul, the existence of family to  support  him
    must in my view be a material factor.

56.  As regards the final factor, that of language, education  and  vocation
    and skills, the appellant speaks Pashtu and has had some  education  in
    the United Kingdom.  He has skills which could stand him in good stead.



57.  Bringing all these matters together, I consider it is not  unreasonable
    for the appellant to relocate in Kabul bearing  in  mind  his  personal
    situation and the general  situation  there.   As  a  consequence  this
    appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 22 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

