
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01700/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |            Decision Promulgated   |
|On 4 May 2017                      |            On 16 May 2017         |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               MOFTAH MEHEMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr A Devlin (counsel) Quinn Martin & Langan,
solicitors
For the Respondent:       Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on 1  December  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

3. The Appellant was born on 02/09/1970 and is a national of Libya.

4. On 11 February 2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.
The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Gillespie ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 27 March 2017 Upper  Tribunal
Judge Pitt gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

       It is arguable that the expert report of Dr George did comment on the
      likelihood of the incident involving the threat  from  a  student  and
      possibility of searches at Tripoli airport  and  that  those  comments
      could have made a material difference to the  credibility  assessment.
      The grounds concerning the existence of the college  have  less  force
      but remain arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Devlin counsel for the appellant moved the grounds of  appeal.  He
told me that the Judge gave three reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant
was not a credible witness, and that those reasons can be found at  [29]  to
[31] of the decision.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  considered  that  the
appellant  failed  to  prove  the  existence  of  his  employer,  that   the
appellant's credibility was adversely  affected  because  he  destroyed  his
documents at Tripoli airport, and that the appellant's  claim  to  fear  one
alleged agent of persecution did not stand up to scrutiny.

(b) Mr Devlin took me to [24] of the decision,  where  the  Judge  discusses
two copy documents produced by the appellant. The documents  relate  to  the
appellant's claimed employment  by  a  college  in  Libya.  In  the  closing
sentences of [24] the Judge says that original documents are  not  available
and that he approaches the  documentary  evidence  with  circumspection.  Mr
Devlin told me that there was no reason for the Judge  to  entertain  doubts
about the authenticity of  the  documents  or  to  find  that  the  evidence
presented by the appellant is implausible. He told me  that  the  Judge  has
not adequately set out reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  evidence.  He
referred me to AB(reliance on photocopies) Republic of  Congo  (Brazzaville)
[2014] UKAIT 00172.

(c) Mr Devlin took me to [25] of the decision and told me that  the  Judge's
analysis of the documents and his rejection of the appellant's account  that
he was employed by a particular college amounts to  an  irrational  finding.
He referred me to the  unreported  inner  house  case  of  Chinder  Singh  v
Secretary of State for the home Department. He  told  me  that  the  Judge's
reasoning proceeds solely on the difference between  two  names  given.  The
difference  could  be  a  grammatical  error.  The   difference   could   be
transliteration caused by translation from Arabic to  English.  He  told  me
that the Judge's findings were irrational.

(d) Mr Devlin then took me to [26] of the decision, and  told  me  that  the
Judge's credibility findings are flawed because the  Judge  proceeds  on  an
assumption about the availability of email addresses.

(e) Mr Devlin turned his attention to the Judge's findings  in  relation  to
destruction of documents. He took me to [30] of the  decision  and  told  me
that the Judge's reasoning is irrational. He told  me  that  the  Judge  was
wrong to consider that any man who would take a risk once would take a  risk
repeatedly. He told me that there was no evidence  to  support  the  Judge's
findings.

(f) Mr Devlin took me to [31] of the decision and told me that  the  Judge's
findings there proceed on the Judge's own assumption of the manner in  which
innocent bystanders would react to a frightening violent incident  in  which
they were not directly involved. He argued that the Judge's finding at  [31]
is irrational and based on the Judge's opinion rather than on  the  evidence
led.

(g) Mr Devlin then turned his attention  to  the  treatment  of  the  expert
report from Dr George. He referred me to [33] to [35] of the  decision,  and
told me that the Judge simply  acknowledges  the  existence  of  the  expert
report, but says for, unsustainable reasons, that the expert report  has  no
impact on the subjective evidence. He told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings
were irrational because the expert report says that  the  appellant's  claim
is plausible.

(h) Mr Devlin urged me to  allow  the  appeal  and  to  set  the  First-tier
Tribunal decision aside.

7. (a) For the respondent, Ms O'Brien told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. She told me that  the  challenges  to
the decision amount to a suggestion that the Judge's findings are  perverse.
She told me that in dealing with documentary evidence the  Judge  was  aware
of the principles set out in in Tanveer Ahmed (Starred)  2002  UKIAT  00439.
She told me that the decision is a carefully worded decision  in  which  the
Judge has considered all relevant factors and that the Judge  had  carefully
weighed each strand of evidence, taking a holistic approach before  reaching
his conclusions.

(b) Ms O'Brien told me that the Judge's  conclusions  are  well  within  the
range of reasonable conclusions available  to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence
presented. She told me that the Judge  properly  engaged  with  Dr  George's
report before deciding what weight  should  be  attached  to  it,  and  then
provided reasons for the weight that it is  attached  to  that  report.  She
suggested that what is argued for the  appellant  amounts  to  nothing  more
than a disagreement  with  properly  reasoned  findings.  She  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The grounds of appeal can be marshalled into  two  main  challenges.  The
first challenge is to the findings between [23] and [31].  Counsel  for  the
appellant clearly stated that the findings at [24], [25], [26] and [31]  are
findings which no  reasonable  Judge  would  make.  The  argument  is  quite
clearly that the findings are irrational. The second  challenge  relates  to
the way in which the Judge treated  the  evidence  contained  in  an  expert
report from Dr George.

9. Between [1] and [4] the Judge sets out the background to the  appeal.  At
[5] he summarises the grounds of appeal and between [6] & [9] he  accurately
sets out the applicable law. Between [10] and [12]  he  correctly  sets  out
the burden and standard of proof before  summarising  the  evidence  between
[13] and [20].

10. At [21] the Judge confirms that he has taken  a  holistic  view  of  the
entirety of the evidence. It is not surprising that no  challenge  is  taken
to [21] because a fair reading of the decision demonstrates that  the  Judge
has manifestly taken a holistic view of each strand of evidence.

11. At [24] the Judge considers two documents produced by the appellant and
between [24] and [27] discusses the documentary evidence  set  against  the
totality of evidence. He then sets out his  reasons  for  attaching  little
weight to the documents. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT  254
(IAC)  the Tribunal said that

      Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the fact  finding
      Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give  rise  to  an
      error of law.

12.  Between  [24]  and  [31]  the  Judge  finds  certain  aspects  of   the
appellant's account "implausible" and  other  passages  of  evidence  to  be
evidence which he does not find to be persuasive. At each  stage  the  Judge
adequately explains his reasoning and, in doing so, explains  why  he  comes
to his conclusion. The Judge does not proceed on assumption.  He  makes  his
findings from analysis of the evidence placed before him.  That  is  exactly
what a Judge should do.

13. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct  approach)  [2016]
UKUT 00028 the Tribunal held that  in  error  of  law  appeals  relating  to
findings of fact, the Upper Tribunal should apply the principles in Edwards
v Bairstow [1956] AC 14. In Edwards  v  Bairstow [1956]  AC  14  Viscount
Simonds  said

     For it is universally conceded that, although it is a pure finding  of
    fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have been stated in  various
    ways but are, I think, fairly  summarised  by  saying  that  the  court
    should take that course if it appears that the commissioners have acted
    without any evidence or upon a  view  of  the  facts  which  could  not
    reasonably be entertained.

  Elsewhere the House of Lords referred to " perversity", defining  this  as
a case in which

     ..... the facts found are such that no person  acting  judicially  and
    properly  instructed  as  to  the  relevant  law  could  come  to   the
    determination under appeal.

In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982  Lord Justice Brooke  noted  that
perversity represented a very high  hurdle.   It  embraced  decisions  which
were irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

14. The Judge reaches carefully reasoned conclusions.  The  appellant  might
not like the conclusions that  the  Judge  reaches,  but  he  reaches  those
conclusions on the basis of an analysis of the evidence placed  before  him.
In reality, the first part of the challenge set up in  this  appeal  amounts
to nothing more than a disagreement with the facts as the Judge  found  them
to be. The  Judge's  findings  are  neither  perverse  nor  irrational.  The
Judge's findings are findings which were open to him on  the  basis  of  the
evidence presented.

15. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)   the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

16. The second challenge, and the focus for the grant permission to  appeal,
relates to the way in which the Judge dealt with an expert  report  prepared
by Dr George.

17. At [33] the Judge  turned  his  attention  to  the  expert  report,  and
summarises the relevant part of the report. At [34] the Judge  records  that
Dr George accepts that he  cannot  comment  in  detail  on  the  appellant's
claim, but finds the claim to be broadly plausible. At [35] the  Judge  says
that Dr George's report provides background information which  confirms  the
existence of militia, but has not assessed the  detail  of  the  appellant's
claim.

18. The detail of the appellant's claim comes from the  evidence  summarised
between [13] and [20] of the  decision.  The  Judge  analyses  the  evidence
between [21] and [32] of the decision and, for the reasons  set  out  there,
finds that the appellant's evidence is neither  credible  nor  reliable.  At
[36] the Judge found the evidence of the appellant's wife to be  incredible.
No challenge is taken to that finding.

19. In MF(Albania) v SSHD 2014 EWCA Civ 902  (in  a  blood  feud  case)  the
Court of Appeal decided that it was for the tribunal,  not  the  expert,  to
decide whether an applicant would be at  risk  on  return.  It  was  neither
appropriate nor helpful for an expert to express a view on specific  factual
questions bearing on  the  situation  of  a  particular  applicant  such  as
whether he could safely relocate or whether he  could  obtain  support  from
other members of the family, if that view was based on nothing more  than  a
general understanding of local conditions.  The Court of  Appeal  emphasised
that where an expert had not met an individual,  the  weight  which  can  be
given to the individual account is a matter for  the  fact  finding  of  the
tribunal. It is not in general within the expert's area of expertise.

20. When read as a whole, the decision clearly demonstrates that  the  Judge
carried out a rounded assessment of the  totality  of  evidence.   He  found
that the expert report is not determinative of this appeal.  He  found  that
neither the appellant nor his wife  were  credible.  He  sets  out  adequate
reasons for dealing with each strand of evidence. Having  found  that  there
was no support for the appellant's claim in any part  of  the  evidence  the
only conclusion that he could reach is that the appeal should be dismissed.

21. The Judge took correct guidance in law. There is nothing wrong with  the
Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's
credibility findings in relation to the appellant's wife. The  challenge  to
the Judge's treatment of the appellant's evidence  amounts  to  little  more
than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings  on  the   question   of
credibility. Those findings  are  clearly  sustainable.  They  are  properly
explained and fall well within the range of  reasonable  findings  available
to the Judge. The Judge dealt with the  expert  evidence  correctly.  Having
considered the expert evidence, the Judge had no criticism of  the  evidence
but did not find the evidence to be determinative of this appeal.

22. It is only after  considering  each  strand  of  evidence  and  properly
analysing it that the Judge reached his  conclusions.  The  conclusions  the
judge reached were well within the range of reasonable conclusions  open  to
the Judge, and do not run counter to the Judge's overall assessment  of  the
totality of evidence.

23. There is no misdirection in law & the fact-finding  exercise  is  beyond
criticism.  The decision is not tainted by a  material  error  of  law.  The
Judge's  decision  when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out  findings  that  are
sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

24. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

25. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 12 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

