
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01746/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 27 June 2017                     |On 12 July 2017                         |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    AHML
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Ian Howard, promulgated on 5 April  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an  anonymity  direction  continuing
     that made in the First-tier Tribunal.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "I am satisfied that there is an arguable  error  of  law  in  this
         decision in that the Judge made adverse findings in  respect  of  a
         judgment in absentia without putting his concerns to the Appellant.
          Further, the Judge made an arguable error of law in  finding  that
         this was the only evidence he had before him, by  not  taking  into
         account the medical report in respect of the Appellant's father."


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard brief submissions from Mr.
     Eaton and Mr. Deller in which Mr. Deller  accepted  that  the  decision
     involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.   Having  set  the
     decision aside, I proceeded to hear submissions on the remaking of  the
     appeal.


Error of Law Decision


  5. In submissions, Mr. Eaton  relied  referred  to  the  judgment  of  the
     criminal court in Egypt (page  122  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).   In
     paragraph 32 of the decision the judge found that he could not rely  on
     this judgment because of the discrepancy in relation to  three  of  the
     names listed at the start and at the end.   It  was  submitted  by  Mr.
     Eaton, and accepted by Mr. Deller, that this had not been  put  to  the
     Appellant at the hearing.  Neither had it been raised by the Respondent
     in her decision.


  6. I find that the judge has dismissed the Appellant's appeal  essentially
     as a result of his findings in relation  to  this  judgment.   To  make
     these findings without giving the Appellant a chance to respond to them
     is an error of law.


  7. However, I further find that, although the judge  states  that  he  has
     studied the translated copy carefully, this cannot be  the  case  given
     its contents.  In the fourth paragraph on page  122  it  sets  out  and
     corrects errors made in the names listed at the start of the  judgment,
     and explains why the names at the end of  the  judgment  are  therefore
     different.


  8. In paragraph 32 the  judge  refers  to  the  name  of  Ashour  El-Sayed
     Abdullatif Al Azli, the seventh person listed on the indictment on  the
     first page of the judgment.  On page 122 a correction is  made  stating
     that the seventh accused person is called Abdul Rahim Hassan Abdullatif
     Ali.  This is the name listed at the end of the judgment on page 125.


  9. The judge also refers in paragraph 32  to  Ashraf  Ahmed  Mohammad  El-
     Shouki and states that he does not appear to be one of those accused on
     the first page.  However, on page 122 it states that the second accused
     person is called Ashraf Ahmed Mohammad El-Shouki and is  known  as  Abo
     Ghaiba.  This is the name listed as the second accused on the  list  at
     the front of the judgment.


 10. Similarly the judge refers to Sami Yousri El-Sayed Mohammad  Al-Zentawi
     and states that he does not appear to be of those accused on the  first
     page, but again at page 122 there is a reference to  this  man  stating
     that the fourth accused person is called by this name.


 11. I therefore find that,  had  the  judge  studied  the  translated  copy
     carefully as he claims to have done, he would have found  that  halfway
     through the judgment is a list of corrections of the names given on the
     first page of the judgment.  Therefore, even had the judge done what he
     should  have  done  and  put  these  alleged  inconsistencies  to   the
     Appellant, within the judgment itself there is an answer as to why  the
     names listed at the start and the end do not precisely correspond.


 12. It is therefore clear that, there having been an answer to this alleged
     inconsistency, an answer which is contained within  the  very  document
     which the judge purports to  have  considered  carefully,  the  judge's
     error in failing to put this issue  to  the  Appellant  is  a  material
     error.


 13. I therefore set the decision aside.  As was agreed  between  Mr.  Eaton
     and Mr. Deller, the findings between paragraphs 28  and  31,  that  the
     event took place as claimed in May 2011  and  that  the  Appellant  was
     present, can be preserved.


 14. Mr. Eaton submitted that he did not want to call further  evidence  and
     Mr. Deller accepted  that  the  findings  which  were  set  out  up  to
     paragraph 31 could be adopted by the Upper  Tribunal  in  remaking  the
     decision.


Remaking

 15. I have before me the Appellant's bundle of  213  pages.   This  is  the
     bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I have the grounds of
     appeal and the skeleton argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
     also have a Respondent's bundle (to Annex 5).   As  stated  above,  the
     appeal proceeded on the basis of submissions only.


 16. Mr. Deller submitted that there was not much more that  he  could  add.
     The incident was verifiable and  it  boiled  down  to  the  Appellant's
     evidence and the Secretary of State's treatment of that evidence.  What
     was necessary was a proper appraisal and assessment of the  documentary
     evidence, and whether a combination of the Appellant's account and  the
     documentary evidence established that the Appellant was  involved,  and
     the consequences were as claimed.  The judgment was a lengthy  document
     which dealt with the issue of the  errors  and  the  changes  of  name.
     Nevertheless the burden rested on the Appellant.  He conceded that  the
     Appellant's appeal would succeed on asylum grounds if  the  account  as
     put by the Appellant was established to have taken place.


 17. Mr. Eaton submitted that the key issue was that set out at paragraph 29
     of the decision.  There was an incident in  May  2011.   The  villagers
     reacted angrily and the police were humiliated.  He submitted that  the
     judgment was a lengthy document and that there were no reasons  not  to
     consider it to be genuine.  He referred to  the  case  of  SA  (Kuwait)
     [2009] EWCA Civ 1157.  There was nothing to suggest that this  document
     had been tampered with.


 18. The expert, Dr. Armbrust, had stated  in  his  report  in  response  to
     question 8 that the document had official stamps  on  every  page.   He
     submitted that there was nothing about it which could not be considered
     genuine.  The fact that the names had been corrected during the  course
     of the judgment is a detail which would not have been included had  the
     judgment been fabricated.  The Respondent rejected this document merely
     because it was a photocopy but he submitted that the Tribunal  was  not
     bound by the  same  restriction.   In  any  event  he  referred  me  to
     paragraph 32, where the judge had found that the original document  had
     been received as an  attachment  to  an  email  and  therefore  only  a
     facsimile copy was available.


 19. He further referred to the fact that it  was  the  Appellant's  account
     that the police had come looking for him but, as they had not been able
     to find him, they had taken his father into custody.  I was referred to
     the medical evidence at pages 126 to 134, medical  evidence  supporting
     the Appellant's claim that his father had received  medical  treatment.
     He submitted that in the First-tier Tribunal there had  been  extensive
     documentary and video evidence in relation to the event  in  May  2011.
     Dr. Armbrust had corroborated the account.   In  summary  he  submitted
     that there was no reason not to accept the judgment.


 20. In relation to whether the Appellant would be at risk on return  and  a
     victim of being persecuted, while he accepted Mr. Deller's  concession,
     he also referred me to the objective evidence in the form of the expert
     report, in particular pages 81 to  84,  and  the  Operational  Guidance
     Note, in particular those parts relating to deficiencies in due process
     in Egypt and the problems with  fair  trial.   He  submitted  that  the
     Appellant's case was uniquely corroborated to the required standard  of
     proof.  He had been convicted in absentia and would not be subject to a
     fair trial.  He would receive a fifteen year sentence merely for  being
     present at a demonstration where the police had been humiliated.


Findings and Decision


 21. I have carefully considered the judgment from  the  criminal  court  in
     Egypt.  As stated by Mr. Eaton, in her decision the Respondent did  not
     accept that the incident to which the judgment refers had taken  place,
     or that the Appellant was involved.  I have adopted the findings of the
     First-tier Tribunal in this respect, as was accepted by Mr. Deller.   I
     find that the incident in May 2011 took place as claimed.


 22. The Respondent's decision states that no weight is to be placed on  the
     judgment as photocopies had been  submitted  [44].   I  have  carefully
     considered these photocopies.  The fact in and of itself that I do  not
     have the original document before me does not mean that I can place  no
     weight on it.  The judgment refers to an incident which took  place  on
     25 May 2011.  I find that this judgment refers to the  event  described
     by the Appellant which, it is accepted, occurred.


 23. In the indictment at the start of the judgment there is a reference  to
     the Appellant.  On the final page of the judgment it states that he  is
     sentenced in absentia to fifteen years of imprisonment.


 24. I have taken into account the evidence of the expert, Dr. Armbrust.   I
     have considered his CV (pages 89 to 104).  I find  that  he  has  wide-
     ranging experience in  relation  to  Egypt  and  has  published  papers
     recently on the current position in Egypt.  I do not intend to set  out
     his report in detail here, but I find that I can rely on his report.


 25. Dr. Armbrust is asked "Whether our  client  was  sentenced  to  fifteen
     years in absentia for the incident" [6].


     He states:


         "The client is person number 9 in the list of the accused,  [....].
         The document clearly states that he was sentenced to fifteen years'
         imprisonment in  absentia.   I  surmise  that  the  length  of  the
         sentence was due to the fact that he along with several others were
         never apprehended by the authorities.  Those who  were  apprehended
         received sentences of a couple of years.  The copy  of  the  Arabic
         document in the Home Office bundle is not clear enough to check the
         accuracy of the translation but the translation  in  general  seems
         competent, so I have no reason to doubt it."


 26. He is later asked: "Can you confirm whether the  court  document  which
     confirms that our client was sentenced to fifteen  years'  imprisonment
     is genuine?"[8].  He states:


         "The document has official stamps on every page.   The  Appellant's
         name is clear, and the document  does  say  that  his  sentence  is
         fifteen years in absentia."


     He goes on to state that, although he can find no  independent  reports
     on the verdict and that there are no media reports on the case, he  has
     found that the official stamps appear on every page of the document.


 27. I have taken into account the submission of Mr. Eaton that it is highly
     unlikely that a forged document would go to the  effort  of  correcting
     the names listed at the start and end of the document.  Equally, I find
     that if this was a fabricated document, it is highly likely that  those
     who made it would ensure that the names at the start  and  at  the  end
     were the same.  I have  also  taken  into  account  that  it  has  been
     accepted that the event to which the  judgment  refers  took  place  as
     claimed.


 28. At question 3 Dr. Armbrust is asked whether the  Egyptian  authorities'
     reaction to the event was serious and harsh.  At the top of page 83  he
     states:


         "In general the authorities always take seriously any challenge  to
         the dominance of the police.  The only thing the  authorities  were
         concerned with was the uprising  by  the  townspeople  against  the
         police.  This does not come in a vacuum."


 29. At the end of page 83 he states:


         "In summary, if the question is 'was the authorities'  reaction  to
         the event serious and harsh', then the  answer  is  certainly  yes.
         The reason for the harshness is inseparable from the  revolutionary
         times, which put the state's security services on the defensive and
         spurred them to take revenge as a  means  of  reasserting  control.
         There is every reason to believe the  Appellant's  claim  that  the
         only 'evidence' the police had of his involvement in  the  incident
         was the statement of a  police  informer,  and  the  statements  of
         informers cannot be considered verifiable or credible."


 30. I find that Dr. Armbrust's evidence is corroborative of the Appellant's
     account.  He sets out clearly the reasons why  the  police  would  have
     reacted in this way, and why the  Appellant  would  have  received  the
     sentence that he received.


 31. Taking all of the above into account, and  bearing  in  mind  that  Mr.
     Deller did not submit that this document could not be relied on, I find
     that this document is a reliable court document which  shows  that  the
     Appellant has been convicted in Egypt in  absentia  to  fifteen  years'
     imprisonment as a result of being present at the event which took place
     in May 2011 in his village.


 32. As I have  found  that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
     Appellant's account is true, and bearing in mind the acceptance by  Mr.
     Deller that an appeal founded on these facts would  succeed  on  asylum
     grounds, I find that the Appellant has shown that  he  is  at  risk  on
     return to Egypt.


 33. I have additionally taken into account the evidence referred to by  Mr.
     Eaton.  At [9] of his report Dr. Armbrust states that it is very likely
     that the Appellant would be on a detained list, and it would only be  a
     matter of time before he was arrested if he were able  to  enter  Egypt
     without being detained.  At [10] he says that there would  be  no  fair
     trial for the Appellant  and  it  is  more  likely  that  he  would  be
     imprisoned on the basis of the trial that has already taken place.   In
     answer to questions 11 and 12 he states that there is no protection for
     the Appellant and that relocation is not possible.


 34. The Operational Guidance Note refers to the procedural deficiencies  in
     the judiciary that  deprive  detainees  of  basic  due  process  rights
     [1.2.4].  This is further expanded at paragraphs  2.8.6  and  2.8.8  in
     relation to due  process  violations  in  trials  before  the  criminal
     courts.


 35. Taking all of the above into account, I find  that  the  Appellant  has
     demonstrated that there is a real risk that he will suffer  persecution
     on return to Egypt, and  so  his  claim  succeeds  on  asylum  grounds.
     Following my finding in relation to his asylum claim, I  find  that  he
     would also be at risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of  the
     ECHR such as to put the United Kingdom in breach  of  its  obligations.
     The appeal is therefore also allowed on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


 36. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


 37. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

