
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01063/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2019                    |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     bs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sardar, Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Albania, born  on  9  April  1986,  appeals
    against a  decision  of  Judge  Sullivan  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated  on  11  June  2019  dismissing  her  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse her claim for asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection, submitted on the basis that she was a trafficked  woman  at
    risk of being retrafficked in  Albania.   Judge  Sullivan  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Has the appeal been abandoned?

 2. As the Article 8 limb of the appellant's  case  was  successful  before
    Judge Sullivan, I queried with the parties whether she had already been
    granted leave in that capacity.   I  was  informed  that  she  had.   I
    therefore indicated to the parties that this may be  a  case  to  which
    section 104 (pending appeal) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 applied.

 3. Section 104(4A) provides that an appeal is to be treated  as  abandoned
    if an appellant is granted leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  A potential exception is contained in subsection (4B).   That
    subsection provides that subsection (4A) shall not apply to  an  appeal
    in so far as it is brought on grounds which  include  section  84(1)(a)
    (removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach  Refugee
    Convention), provided the appellant gives notice  to  the  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. Rule 17A of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  makes
    provision for the purposes of section 104(4B)(b).  It  provides,  where
    relevant:


         (1)  A party to an asylum case or an immigration  case  before  the
         Upper Tribunal must notify the Upper Tribunal  if  they  are  aware
         that-


         [...]


             (b)  the appellant has been granted leave to enter  or  remain
             in the United Kingdom;


         [...]


         (3)  Where  an  appeal  would  otherwise  fall  to  be  treated  as
         abandoned  pursuant  to  section  104(4A)   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but the appellant wishes to pursue
         their appeal, the appellant must send or deliver  a  notice,  which
         must comply with any relevant practice  directions,  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal and the respondent so that it is  received  within  thirty
         days of the date on which the notice of the grant of leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom was sent to the appellant.


         [...]


         (5)  Notwithstanding rule 5(3)(a) (case management powers) and rule
         7(2) (failure to comply with rules etc.), the Upper  Tribunal  must
         not extend the time limits in paragraph (3) and (4).


 5. As is clear from rule 17A(3), an appellant has thirty days in which  to
    notify  the  Tribunal,  in  accordance  with  the   relevant   practice
    directions, that she intends to pursue an appeal on, in  this  context,
    asylum grounds.  The Upper Tribunal's normal case management powers  to
    vary or amend rules do  not  apply  to  the  time  limit  contained  in
    paragraph (3).  As such, the thirty  day  limit  is  a  hard  deadline;
    unless notice is provided in that period, the appeal "shall be  treated
    as abandoned".

 6. After taking instructions, Ms Sardar  confirmed  that  her  instructing
    solicitors had no record of having provided notice under  rule  17A(3).
    She indicated that the appellant wanted to proceed with her appeal.

 7. I was  not  presented  with  any  documentary  evidence,  or  otherwise
    informed by either party, that the appellant's grant of Article 8 leave
    had taken place in excess of the thirty day period permitted under rule
    17A(3).  Although rule 17A(5) does not permit the Tribunal to  use  its
    case management powers to extend the time for compliance  with  a  rule
    under rule 5(3)(a) or otherwise waive a requirement of the rules  under
    rule 7(2)(a) in relation to the thirty  day  period,  that  restriction
    does not apply in relation to the form in which such notice  is  to  be
    given.  Accordingly, in exercise of my  case  management  powers  under
    rules 5(3)(a) and 7(2)(a), to the  extent  it  was  necessary  for  the
    appellant's notice under section 104(4B) of the  2002  Act  to  take  a
    particular form, I waive that requirement and  substitute  for  it  the
    appellant's notification, through Ms Sardar, that the appellant  sought
    to continue with her appeal on asylum grounds.

 8. Mr Tarlow was content to proceed in this way and  made  no  submissions
    contending that the appeal fell to be treated as abandoned.

 9. Accordingly, I find that the appeal had not been treated as abandoned.


Background

10. The following factual summary  is  taken  from  [2]  to  [4]  of  Judge
    Sullivan's decision.

11. The appellant claims to have left Albania in  or  about  October  2014.
    From there she travelled to Italy,  ostensibly  to  meet  up  with  her
    boyfriend.  However,  on  arrival  she  was  forced  into  prostitution
    following which she was trafficked via Belgium to  the  United  Kingdom
    where she was again forced into prostitution.  She was able  to  escape
    in February 2017 and claimed asylum that month.  She was later referred
    to the competent authority for an assessment as to whether  she  was  a
    victim of trafficking.  On 21 September 2018  the  competent  authority
    found that there were conclusive grounds to conclude that the appellant
    was and is a victim of trafficking.

12. The appeal brought by the appellant is on the sole  ground  that  Judge
    Sullivan failed to apply the country guidance case  applicable  to  the
    risk of retrafficking in Albania, namely TD and AD  (Trafficked  women)
    CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).  Permission to appeal was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on that basis.

Legal framework

13. The burden is on the appellant to establish that,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof, she meets the requirements of the Refugee or  Person
    in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006
    ("the Qualification Regulations").  Specifically,  the  appellant  must
    establish to the above standard that he falls within the definition  of
    "refugee" contained in Article 1(A)  of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention
    ("the  Geneva  Convention"),  as  incorporated  into  domestic  law  by
    regulation 2(1) of the Qualification Regulations.   Alternatively,  she
    must demonstrate that she meets the criteria in paragraph 339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and/or that returning her to  Albania  would  breach
    the United Kingdom's obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").

Discussion

14. Ms Sardar submits that the judge made no reference to TD and AD in  her
    operative analysis of the  appellant's  case  and  did  not  appear  to
    consider or apply the substantive requirements of the Headnote  in  her
    analysis.

15. Mr Tarlow submits that the appellant's challenge is nothing more than a
    disagreement with valid and well-reasoned findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge properly applied the  relevant  country  guidance,
    before reaching conclusions that were open to her on the evidence.

16. It is necessary to recall the findings of fact which  were  reached  by
    Judge Sullivan.  There has been no challenge by either party  to  those
    findings.  Mr Tarlow confirmed that the respondent has  not  challenged
    the finding that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

17. At [17], the judge set out why she considered the  appellant  to  be  a
    vulnerable person by reference to the experiences  she  had  undertaken
    and  her  medical  conditions.   At  [21],  Judge  Sullivan  found  the
    appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness,  referring  to   her   general
    credibility.

18. At [22] the judge quoted and endorsed the psychological  report  of  Dr
    Parsonage.  She stated:

         "Based on the medical report and  the  appellant's  evidence  I  am
         satisfied as follows:


         (a)  The appellant suffers from severe PTSD;


         (b)  she takes mirtazapine to treat the condition;


         (c)  she has in the past twice taken an overdose  to  harm  herself
             (on both occasions she was in captivity and  on  one  occasion
             she had been forced to abort a pregnancy);


         (d)   the  symptoms  she  now  suffers  include   depressed   mood,
             nightmares, avoidance of social contact, hypervigilance,  poor
             concentration and  finding  public  places  (including  public
             transport) difficult;


         (e)  she suffers the symptoms listed in full in the medical  report
             notwithstanding that she was receiving counselling and  taking
             medication;


         (f)  she is  very  anxious  about  the  prospect  of  returning  to
             Albania;


         (g)  the thought of return to Albania makes her feel suicidal;


         (h)   she  is  not  as  resilient  as  she  was  before   she   was
             trafficked..."


19. The judge did refer to TD and AD at [11] of her decision, and  appeared
    to refer, albeit briefly, to the impact that mental  health  conditions
    can have on the viability of return to Albania or the risk arising from
    retrafficking.

20. For the reasons set out below, I accept Ms  Sardar's  submissions  that
    the judge did not follow  the  requirements  of  the  Headnote  or  the
    operative analysis within TD and AD.  The oblique  reference  at  [11],
    when viewed alongside the judge's analysis of the trafficking  elements
    of the appellant's case,  does  not  demonstrate  that  the  judge  had
    applied the relevant country guidance.

21. The relevant paragraphs of the Headnote to TD and AD include:

         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
         women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of  the
         country and from varied social backgrounds.


         ...


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
         significant efforts to improve its response  to  trafficking.  This
         includes widening the scope of legislation, publishing the Standard
         Operating Procedures, implementing an effective  National  Referral
         Mechanism, appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking  Co-ordinator,  and
         providing training to  law  enforcement  officials.   There  is  in
         general a Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but  it  will
         not be effective in every case.  When considering  whether  or  not
         there is a sufficiency of protection for a  victim  of  trafficking
         her particular circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
         for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking  are
         able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'  may  be
         able to stay there for up to 2 years. During  this  initial  period
         after return victims of trafficking are  supported  and  protected.
         Unless  the  individual  has  particular  vulnerabilities  such  as
         physical or mental health issues, this option cannot  generally  be
         said to be unreasonable; whether it is must be determined on a case
         by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
         live on her own. In doing so she will face  significant  challenges
         including,  but  not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,   financial
         hardship and uncertainty, a sense of physical  insecurity  and  the
         subjective fear of being found either by their families  or  former
         traffickers.  Some women will have the capacity to negotiate  these
         challenges without undue hardship. There will however be victims of
         trafficking  with  characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness   or
         psychological  scarring,   for   whom   living   alone   in   these
         circumstances  would  not  be  reasonable.   Whether  a  particular
         appellant  falls  into  that  category  will  call  for  a  careful
         assessment of all the circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
         individual claimant will turn in part on the factors  that  led  to
         the  initial  trafficking,  and  on  her  personal   circumstances,
         including her background, age, and her willingness and  ability  to
         seek help from the authorities. For  a  proportion  of  victims  of
         trafficking, their situations may mean  that  they  are  especially
         vulnerable  to  re-trafficking,  or   being   forced   into   other
         exploitative situations.


         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
         particular social group on that account alone. Whether they are  at
         risk of persecution on account of such membership and whether  they
         will  be  able  to  access  sufficiency  of  protection  from   the
         authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual   circumstances
         including but not limited to the following:


               1) The social status and economic standing of her family


               2) The level of education of the victim of trafficking or her
                  family


               3) The victim of trafficking's state of health,  particularly
                  her mental health


               4) The presence of an illegitimate child


               5) The area of origin


               6) Age


               7) What support network will be available"


22. Turning to the submissions, the first  objection  to  Judge  Sullivan's
    decision raised by Ms Sardar is that the judge  misapplied  or  misread
    the respondent's own Country  Policy  and  Information  Note,  Albania:
    People trafficking, version 7.0 December 2018 ("the CPIN").   Paragraph
    2.3.6 of the CPIN outlines the respondent's reasons why  she  considers
    trafficking  to  be  less  common  in  Albania.   That  was  a   factor
    highlighted by the judge at [25(c)] of her decision.  However,  submits
    Ms Sardar, at paragraph 2.3.7  of  the  CPIN,  the  respondent  herself
    acknowledges that that analysis does  not  permit  departure  from  the
    terms of the existing country guidance contained in  TD  and  AD.   The
    judge does not appear to have engaged with paragraph  2.3.7,  nor  with
    the risks outlined in the Headnote to TD and AD, which states  at  sub-
    paragraph (g) that retrafficking is a "reality".

23. Accordingly, whereas the judge found that  retrafficking  is  something
    which is less common, the respondent's CPIN maintained the position  in
    TD and AD that retrafficking is a reality.  The judge did  not  purport
    to be able to depart from the terms of TD and AD,  and  nor  was  there
    evidence before her permitting her to.  It appears that the reality  of
    retrafficking is something that  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  in
    accordance with the terms of the country guidance.

24. In addition,  TD  and  AD  calls  for  a  personalised  rather  than  a
    generalised approach to  the  risk  upon  return.   It  is  clear,  for
    example, from sub-paragraphs (d) and (e) to the Headnote that the  risk
    of whether an individual will face retrafficking  is  a  case  specific
    question, which must be addressed by reference  to  the  facts  of  the
    individual case.

25. Against that background, I turn to the specific criteria set out at sub-
    paragraph  (g)  of  TD  and  AD's  Headnote  concerning  the  risk   of
    retrafficking.

26. One of the factors highlighted in that paragraph is the willingness and
    ability of  a  previously  trafficked  woman  to  seek  help  from  the
    authorities.  Ms Sardar  submits  that  due  to  her  experiences,  her
    vulnerabilities and the findings that the  judge  made  concerning  the
    appellant's own difficulties upon her return which ultimately merited a
    finding that she was entitled to leave to remain on Article 8  grounds,
    the appellant is neither willing nor able to engage with the protection
    available to many women in Albania.  In support of this  contention  Ms
    Sardar highlights [23] of Dr  Parsonage's  report  where  Dr  Parsonage
    records the appellant as having said to him that she did  not  want  to
    live in hiding or under protection in Albania.

27. Secondly, the judge's findings in relation  to  the  presence  of  very
    significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  in   Albania
    featured considerations which go directly to the heart of  this  issue.
    Even though those factors led to  the  judge  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds, those factors did not form  part  of  her  operative
    analysis concerning  the  risk  of  re-trafficking.   For  example,  at
    [29(a)] the judge noted that the appellant genuinely fears returning to
    Albania.  She is  likely  to  be  suspicious  of  others  and  will  be
    inhibited in establishing relationships of any sort with other  people.
    The judge did not address the factors in paragraph (g) of the  Headnote
    to TD and AD in light of these findings of fact.

28. Thirdly, the judge found in [29(b)]  that  the  PTSD  suffered  by  the
    appellant means that she finds it difficult to go out in public, to use
    public transport and to socialise.  That will  make  it  impossible  in
    practical terms for her to look for employment or go to work or  obtain
    work  experience  or  educational  qualifications,  the  judge   found.
    Significantly for present  purposes,  the  appellant's  conditions  are
    likely to prevent her from engaging with others in Albanian society  or
    forming friendships.  The judge also found there would be  very  little
    prospects of her reintegrating into society in Albania.

29. The judge also noted at [29] that the  appellant's  medical  conditions
    persist, despite the medication and treatment she is receiving in  this
    country, and they are likely to worsen  in  Albania.   Taken  together,
    these factors lead to considerations which the judge should have  taken
    into account, but did not appear to have addressed, in the  context  of
    assessing whether the appellant would be willing or able to  seek  help
    from the authorities in the form of sheltered  accommodation  or  other
    forms of protection upon her return to Albania.

30. Secondly, Ms Sardar submits that even if  the  appellant  did  enter  a
    shelter  in  Albania,  doing  so  would  only  provide  a  time-limited
    temporary solution which would not provide  any  prospects  of  lasting
    protection.  Ms Sardar relies on the evidence  this  Tribunal  recorded
    that it heard in TD and AD.  At [105] of TD and  AD,  the  time-limited
    nature of the  protection  available  to  victims  of  trafficking  was
    highlighted.  At [112], the panel  noted  that  there  is  a  "critical
    phase" of reintegration which all victims of trafficking face following
    the conclusion of their time in Government or sheltered  accommodation,
    prior to their reintegration into society.  The judge did not  consider
    the impact of the findings that she made in relation to the presence of
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in  Albania
    on this time limited and "critical phase" of  her  reintegration.   The
    judge did not address the factors outlined  at  (f)  of  the  Headnote,
    which require consideration of whether the  particular  vulnerabilities
    of a victim of trafficking, for example mental  illness,  would  render
    the process of leaving the  shelter  unduly  harsh.   I  consider  this
    aspect of the judge's analysis to feature an error of law.

31. Thirdly, in addition to having failed to consider the phased return  to
    society   from   Government   accommodation   to   private   or   other
    accommodation,  and  the  ensuing  difficulties,  the  judge  did   not
    incorporate into her assessment the earlier findings that she had  made
    that the appellant is no longer in contact with her family.  Ms  Sardar
    submits that the judge could have gone on to consider the expert report
    that was before her, concerning the appellant's estrangement  from  her
    family on account of the shame they are likely to feel as a  result  of
    the experiences the appellant has been subjected to by her traffickers.
     Paragraph (b) of the Headnote to TD and AD is also  relevant  in  this
    regard:

         "(b) Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
         honour which not only means that trafficked women would  have  very
         considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their home  areas  on
         return but also will affect their ability to relocate internally"


    Also relevant to the issue of post-shelter integration are the  factors
    that the judge outlined at [29]: the appellant's inability to work  and
    the impossibility, to adopt the judge's terminology, of her integrating
    into society.

32. I accept the submissions of  Ms  Sardar  that,  in  combination,  these
    factors mean that the judge failed properly to  follow  and  apply  the
    relevant country guidance case of TD and AD,  and  the  errors  of  law
    which beset the judge's analysis are such that the decision needs to be
    set aside.

33. At the hearing I  sought  submissions  from  both  parties  as  to  the
    appropriate course of action.  Both parties submitted that I could base
    my own assessment of the applicability of TD and AD to the  appellant's
    case on the unimpugned findings of fact reached by  Judge  Sullivan:  I
    agree.  I set Judge Sullivan's decision aside, preserving its  findings
    of fact save those in relation to the risk of re-trafficking.

Remaking decision

34. I turn therefore to remaking this decision.  The essential  issues  for
    my consideration  are  those  outlined  at  sub-paragraph  (g)  of  the
    Headnote to TD and AD, viewed through  the  lens  of  Judge  Sullivan's
    findings of fact.

35. I must bear in mind the extreme vulnerability  of  this  appellant,  as
    evidenced by the report of Dr Parsonage, the natural consequences  that
    are likely to flow as a result of the Competent Authority's  conclusive
    grounds decision, and Judge Sullivan's separate findings in relation to
    the  presence  of  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    integration.

36. The risk factors relevant under sub-paragraph (g) are  the  appellant's
    personal circumstances, background, age,  willingness  and  ability  to
    seek help from the authorities.  The  personal  circumstances  of  this
    appellant, as I have already outlined, are that she is  estranged  from
    her family and is likely to be unable to seek any assistance from them.



37. She has a good education, but that is not determinative of the  absence
    or presence of a risk of retrafficking.  She is 33, and although  Judge
    Sullivan said that at that age she is older than a typical age of those
    likely to be trafficked in Albania, I consider that it is necessary  to
    have regard to sub-paragraph (a) of the Headnote to TD and AD:

         "It is not possible to set out  a  typical  profile  of  trafficked
         women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of  the
         country and from varied social backgrounds."


    Accordingly, although the appellant may  be  older  than  some  current
    victims of trafficking, that is not a factor  which  mitigates  against
    the risk of retrafficking upon her return to any significant extent.

38. Returning to the personal circumstances of the appellant,  she  is  not
    willing, and understandably nor is she able in  light  of  her  medical
    conditions, to seek the assistance of the authorities,  either  in  the
    form of protection upon her return from the police or through some form
    of accommodation in a shelter for trafficked women.  I accept that  her
    unwillingness to countenance the possibility of such accommodation is a
    factor which is relevant for me to take into account, pursuant to  sub-
    paragraph (g) of the Headnote in TD and AD.

39. Accordingly, although the findings of Judge  Sullivan  in  relation  to
    very significant obstacles related primarily to the likelihood  of  the
    appellant being able to integrate in Albania  upon  her  return,  those
    findings of fact are highly relevant to this assessment of whether  the
    appellant will be able to  avail  herself  of  the  protection  of  the
    authorities.  These are all considerations which are highly relevant to
    my consideration of whether the appellant has a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the basis of being  a  member  of  a  particular  social
    group, namely trafficked women in Albania, and  I  find  that  for  the
    reasons I have outlined that she is.  Past  persecution  is  a  serious
    indication of likely future risk, unless there are good reasons to  the
    contrary.  The appellant is unable to avail herself of  the  protection
    of the authorities for the reasons outlined above and, accordingly, she
    satisfies the definition of a refugee in the Qualification Regulations.





Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge  Sullivan  is  set  aside  and  remade  to  allow  the
appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  [pic]     Date          5 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
