
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01180/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 January 2019                         |On 28 January 2019              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                    HAAM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuike, of Broudie Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Monaghan dated 13 September 2018 dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  11  January  2018
      refusing his protection claim.

2     The appellant is a national of Egypt, who arrived  in  United  Kingdom
      on  or  around  23  September  2015  and  claimed  asylum.  He  sought
      protection on the grounds that he feared his extended  family  members
      in Egypt because of a dispute as to the possession of a certain  piece
      of land. It was said that as part of this  dispute  a  member  of  his
      cousin's family had been killed, which  led  to  criminal  proceedings
      being taken against the appellant, two of his brothers, and his mother
      and father. It was said that  these  other  family  members  had  been
      acquitted at  first  trial  or  on  re-hearing/appeal,  but  that  the
      appellant had been sentenced in his absence to 25  years  imprisonment
      for murder. The appellant stated that he did not  fear  being  treated
      unfairly by the court itself, but feared serious harm at the hands  of
      corrupt police before he reached any court hearing, and that he  would
      otherwise  have  difficulty  defending  criminal  proceedings  against
      himself. He also continued to fear  serious  harm  from  his  extended
      family arising from the dispute.

3     The respondent  refused  the  protection  claim  on  the  grounds  the
      appellant's account was not credible,  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
      decision letter.

4     On appeal, the judge also found that the  account  not  credible,  for
      the following reasons, in summary:

      (i)   the appellant's failure to pursue an asylum claim  that  he  had
           made in Italy was damaging to his overall  credibility;  he  had
           been inconsistent in his reasons for  wanting  to  leave  Italy,
           saying that it was easy for those he feared to travel from Libya
           (neighbouring Egypt) to Italy  to  find  him,  and  yet  he  had
           approached some Egyptians in Italy after he  had  been  released
           from detention to secure money  to  enable  him  to  leave  that
           country [12-14];


      (ii)  when giving oral evidence in cross  examination,  the  appellant
           gave  extraneous  information  not   directly   concerning   the
           questions put; his evidence was  difficult  to  follow,  and  he
           became agitated and belligerent [20];


      (iii) having suggested that he possessed further evidence available on
           his mobile phone, he was inconsistent as to what  such  evidence
           might be [22];


      (iv)  the appellant stated that his case had proceeded to the Court of
           Appeal in  Cairo,  and  that  it  was  not  possible  for  court
           documents to be sent back to the local court  in  Mansoura;  but
           then contradicting himself, stating that he could get papers  to
           be sent back from the Cairo court, but that this  would  cost  a
           lot of money; further, that to do so he would  need  to  be  'in
           prison' [23]; this was inconsistent with his  witness  statement
           which stated that he would have to  be  merely  present  in  the
           country to do this [24];


      (v)   he was inconsistent about the number of potential witnesses that
           maybe called in any proceedings against him [34];


      (vi)  he was inconsistent regarding his claimed  knowledge  about  the
           nature of the proceedings [35];


      (vii) he had left Egypt using his own passport [36]; whilst the  judge
           noted country evidence suggesting  that  "Not  all  people  with
           charges against their names (or trials or appeals  pending)  are
           automatically put  on  the  warning  list,  and  is  up  to  the
           Prosecutor General to add their names",  it  was  not  plausible
           that a person facing so serious a charge or conviction, relating
           to the murder of a child, would not be placed on such  a  warned
           list [37]; his ability to leave the country on his own  passport
           was highly damaging to his overall claim [38];


      (viii)      it  was  not  plausible  that  he  professed  to  have  no
           knowledge about why  his  brothers  were  subsequently  cleared,
           despite his inquiries and despite his admission that he  remains
           in regular contact with his family [39];


      (ix)  the judge held that the appellant was not part of an incident in
           which his cousin's child was killed, and  that  neither  he  nor
           anyone was facing or had faced charges or been convicted of  any
           offences in relation to that incident [40].

5     The appellant applied for permission to appeal  against  the  decision
      in grounds dated 21 September 2018, arguing that the  judge  erred  in
      law, in summary, as follows:

      (i)   in making an adverse credibility finding on the grounds that the
           appellant had failed to pursue his asylum claim  in  Italy,  the
           judge had erred in law in failing to have  regard  to  evidence,
           said to have been given by the  appellant  (not  stated  where),
           that 'the Egyptians who helped fund his onward travel to  France
           were from his area and already knew he was  fleeing  because  of
           the tribal/family feud/Al-Tar vendetta';  the  judge  failed  to
           take the evidence into account, and attached 'too  much  weight'
           to this issue;


      (ii)  in finding that the appellant had been inconsistent in his  oral
           evidence, the judge proceeded  under  a  mistake  of  fact;  the
           grounds stated that "I have checked my notes taken  by  hand  at
           the hearing and can confirm that I recorded appellant  (sic)  as
           stating that he would have needed to be present in "person", and
           not in "prison" to assess (sic - access?) the records";


      (iii) in finding it implausible that the appellant had  been  able  to
           leave the country using his own passport, the judge  had  failed
           to take into account that he had  left  the  country  four  days
           before being  wanted/convicted  (both  terms  are  used  in  the
           grounds);  the  judge's  reasoning  for  finding   against   the
           appellant in being able to leave Egypt legally  was  inadequate;
           the judge failed to take into account the objective evidence  on
           the point;


      (iv)  when considering, in the alternative, the appellant's  claim  at
           its highest, and  in  finding  that  there  would  be  effective
           protection and internal flight available to the  appellant,  the
           judge erred in law in failing to have  adequate  regard  to  the
           country evidence on the  availability  of  state  protection  in
           family or tribal feuds.

6      Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Keeffe on 4 October 2018, on the grounds that the argument about the
      judge potentially having proceeded under a mistake of fact as  to  the
      appellant's oral evidence was arguable.  Although  the  other  grounds
      were described as little more  than  a  disagreement,  permission  was
      granted on all matters.

7     I have heard from Mr Madubuike, who also appeared before the judge.  I
      did not need to hear from Mr Tan.

      Discussion

8     In his first and second grounds, the appellant  asserts,  in  essence,
      that the judge failed to make a  proper  note  of  the  evidence,  and
      proceeded under a mistake  as  to  the  appellant's  actual  evidence.
      However, although the appellant makes such assertions in  the  grounds
      of appeal, the appellant  has  not,  either  himself  or  through  his
      advocate, evidenced what he says his oral evidence was. There has been
      no compliance with BW (witness statements by  advocates)  [2014]  UKUT
      568 (IAC) (which in any event merely repeats guidance given in earlier
      authorities); no handwritten or typed copy of Mr Madubuike's  note  of
      evidence has been submitted, and  there  was  no  statement  of  truth
      accompanying the grounds of appeal. There  is  therefore  no  evidence
      supporting  the  contentions  made  within  the  grounds,   that   the
      appellant's evidence had been something other than  that  recorded  by
      the judge.

9     The second ground involves the scrutiny of only  one  particular  word
      within Mr Madubuike's note, and Mr Tan indicated that, notwithstanding
      the appellant's non-compliance with relevant procedural authority,  he
      was prepared to look at that  particular  section  of  Mr  Madubuike's
      note. In fact, both parties agreed that Mr Madubuike's  note  actually
      read: "I can't do it while abroad, I need to be present at  the  point
      of application".

10    It can therefore be seen that Mr Madubuike's note would  not  in  fact
      establish that the appellant had stated that he needed to  be  present
      'in person', as alleged in the grounds. There would  therefore  be  no
      evidential foundation for the appellant's contention  that  the  judge
      had mistaken the words 'in person' for 'in prison',  even  I  formally
      admitted Mr Madubuike's note into evidence, which I  do  not.  I  find
      that the appellant's point in ground two is not made out.

11    However, it is also part of the appellant's case the judge  failed  to
      take into account certain evidence about  what  fellow  Egyptians  the
      appellant met in Italy. Mr Madubuike only clarified in the  course  of
      oral submissions, that the reference in the grounds of appeal  to  the
      appellant's evidence that 'the Egyptians who helped  fund  his  onward
      travel to France were from his area and already knew  he  was  fleeing
      because of the tribal ... feud' had been in oral evidence.   Again,  I
      pointed out to Mr Madubuike that although the appellant  made  certain
      assertions within grounds of appeal, there was no  evidence  from  the
      appellant, or from Mr Madubuike,  as  to  what  the  appellant's  oral
      evidence was said to have been. In circumstances where  the  appellant
      has failed to follow relevant procedure, as set  out  in  BW  (witness
      statements by advocates), I was not prepared to permit Mr Madubuike to
      read out any other part of his own record of evidence, and I  did  not
      invite Mr. Tan to peruse that document. I distinguish my  approach  in
      this regard from my decision to permit Mr. Tan  to  peruse  the  other
      part of Mr Madubuike's note (in relation to the second ground) on  the
      grounds that that matter required the consideration  of  the  presence
      (or, as it turned out, the absence) of only one word.

12    It is simply  not  appropriate  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be
      presented with assertions contained only in grounds of appeal  that  a
      witness's evidence had been something other than that recorded by  the
      judge, and yet no effort be taken on the  part  of  the  appellant  or
      their representative to put in evidence what  his  oral  evidence  had
      actually been. The relevant authorities are not only common sense, but
      are long-standing, and ought to be known and applied.

13    In any event I find that even if the appellant had given the  evidence
      that he alleged regarding the identity of the Egyptians from  whom  he
      had sought assistance, I cannot see that such evidence would have been
      likely to make any difference to the judge's approach to the issue; if
      the appellant was afraid of  associating  with  Egyptians  present  in
      Italy on the basis  that  this  might  increase  the  chances  of  his
      whereabouts becoming known to those in Egypt who  intended  him  harm,
      then it seems logical  that  the  risk  of  that  happening  would  be
      increased if the persons he was associating with  in  Egypt  had  been
      made aware that he had fled Egypt because of a tribal/family feud. The
      appellant had not made out any material error of law.

14    I find that the judge was perfectly entitled to  treat  as  militating
      against the appellant's credibility that he had been  able  to  depart
      Egypt using his own passport four days prior to his conviction  for  a
      serious offence. The judge clearly  took  into  account  the  relevant
      evidence about the operation of a 'warning list' in  Egypt,  and  gave
      reasons which are  adequate  in  law  for  finding  that  due  to  the
      seriousness of the matter that the appellant was accused  of,  it  was
      likely that the appellant's name would have  been  put  on  a  warning
      list. Mr Madubuike appeared at one stage to suggest that the  evidence
      indicated that persons would not be put on a  warning  list  prior  to
      actual conviction. However, that assertion defies  common  sense,  and
      indeed is inconsistent with the terms of the  guidance  itself,  which
      refers to "...not all people with  charges  against  their  names  (or
      trials or appeals pending) ...(etc)" (emphasis added).  The  inference
      is that some people facing  charges  or  trial  (both  being  at  pre-
      conviction stage) are put on the warning list. There is nothing in the
      appellant's point.

15    Finally with regard to the fourth ground of appeal,  I  note  that  no
      particular country information is set out in the ground which is  said
      to have been left out of account  by  the  judge  when  assessing  the
      availability of effective protection or internal relocation.  Further,
      Mr Madubuike did not pursue the ground in oral submissions. The  point
      is academic in any event, given that the appellant's challenge to  the
      adverse credibility findings has failed.

      Decision

      The making of the decision did not involve the making of any  material
      error of law.

      I do not set aside the judge's decision.

      I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed:                                            Date: 16.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 16.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan






