
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01326/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2018                  |On 17 October 2018                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                    [W B]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi (for Bedfords Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Lindsay (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of [WB], a citizen of Ghana born 27  August  1985,
       against the decision of the  First-tier  tribunal  of  25  July  2018
       dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim by  the
       Respondent (of 16 January 2018).

    2. The Appellant's claim is as follows. He was identified as gay  having
       been caught in flagrante with another  boy  in  2003  and  beaten  by
       students,  following  which  the  school  banned  him  from   further
       attendance. He had managed to intercept a letter to his parents of 14
       May 2003 stating that his expulsion was because he was  a  practising
       gay; he had retained this  letter  over  the  years  and  put  it  in
       evidence before the Tribunal. He told his parents that  he  could  no
       longer bear to stay at the boarding school, and  they  accepted  this
       excuse.

    3. In 2013 he was at a funeral at Osenase when he was again caught in  a
       sexual act by community members who beat  him,  following  which  his
       gender preference became known locally, including to his parents. His
       father turned against him and left  his  mother.  His  mother  raised
       funds for his exit from Ghana. He applied for a visa in October 2013,
       though that was refused. He then re-applied in December 2013,  and  a
       visa having then been granted, left the country on February 2014.  He
       arrived in the UK with nowhere to stay, and having made  his  way  to
       Luton which was recommended to him  by  a  friendly  taxi  driver  as
       somewhere that he might try and find accommodation,  he  ran  into  a
       fellow Ghanaian, Mr George  Brobbey,  who  had  indefinite  leave  to
       remain in the UK. Mr Brobbey was moved by his plight and  offered  to
       take him in; some time later  they  became  aware  of  one  another's
       sexuality and began a relationship.

    4. The First-tier tribunal accepted the  Appellant's  account  of  being
       gay, based on two pieces of evidence that it considered  particularly
       persuasive: a classified advert of 17 January 2011 giving his nom  de
       plume as Hudgson, and the  fact  that  all  the  available  evidence,
       including that from Mr Brobbey  himself  who  gave  evidence  in  his
       support, showed them to be genuine partners.

    5. However, some aspects of his claim were not accepted as credible. His
       partner Mr Brobbey referred to the Appellant having spoken  regularly
       to his parents, which did not give  the  impression  that  they  were
       truly separated. He had  left  Ghana  in  a  planned  and  deliberate
       manner, and his visa application had contained  significant  untruths
       regarding his employment and the claim that he had been sponsored  by
       the Agona West Municipal Assembly to study in  the  UK;  it  was  not
       accepted that any agent had been involved in this process. His  claim
       to have met Mr Brobbey by chance was not  credible,  and  his  asylum
       claim was made late, notwithstanding his being an educated man,  only
       after three years spent working in a false identity,  having  quickly
       abandoned his studies here, and was apparently promoted only  by  his
       arrest for working illegally.

    6. The First-tier tribunal  summarised  the  relevant  country  evidence
       thus. The Home Office CIG  report  stated  that  LTBT  persons  faced
       intolerance and discrimination, though asylum would only be warranted
       if  they  faced  a  combination  of  measures   which   amounted   to
       persecution; the dangers from non-state actors might  be  avoided  by
       moving to another part of the country, particularly Accra,  where  it
       was not unreasonable to do so. Human Rights Watch stated  that  there
       was  an  "anti-gay  law"  in  force  but  there  had  been  very  few
       prosecutions. The Ghanaian permanent mission to the UN  had  reported
       that the national law prohibited persecution and violence against the
       LGBTi community.

    7. Assessing his claim  based  on  the  accepted  facts  of  his  gender
       preference and the two incidents that had occurred to him, the First-
       tier Tribunal concluded that he had faced discrimination rather  than
       persecution. He had been able to place classified advertisements with
       a view to arranging to meet other members of the LGBTi community. The
       incident at the funeral might have been motivated by a  feeling  that
       he had acted disrespectfully. No police action was taken against  him
       following these incidents, which were a  decade  apart,  and  neither
       beating was serious. He had apparently been able to pursue a same-sex
       relationship for many years without suffering serious harm.

    8. That left the HJ (Iran) question, ie whether he lived discreetly  and
       the  reasons  for  that  decision.  He  had  indeed   practiced   his
       homosexuality discreetly in Ghana, in the context of the conservative
       environment of which his family  was  part.  Ghana  was  a  religious
       society  and  a  liberal   democracy;   there   might   be   societal
       discrimination  there  leading  to  violence,  but  the  police   and
       government were supportive of the  LGBTi  community.  There  were  no
       societal pressures in the UK driven by persecution yet he  had  lived
       here discreetly: Mr Broppey's family had not been told of the  nature
       of their relationship, to avoid causing offence.

    9. As to the Appellant's claim  on  human  rights  grounds,  he  and  Mr
       Broppey could legitimately live discreetly in Ghana; the latter's 14-
       year old British citizen son did not live with him  and  could  visit
       him in Ghana. There was no credible evidence  suggesting  Mr  Broppey
       would face difficulties because of his kidney condition. There was no
       evidence to show that  the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Ghana given his history of education  and
       work there, and the skills and experience he had gained  in  the  UK.
       Looking at the claim outside the Rules, his precarious residence, his
       inability to  speak  adequate  English  and  his  lack  of  financial
       independence  showed  that  his  departure  would  not  represent   a
       disproportionate interference with his private life.

   10. Grounds of appeal argued that the First-tier tribunal  had  erred  in
       law because

        a) Having apparently  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  suffered
           physical violence on account of his sexuality it  was  untenable
           to  proceed  to  find  that  level  of  mistreatment   was   not
           persecution - furthermore it  was  unclear,  given  the  partial
           acceptance of the Appellant's credibility, as to  whether  these
           assaults were accepted;

        b) Relevant country evidence was overlooked that showed a  risk  of
           persecution rather than discrimination;

        c) Evidence as to the closeness of Mr Broppey to his  son  who  had
           recently stayed with him for three months was overlooked,  which
           was relevant to the reasonableness of Mr Broppey's relocation to
           Ghana;

        d) It failed to take account of the fact that Mr Broppey would  not
           be able to  access  NHS  treatment  in  Ghana,  whereas  he  was
           entitled to such treatment as a person with indefinite leave  to
           remain in the UK;

        e) Failing to take account of  the  couple's  LGBti  identity  when
           assessing whether the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant
           obstacles to integration in Ghana.

   11. Permission to appeal was granted on all  grounds  by  the  First-tier
       tribunal on 21 August 2018, particular reference being  made  to  the
       arguable lack of clarity as to the accepted events, the finding  that
       violence amounted to discrimination rather than persecution, and  the
       failure to consider the  Appellant's  sexuality  when  assessing  the
       obstacles to integration.

   12. Mr Azmi for the Appellant made submissions in line with  the  grounds
       of appeal, pointing out the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       evidence which had been arguably overlooked. The country evidence had
       not been fairly summarised by the First-tier  Tribunal:  for  example
       Human Rights Watch in their report of January 2018  had  stated  that
       LGBT people very frequently suffered physical violence  and  the  May
       2016 Solace Brothers Foundation publication A  shadow  report  raised
       similar concerns.

   13. Mr Lindsay submitted that the two incidents  said  to  demonstrate  a
       real risk of persecution to the Appellant on a return  to  Ghana  had
       been appropriately addressed: he had been beaten both at  school  and
       at  a  funeral  following  his  behaviour  being  seen  as   socially
       inappropriate.  Neither  incident  was   due   to   the   foreseeable
       consequences of everyday life in Ghana for the Appellant were  he  to
       return there as an adult. The judge's treatment of private and family
       life was lawful; there was nothing  suggesting  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh or unreasonable to reintegrate into local society.

Findings and reasons

   14. It seems to me that the grounds  of  appeal  are  made  out  in  this
       appeal. As Carnwath LJ explained in YH [2010] EWCA Civ 116 that  term
       "has by usage acquired special significance as underlining  the  very
       special human context in which such cases are brought, and  the  need
       for decisions to show by their  reasoning  that  every  factor  which
       might tell in favour of an applicant has  been  properly  taken  into
       account."

   15. Firstly, there is a concern  as  to  the  impression  the  First-tier
       Tribunal derived from the country evidence before it. It is important
       to set out the flavour of the material said to have been  overlooked.
       For example, Human Rights Watch stated that  "LGBT  people  are  very
       frequently victims of  physical  violence  and  psychological  abuse,
       extortion and discrimination in many different aspects of daily life,
       because of their sexual orientation and gender identity." The  report
       Human  Rights  Violations  Against  Lesbian,   Gay,   Bisexual,   and
       Transgender (LGBT) People in Ghana: A Shadow  Report  (submitted  for
       consideration at the 117th Session of  the  Human  Rights  Committee;
       Geneva, June-July  2016,  by  the  Solace  Brothers  Foundation,  The
       Initiative for Equal Rights, Center for International Human Rights of
       Northwestern Pritzker School of Law) set out the following:

           "Amnesty International and the NGO  Freedom  House  reported  in
           2013 that violence against the LGBT community was prevalent  and
           that "the persecution of sexual minorities has escalated.

           ...

           In December 2014, residents of Libya Quarters at Madina Zongo in
           Accra conducted a manhunt targeting a young man accused of being
           homosexual. Malam Shaibu, an Islamic  cleric  at  Madina  Zongo,
           said, "We shall burn  [him]  to  death"  because  "Islam  abhors
           homosexuality."  The  leader  of  the  manhunt,  Shehu  Munkaila
           Iddrisu, told the Daily Guide in an interview, "We shall burn or
           bury him alive to  serve  as  a  deterrent  to  others  who  may
           entertain any thoughts of engaging in  homosexuality."  The  mob
           severely beat members of the young man's family,  including  his
           mother and father,  and  set  fire  to  a  motorbike  that  they
           believed belonged to the targeted man.

           ...

           During a period of time in 2015, the LBGT community in the  Nima
           area of Accra was terrorized  by  a  homophobic  vigilante  gang
           called "Safety Empire," whose stated aim is to "wage  a  crusade
           against homosexuality." The leader of this group,  who  goes  by
           various names including Sulley Fuseini and Doya Dundu,  referred
           to himself on one of his Facebook pages  as  "The  Gay  Slayer."
           According to reports, Fuseini and his gang  would  attack  their
           victims after Fuseini had lured them on Facebook under the guise
           of asking them on a date. Upon a victim's arrival,  Fuseini  and
           his gang would strip, beat, and humiliate the victim. Videos  of
           these  attacks  were  posted  on  social  media,  thus   further
           humiliating the victim and causing fear in the LGBT community.

           ...

           In January 2016, a mob of students at  Opoku  Ware  Senior  High
           School in Kumasi attempted to lynch three male students who were
           accused of having "engaged in homosexuality." The attackers, who
           were prevented from carrying out  the  attack  by  some  of  the
           teachers at the school, had been armed with clubs, machetes  and
           stones. The school responded to this situation by expelling  the
           three intended victims."

   16. These extracts from the country evidence clearly show that  there  is
       some risk of physical violence that reaches the level of persecution.
       The First-tier Tribunal nevertheless overlooked this  material.  This
       is relevant on the facts of this  case,  because  the  Appellant  has
       twice suffered physical  violence  following  the  detection  of  his
       sexual preference. The country evidence tends to show that one  could
       not rule out a risk of their repetition.

   17. I do not accept, as Mr Lindsay argued, that the incidents in question
       can simply be discounted as the kind  of  violence  which  is  to  be
       expected in the averagely robust school or  inevitably  ensuing  from
       social disapproval of behaviour at a funeral. The evidence  comprised
       in letters and witness statements on file was that the Appellant  was
       engaged in sexual relations in private on both occasions; these  were
       not ostentatious displays that could reasonably have caused  offence.
       The funeral incident did not take place at a ceremonial occasion  but
       at the family home (according to the interview record) - nevertheless
       individuals broke into  the  room.  Clearly  they  must  have  animus
       against the Appellant behaviour  predicated  on  their  view  of  his
       sexuality in order to act as they did. The country  evidence  depicts
       serious incidents of vigilante violence in not  dissimilar  contexts.
       Those suspicions  might  well  have  been  motivated  by  persecutory
       intent. The Judge erred in law in failing to  take  account  of  this
       possibility.

   18. Secondly, there is the question of how the Appellant would in  future
       behave, assessed in the context of how he has behaved  in  Ghana  and
       the UK in the past. HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC  31  establishes  �82  that
       where "a material reason for the applicant living discreetly  on  his
       return would be a fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he
       were  to  live  openly  ...  then,  other  things  being  equal,  his
       application should be accepted". The  Appellant's  evidence  included
       his answer at interview that he knew of  negative  attitudes  towards
       gay people in Ghana from secondary school: "I knew you could  not  do
       it in public, you could not say this is your gay partner in public; I
       heard a story about a lesbian being beaten to death by people." Asked
       at interview whether he was open about his  relationship,  he  stated
       that "Not really apart from one or two gay and  lesbian  friends  who
       knew us". Additionally of course he advertised for a  sexual  partner
       in Ghana under a false name.  None  of  this  sits  easily  with  the
       evidence identified  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  apparently
       showed that he had been consistently able to live  relatively  openly
       in Ghana.

   19. Given the case-specific and country-oriented evidence to which I have
       just referred, plus the fact  that  the  Appellant  was  accepted  as
       having previously suffered violence when his sexual identity came  to
       light, I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal could  lawfully
       conclude that any future choice to live discreetly would  be  due  to
       generalised  social  pressures  rather  than  a   desire   to   avoid
       recurrences  of  such  violence  without   a   significantly   closer
       engagement with the material than the exercise it carried out.

   20.  Thirdly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made   clear   findings,   when
       determining the asylum ground of appeal,  that  the  Appellant  would
       face discrimination rather than persecution in his country of origin.
       Patently the existence of discrimination  is  relevant  to  the  non-
       asylum ground in assessing whether he  would  face  very  significant
       obstacles to  integration  on  a  return  there.  These  findings  re
       discrimination were wholly overlooked when the private life claim was
       assessed. As stated in the Respondent's  Guidance  Family  Migration:
       Appendix FM Section 1.0b: Family Life (as a Partner  or  Parent)  and
       Private Life: 10-Year Routes (22 February 2018):

           "The decision maker must consider the degree of difficulty  that
           would be faced as a result of the applicant's  faith,  political
           or sexual orientation or sexual identity based on the  situation
           in practice in the country of return and not necessarily  solely
           what is provided for in law. The applicant's previous experience
           of life in that  country  and  any  difficulties  the  applicant
           claims to have experienced as a result of their faith, political
           or  sexual  orientation  or  sexual  identity   must   also   be
           considered."

   21. For these reasons I consider that the grounds of appeal are made out.
       There were significant errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal requiring that the appeal be re-heard.

   22. There is a further factor that should be taken into  account  by  any
       Judge considering this  appeal  in  the  future.  The  Asylum  Policy
       instruction Sexual orientation in asylum claims (Version 6.0) states:



           "Feelings of shame, cultural implications, or painful  memories,
           particularly those  of  a  sexual  nature,  may  have  led  some
           claimants to feel reluctant about  speaking  openly  about  such
           issues and may therefore not be uncommon."

   23. That policy instruction also contains these further passages:

           "Stigmatisation, shame and secrecy

           Some LGB people may originate from countries in which  they  are
           made to feel ashamed, humiliated and stigmatised  due  to  their
           sexual orientation. This may be  through  homophobic  attitudes,
           instilled within children in  early  years  that  being  gay  is
           shameful and wrong. This can be compounded where the  individual
           is made to  feel  different  and  separated  from  their  peers,
           causing such negative messages to become internalised. Claimants
           may  reference  in  their   narratives,   elements   of   strong
           disapproval  from  external   sources,   indicating   that   the
           claimant's sexual orientation and  or  conduct  is  seen  to  be
           unacceptable, immoral, sinful, and socially disgusting.

           ...

           Responding to a claimant's narrative: issues around 'difference'

           Most LGB asylum claimants live their lives  in  societies  where
           being 'straight' is considered as the norm. From the perspective
           of the persecutor, the issue can be the fact that the individual
           is not conforming to common  prevailing  normative  heterosexual
           stereotypes. In effect, the behaviour which  may  give  rise  to
           harm, harassment or persecution may not  be  LGB  behaviour  (or
           perceived LGB behaviour), but behaviour or lifestyles which  are
           deemed not to be heterosexual enough."

   24. The UNHCR have also recognised these themes, in their  Guidelines  On
       International Protection No. 9

           "Ascertaining the applicant's LGBTI background is essentially an
           issue of credibility. The  assessment  of  credibility  in  such
           cases needs to be undertaken in an individualized and  sensitive
           way.  Exploring  elements  around   the   applicant's   personal
           perceptions, feelings and experiences of difference, stigma  and
           shame are  usually  more  likely  to  help  the  decision  maker
           ascertain the applicant's sexual orientation or gender identity,
           rather than a focus on sexual practices."

   25. As the Judge noted below, this was not a case where the Appellant was
       living an openly gay lifestyle in the UK. So the relevance  of  these
       considerations will have to be considered  when  a  Judge  re-hearing
       this appeal assesses the concerns as to his claim's credibility based
       on the delay in claiming asylum.

Decision

The appeal is allowed,  as  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for re-hearing afresh; no findings are preserved.

Signed      Date 8 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
