
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01392/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 27 November 2019              |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                      M H
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran. He appeals with permission against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  ("FtTJ"),  promulgated  on  the  7
    August 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's history is set out in the  decision  letter  of  the  1
    February 2019 and the decision of the  FtTJ  at  paragraphs  1-16.  The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  a  spouse  visa  which  was
    curtailed on the 22 May 2018. It was asserted that he claimed  to  have
    returned to Iran in February 2018 but returned to the UK  in  May  2018
    and made a claim for asylum on 18th July 2018.

 3. He provided a screening interview and was interviewed about the factual
    basis of his claim on the 14th December 2018. In addition, there  is  a
    screening  interview  and  a  Preliminary   Information   Questionnaire
    completed by appellant.

 4. The basis of his claim related to his sexual orientation  and  that  on
    return to Iran he would be at risk of harm. In a decision letter  dated
    the 1 February 2019, the respondent refused his claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection. It was accepted the appellant was  an  Iranian
    national but did not accept his claim relating  to  his  sexuality  and
    therefore membership of a particular social group.

 5. As can be seen within those paragraphs, the Secretary of State set  out
    a number of credibility and plausibility issues relating  to  the  core
    aspects of his claim.

 6. It is common ground that following his interview, the respondent sent a
    letter to the appellant's legal advisors and the  Tribunal  dated  12th
    March 2019, setting out a new issue which arose from what the appellant
    had said in his interview  and  that  notice  was  given  that  if  the
    appellant's credibility was accepted, he should be  excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention under Article 1F  (b)  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    committed a serious  non-political  crime  (  sexual  activity  with  a
    minor). The letter set out the primary position,  which  was  that  the
    appellant was not credible and that none of the activity took place and
    the appeal should be dismissed on credibility grounds.

 7.  The  appellant  sought  to  appeal  that  decision.   In  a   decision
    promulgated on the 26 July 2019, the FtTJ dismissed the appeal  on  the
    basis of an admission in his interview that he had been involved with a
    minor and thus he should be excluded from the Refugee Convention  under
    Article 1F (b)  and then having concluded that the  appellant  had  not
    given a credible or plausible account as to his sexual orientation that
    he would not be at risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  contrary  to
    Article 3.

 8. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of  appeal  were  issued
    for permission to appeal and that  application  was  refused  by  Judge
    Chohan on the 6 September 2019. On reconsideration permission to appeal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on the 26th September 2019.

 9. As a result of the grant of permission  the  appeal  comes  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, Ms Rogers relied upon the grounds as drafted. Mr  Mills
    relied upon the Rule 24 response dated 9 October 2019 and I have  heard
    oral submissions from each of the advocates.

10. I am grateful for the submissions made by each of the advocates  and  I
    have taken into account the matters raised both in the written  grounds
    and in the oral submissions. Having done so, I am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law.
    I shall set out my reasons for reaching that decision below  and  shall
    do so by reference to the decision of the FtTJ and the submissions that
    I have heard.

11. The basis of the appellant's claim related to his  sexual  orientation.
    The appellant gave evidence concerning both events in  his  country  of
    nationality and also in the United  Kingdom,  which  included  evidence
    from a partner and from an organisation with whom he had been  involved
    with. The FtTJ did not accept his account of  his  sexuality  and  also
    reached the conclusion that he should be excluded from  the  Convention
    as a result of admission concerning sexual activity with a minor.

12. There are a number of grounds  that  are  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. I  begin  with  ground  4  which  relates  to  the  evidence
    concerning his sexual orientation in the United Kingdom. The  appellant
    relied upon evidence  from  his  partner  and  also  evidence  from  an
    organisation who have provided support for LGBT  asylum  seekers.  This
    evidence is set out in two letters (pages 15  -  19  of  the  appellant
    bundle)  and  in  addition  the  FtTJ  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's partner and from a member of the organisation.

13. The FtTJ considered the evidence from his partner and at paragraphs  61
    - 62 reached the conclusion that she could give little  weight  to  the
    evidence. The judge questioned the support given to  the  appellant  by
    his partner as "self-serving" on the basis  that  his  partner  had  an
    ongoing asylum claim and that the evidence did not add anything to  the
    appellant's relationship. The FtTJ accepted that there were photographs
    showing him and his partner together but that they did  not  illustrate
    whether they were in a relationship.

14. It is asserted in behalf of the appellant  that  the  FtTJ  engaged  in
    speculation in the finding made that the  evidence  was  "self-serving"
    and that there was no evidential basis for such a finding. Mr Mills  on
    behalf of the respondent submitted that it had been open to the FtTJ to
    make that finding  of  fact  as  it  was  not  speculative  and  was  a
    reasonable conclusion to reach. The written rule  24  response  asserts
    that the evidence generally added little to the appellant's claim.

15. I have considered those submissions in the light of  the  evidence  and
    the assessment made. In my judgement there are  no  clear  findings  of
    fact concerning the evidence of the appellant's claimed partner. Whilst
    I accept  that  the  witness  statement  submitted  was  brief  in  its
    contents, the appellant's partner did give  oral  evidence  as  to  the
    relationship. The  FtTJ  did  make  some  reference  to  that  evidence
    concerning where he had lived but did not make reference to  the  other
    evidence given  concerning  the  nature  of  this  relationship.  I  am
    conscious of the fact that a  same-sex  relationship  cannot  define  a
    person's orientation however whether the appellant had been in such  an
    intimate relationship with his partner was  a  relevant  factor  to  be
    considered in the round.

16. I would accept that the photographic evidence on its own could properly
    be viewed as having limited weight because photographs as they stand in
    isolation  do  not  demonstrate  whether  a  relationship  is  genuine.
    However, here there was evidence of his  relationship  in  the  written
    witness statement and this was  evidence  in  support  of  his  claimed
    sexuality even if the FtTJ did not  find  this  to  be  evidence  of  a
    genuine relationship.

17. Furthermore I accept the submission that  there  was  some  speculation
    concerning the partner's position. Mr Mills  submits  this  was  not  a
    speculative finding because there was no  suggestion  that  his  asylum
    claim was not related to the current claim.  Whilst there appears to be
    no dispute that the appellant's partner had made a claim for asylum  in
    his own right as a fresh claim,  it does not appear  that  any  further
    details had been given as to the basis of this fresh  claim  either  in
    writing  or  in  cross  examination.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  FtTJ
    questioned whether the support given to the appellant  by  his  partner
    was "self-serving". There are no clear  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
    nature of the relationship or whether he had  been  untruthful  in  his
    evidence or even the factual basis of his present or earlier claim.

18. Dealing with ground five, this relates to the other supporting evidence
    advanced on behalf of the appellant. It  is  submitted  on  behalf  the
    appellant that the FtTJ erred in her assessment and in her approach  to
    the evidence of the author of the letter and that the  judge's  finding
    that the witness could  not  have  made  a  proper  assessment  of  the
    appellant over 10 hours when the appellant spoke broken English  failed
    to take into account that the witness had confirmed in  his  assessment
    that whilst the appellant's English was limited, it had been sufficient
    for him to understand and reach an assessment. It is further  contended
    that the FtTJ failed to put those concerns to the witness and  did  not
    give him the opportunity to give evidence on that issue to support  the
    assessment made.

19. Mr Mills on behalf of the respondent submitted the findings of the FtTJ
    were open to her on the basis that the judge gave adequate  reasons  as
    to why she did not accord that evidence any weight and because  he  did
    not have the experience to make a reliable assessment (see paragraph 62
    of the decision).

20. I have considered the submissions in the light of the  FtTJ's  findings
    and the documentation. I am satisfied  that  the  grounds  have  merit.
    While the FtTJ was not bound to  accept  the  assertions  made  in  the
    letter or in the oral evidence, it was evidence nonetheless  which  was
    relied upon in determining the appellant's account of his sexuality  as
    a gay man. The assessment of that evidence is set out at  paragraph  62
    and it is plain that the judge gave little weight to that evidence  for
    two reasons. Firstly, because the FtTJ was  "not  convinced  "that  the
    witness could make an  assessment  due  to  the  appellant's  level  of
    English and because it had not been said that he  had  the  appropriate
    experience to deal with this type of case.

21. Dealing with the first reason, it is recorded in the oral evidence that
    the witness  had  given  evidence  that  he  understood  the  appellant
    sufficiently well for an assessment take place. As the grounds set out,
    given that evidence it had not been further suggested to the witness or
    put to the witness that his assessment had been undermined  in  anyway.
    The difficulty with finding is  that  the  witness  did  not  have  the
    opportunity to  answer  that  criticism.  Whilst  I  would  accept  the
    submission made by  Mr  Mills  in  general  terms  that  it  is  not  a
    requirement that every point is put to witness, in this case it was the
    principal reason for reaching the conclusion that little  weight  could
    be attached to the evidence. In the light of the oral evidence  of  the
    witness who had said that he understood the appellant sufficiently well
    for an assessment take place, if that was to be  rejected  the  witness
    should have been given the opportunity to say  why  that  was  not  the
    position.

22. Furthermore as I understand the evidence of the  witness,  he  was  not
    giving evidence as an "expert"  or  evidence  that  could  properly  be
    characterised as "expert evidence" and therefore the FtTJ's  assessment
    that he and his colleague did not have the necessary expertise to  deal
    with "this type of case" ignored the type of evidence they were able or
    could give  which  related  to  their  conversations,  their  work  and
    understanding of the appellant and importantly his  partner,  who  they
    also made reference to  in  the  documentary  evidence  which  did  not
    feature in the assessment.

23. For those reasons, the grounds at paragraphs 4 and 5 have been made out
    and therefore the undermined the assessment made of his sexuality which
    is relevant to the issue of risk on return.

24. I now turn to ground 2 which relates to the issue of Article 1F and the
    appellant's exclusion from the Convention as a result of evidence given
    in his asylum interview where it is  said that he gave  an  account  of
    engaging in a sexual relationship with a minor.

25. As set out earlier, the issue of Article 1F and his exclusion from  the
    Convention had not been raised in the decision letter issued after  the
    asylum interview had taken place. As a result,  neither  the  appellant
    nor his legal representatives had been asked to put forward any written
    submissions concerning this issue. It is normally the case that when an
    Article 1F issue arises from evidence submitted by the appellant, it is
    properly raised in a  decision  letter  as  a  result  of  the  serious
    consequences exclusion from the Convention can have for an appellant  (
    as referred to in  the respondent's guidance).

26. It appears from the  documents  before  Tribunal  that  the  presenting
    officer raised this as a further submission and as a  "new  issue"  two
    days before the substantive hearing which at that  time  had  been  set
    down in March 2019. The "new issue" was set out in writing in a  letter
    where it was noted that upon preparation for the hearing a "significant
    new issue" had come to light. It made reference  to  the  part  of  the
    interview relied upon which made reference to an admission made  as  to
    sexual  activity  with  a  minor  but  also  made  reference   to   the
    relationship continuing when the appellant was an  adult.  The  hearing
    was adjourned on the application of the appellant's representatives who
    required time to consider the issue given  the  late  introduction  and
    identified that there were issues with the translation and  the  phrase
    "sexual  relationship"  which,  it  was  said,  was  not  an   accurate
    translation. Subsequently, the appellant provided a  written  statement
    in which he stated that he did not have a sexual relationship with  the
    minor concerned and made reference to the word or phrase in Farsi which
    had been incorrectly interpreted (see paragraph 3).

27. The FtTJ considered the appellant's evidence at paragraphs 47 - 49  but
    reached the conclusion that the  interview  questions  and  replies  at
    question 75 - 77 were "clear and specific" and  that  he  had  repeated
    that he did have such a relationship with a minor and that it could not
    have been misinterpreted. The FtTJ had stated that she  could  not  see
    how the interpreter could have taken the word used out of context.

28. The grounds assert that the FtTJ was wrong to make  this  finding  when
    the FtTJ had also made the  finding  that  on  the  same  part  of  the
    interview there  had  been  confusion  in  his  answers  and  that  the
    appellant had given varying answers (see paragraph  48  of  the  FTT  J
    decision) but then went on to find that those answers were  "clear  and
    specific". Therefore Miss Rogers submits that the reasoning of the FtTJ
    was contradictory and it was not open to the judge  to  find  that  the
    interpreter could not have taken the  word  in  Farsi  out  of  context
    despite the earlier finding that there  had  been  confusion  over  the
    evidence in that part of his interview.

29. Mr Mills by way of  response  to  the  Tribunal  through  the  relevant
    questions both the earlier questions are questions 54 - 58 and then the
    questions at 75 - 77 and submits that the appellant gave  a  particular
    chronology  as  to  the  events  concerning  the  alleged  conduct.  He
    therefore submits that it was open to the judge on a reading  of  those
    questions taken together that the  appellant  had  given  a  clear  and
    specific response which was in support  of  the  finding  made  by  the
    judge.

30. I have considered the FtTJ's assessment of the appellant's evidence and
    in the light of the interview and the other evidence provided.  On  the
    face of the asylum interview replies set out questions  54  -  58,  the
    appellant appears to be making reference to discussing  "his  feelings"
    and that he had spoken to a younger  person  who  was  in  a  different
    position and who had been involved in sexual relations with  other  men
    (see question 54) which he later clarified as not taking place with men
    but "with boys" (see question 58).  However  the  interviewing  officer
    does not pick up on an  inconsistency  concerning  the  reply.  As  the
    appellant was not the same age as the younger boy  concerned,  when  he
    stated that the boys and he  were  of  the  same  age  that  could  not
    correct. The appellant's reply at Q 56 he referred to his  relationship
    with the young man as "close" but made no  reference  to  it  being  an
    intimate relationship. The following  questions  concerned  the  sexual
    relationship.  At  question  75  the  appellant  made  reference  to  a
    relationship with the younger boy. The interviewer at question 76  then
    put to the appellant that he had never raised a relationship with  this
    boy and that he had only spoken to  him  and  asked  the  appellant  to
    explain why he now stated he had a relationship with him and  that  his
    account had changed. The response to that question  made  reference  to
    the fact that he did have a sexual relationship with him "many  times".
    A similar reply was  elicited  in  answer  to  the  question  asked  at
    question 77 when the interviewer sought clarification.

31. On the face of the questions asked and those replies, it  was  open  to
    the FtTJ to  reach  the  conclusion  that  he  had  made  an  admission
    concerning a sexual relationship. However, in rejecting the appellant's
    explanation, there was no reference made to the general confusion  that
    he had in the interview in expressing his feelings and  explaining  his
    background. There was some acceptance of this in the FtTJ's  assessment
    generally at paragraph  48  where  the  judge  did  make  reference  to
    elements of confusion  from  questions  50  onwards  and  also  in  her
    findings  at  paragraph  62  where  the  FtTJ  made  reference  to  the
    misunderstanding  of  the  asylum  interview  record   even   with   an
    interpreter present. What gives rise for concern is  that  it  had  not
    been clarified at any stage what the term given in Farsi and identified
    in the witness statement means in this context. I would  accept  as  Mr
    Mills submitted that this should have been  the  subject  of  evidence.
    However I can find no evidence as to whether this was in fact clarified
    in the oral evidence and whether this  potentially  could  have  had  a
    different meaning. In my judgement this should have been  clarified  by
    the advocates in order to set the interview in context. This is equally
    of importance given that there  had  been  accepted  confusion  in  the
    interview generally and that both issues were relevant in  reaching  an
    overall assessment particularly when that evidence was  the  basis  for
    his claim as one which should be  excluded  under  Article  1F  of  the
    Convention.

32. However, even if the appellant's evidence  was  correct  the  FtTJ  was
    required to consider whether this met  the  threshold  of  Article  1F.
    Beyond the recitation at paragraph 37 and  the  reference  to  "serious
    reasons" there was no assessment  beyond  the  admission  made  by  the
    appellant before reaching the conclusion that he was excluded from  the
    Convention. Whilst  paragraph  46  of  the  decision  appears  to  make
    reference to a concession, I have not been able to resolve  that  issue
    from the material before me and in the light of the submission made  by
    Ms Rogers  that there were no instructions given for such a  concession
    to be made and there are no notes of evidence in the papers.

33. There is also a tension in the findings made. The FtTJ then went on  to
    find that his account did not demonstrate homosexuality but paedophilia
    (see paragraph 52) then stated that  the  appellant  had  outlined  his
    early experiences in order to  explain  the  confusion  about  his  own
    sexuality and at paragraph 53 then considered further the account given
    by the appellant relating to the young man concerned  and  reached  the
    conclusion that the appellant's  account  did  not  ring  true.  It  is
    therefore unclear whether the FTT J did find the appellant's account to
    be a credible  or  not  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  Article  1F
    assessment. There are other findings at paragraphs 57 and 58 where  the
    FtTJ did not find to undermine his  credibility  and  potentially  lent
    support to his account. However the FtTJ did not make it clear  whether
    she accepted the appellant's relationship with "A" and  similarly  with
    paragraph 59 and the relationship with his  wife  and  the  appellant's
    attempts to contact A  and  no   clear  findings  were  made  in  those
    paragraphs beyond the statement that the FtTJ did not find  that  those
    issues undermined the appellant's credibility.

34. I have not found this to be an easy decision to reach  and  the  issues
    are not straightforward. The FtTJ made an adverse  findings  which  has
    not been challenged (see paragraph 56). I am equally mindful  that  the
    FtTJ had the advantage of  hearing  oral  evidence.  However,  for  the
    reasons that I have set out of the  on  balance  and  applying  anxious
    scrutiny to the evidence, I am satisfied that there were  errors  which
    affected the assessment of the appellant's claim concerning his claimed
    sexuality. This was relevant whether or not he was to be excluded  from
    the Convention which went to his Article  3  claim  and  was  therefore
    material in that respect. As to the admission made  by  the  appellant,
    there are conflicting findings upon this which I have identified  above
    and when taken together I have reached the conclusion that as a  result
    no safe findings can be made  therefore  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

35. Given the nature of the errors none of those findings of  fact  can  be
    preserved. The evidence as to  the  appellant's  replies  an  interview
    remain as set out in the written documentation and  if  the  respondent
    seeks to rely on the point raised concerning Article 1F the issue, this
    will need to be properly considered in light of the evidence  presented
    and in accordance with the law relating to Article 1F.

36. Consequently it has been demonstrated that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge involved the making of an error on a point of law.

37. In the light of the conclusion that there are no factual findings  that
    can be preserved, I have therefore  considered  whether  it  should  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal or remitted  to  the  FtT  for  a  further
    hearing. In reaching that decision I have given  careful  consideration
    to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

38. As it  will be necessary for the appellant and the  witnesses  to  give
    evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues, further  fact-finding
    will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return in the light
    of the relevant law and in my judgement the best course and  consistent
    with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a
    further hearing.

39. I note that there was medical evidence before  the  FtTJ.  The  parties
    should raise with the Tribunal in advance whether there are any  issues
    arising from the AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123  in  which  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior
    President, referred to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.  2  of
    2010 and also the Practice Direction.

Decision:

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law, the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Date 10/1/2020

     Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
