

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01812/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 13 September 2019                         |on 18 September 2019          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr G O'Ceallaigh instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors (Harrow Office).
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on the 31 May 2019 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17  September  1978.
        Permission to appeal was sought on 6 grounds.
     3. On 16 July 2019 First-Tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted  permission
        to appeal on Ground 4 only.
     4. The appellant renewed the application for permission to  appeal  on
        the remaining grounds to the Upper Tribunal, which  was  considered
        by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill who in a decision of 3 September  2019
        refused permission to appeal on any of the remaining  grounds.  The
        appeal  therefore  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  limited  to
        assessing whether the Judge made an error of law  for  the  reasons
        pleaded at Ground 4 which is in the following terms:


             Ground 4: in failing to make findings on material matters  the
             FTT erred in law


             22.  The result of the FTT's approach in concentrating on  the
                  documents relied on by the Appellant was that it failed to
                  make findings on several other material matters.


             23.  Firstly, the FTT erred in failing to make findings on the
                  question of  whether  the  Appellant's  brother  had  been
                  murdered or not. That was a material fact  that  supported
                  her case: (i) by showing why she did the work she  claimed
                  to do, which the FTT ultimately disbelieved; and  (ii)  by
                  showing previous  incidents  of  persecution  (Katrinak  v
                  SSHD[2001] EWCA Civ 832 at [23]).


             24.  Secondly, despite the Appellant being unwell to the point
                  where  she  had  recently   been   hospitalised   with   a
                  demonstrable suicide risk,  the  FTT  failed  to  consider
                  whether or not there was a  risk  of  an  Article  3  ECHR
                  breach on her removal. This was a matter expressly  before
                  it (see refusal letter at p24).


             25.   Thirdly,  the  FTT   in   considering   the   Appellants
                  credibility failed to give any corroborative weight of the
                  very fact of her illness.  Given  the  fact  that  it  was
                  apparently accepted that she was a  successful  lawyer  in
                  Pakistan, the fact that she was  plainly  traumatised  was
                  clearly material to the question of whether she  left  the
                  country voluntarily.


             26.  The Appellant submits that the failure to consider  these
                  essential material matters amounted to errors of law.



Error of law


     5. The Judge appears to accept that the appellant's brother  had  been
        murdered in [11(5)] of the decision under challenge  in  which  the
        Judge writes:


             (5)  It is of concern to  me  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
                  demonstrates that it is only in the months  preceding  her
                  arrival in the  United  Kingdom  in  July  2018  when  she
                  claimed asylum, that suddenly the Taliban began to  target
                  her with persistent consistency. In the light of the  fact
                  that her brother was killed in  2009,  that  she  had  all
                  along been practising  as  an  advocate  in  human  rights
                  activities and as she claims in fighting and  bringing  to
                  justice terrorists in the Courts,  there  is  no  credible
                  explanation as to why, after a period of almost a  decade,
                  there should be the sudden eruption  in  Taliban  activity
                  against her, in a few months before  she  claimed  asylum.
                  This is  a  feature  of  the  evidence  that  in  my  view
                  significantly undermines the credibility of the claim that
                  the Appellant has ever received threats from  the  Taliban
                  and the weight of the documentary evidence she relies on.


     6. There was a considerable volume of evidence made available  to  the
        Upper Tribunal in the bundles submitted under cover of a letter  of
        12 September 2019 and handed in on the day. These included evidence
        regarding the appellant's brother's  death  at  the  hands  of  the
        Taliban and a post-mortem report confirming the appellant's brother
        had been shot. Mr O'Ceallaigh's submission  was  that  the  Judge's
        short sentence that the appellant's brother had been killed in 2009
        was  insufficient  as  there  are  no  specific  findings  on   the
        appellant's submissions  relating  to  those  responsible  for  the
        appellant's brother's  death,  the  issue  of  causation,  and  the
        relationship of the same to the appellant's claim that she faced  a
        real risk on return from this source.
     7. The task for the Judge was to consider what is reasonably likely to
        happen to the appellant on return which requires an  assessment  of
        the evidence as a whole. Mr Walker on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
        State accepted there was considerable evidence relied upon  by  the
        appellant on which there was no evidence of whether  the  same  had
        been properly considered or adequate findings made upon  the  same.
        It was accepted by Mr Walker  that  an  analysis  of  the  evidence
        compared to the decision reveals arguable merit in  the  claim  the
        Judge failed to properly consider the evidence as a  whole  and  to
        make adequate findings  on  which  aspects  of  the  evidence  were
        accepted and not accepted, sufficient to amount to material error.
     8. In relation to the second issue, at the commencement of the hearing
        time  was  taken  to  examine  the  Judge's   written   record   of
        proceedings, that prepared by the Presenting Officer  on  the  day,
        and the papers as a whole to ascertain whether human rights were  a
        live issue before the  Judge.  There  is  clear  reference  in  the
        original Grounds of appeal to a challenge on human  rights  grounds
        pursuant to articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR. It was accepted, following an
        analysis of the available material,  that  human  rights  had  been
        specifically raised before the Judge and was therefore a live issue
        upon which the Judge was required  to  make  specific  findings.  A
        reading of the determination shows no such findings were made  with
        the Judge only dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds at [14]. The
        humanitarian protection (Article 15(c))  and  human  rights  claims
        therefore remain extant upon  which  a  decision  is  required.  Mr
        O'Ceallaigh confirmed the appellant is relying upon articles 2  and
        3 in relation to the protection elements, article 3 in relation  to
        health issues (mental health), and article 8  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's private life in the United Kingdom. The appellant  does
        not claim an ability to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human
        rights grounds.
     9. In relation to the third issue:  although  the  Judge  refused  the
        adjournment request in relation to which permission to  appeal  has
        not been granted, it does  not  appear  to  be  disputed  that  the
        appellant has mental health problems.  The  more  recent  statement
        confirms  that  with  the  assistance   of   medication   she   has
        considerably improved but that was not the  situation  appertaining
        at the date of the decision under challenge. The Judge should  have
        appreciated that the appellant is a vulnerable witness in  relation
        to which  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  concerning  vulnerable
        witnesses  applies.  It  is  not   indicated   that   any   special
        arrangements were required to assist the appellant who  was  called
        by her own representative to give oral  evidence.  The  Judge  was,
        however, required to set out in the determination, in  relation  to
        findings made, how the appellant's health issues had been  factored
        into the weight given to the evidence. At [11(8)] the Judge writes:


             "In assessing appellants evidence I have  borne  in  mind  the
             evidence on her mental state and that an application was  made
             to adjourn this matter on the basis that she was unfit to give
             evidence. My credibility findings have in the main been  based
             on the record of her interview and  the  documentary  evidence
             she presented when she claimed asylum. Accordingly, I  do  not
             have concerns that there are aspects of  evidence  and  cross-
             examination where her evidence may be disadvantaged on account
             of her mental state."


    10. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that the Judge fails  to
        make adequate findings on the basis of the appellant's evidence  as
        a whole which must include the evidence that she gave  in  response
        to questions put in  cross-examination.  Does  the  making  of  the
        credibility  findings  in  the  main  based  upon  the  documentary
        evidence mean the Judge failed to give proper weight  to  the  oral
        evidence  of  the  appellant?  It  is  not  clear  what  reasonable
        allowances were made as a result of the appellant's  mental  health
        issues to the evidence that she  gave  and  the  weight  the  Judge
        applied to the same or what aspects of that evidence were  accepted
        and/or rejected.
    11. It was accepted on the respondent's behalf that the Judge failed to
        make sufficient  findings  in  relation  to  core  aspects  of  the
        appellant's case and gave inadequate  reasons  in  support  of  the
        findings made. It was accepted on the respondent's behalf that  the
        Judge failed to determine the human rights aspects of the  case  at
        all, and accepted that the concerns outlined regarding the  failure
        to give any  consideration  to  the  corroborative  weight  of  the
        appellants illness when  considering  the  appellant's  credibility
        undermined the Judge's conclusions and established  material  legal
        error.
    12. In light of the fundamental nature of the flaws in those matters on
        which findings have been made, the rejection of  the  asylum  claim
        shall be set aside. In light of the need to make extensive findings
        of fact in relation to the key aspects of this appeal, in the light
        of the entitlement of the appellant to have a decision in  relation
        to her human rights claim, and taking into account the Presidential
        Guidance relation to the remittal  of  appeals  to  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal,  it  is  considered  this  is  a  case  in  which  it  is
        appropriate for the decision of the Judge  to  be  set  aside,  for
        there to be no  preserved  findings,  and  for  the  appeal  to  be
        remitted to be considered afresh by another judge based  at  Hatton
        Cross, other than Judge Devittie, assigned by the Resident Judge of
        that hearing centre.

Decision

    13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the  appeal  to  Hatton
        Cross.




   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 September 2019












