


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01597/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st September 2017                   |On 17th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                 MrS.A.A.S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz,Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is an Iraqi national who claim she was at risk of a so-
      called honour killing by her cousin to whom she said she had been
      betrothed  as a child. She said that she married someone else and her
      husband and their child are in the United Kingdom and dependent upon
      her claim. According to the appellant her cousin is vengeful. He has
      killed people before but benefited from the patronage of a Mr RD.


   2. Her claim was refused by the respondent on credibility grounds. In any
      event, the respondent concluded there were sufficiency of protection
      and she had the option of relocating.


   3. Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal SJP Buchanan
      and rejected on credibility grounds. The judge also accepted that
      there was sufficiency of protection for her.
   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge overly concentrated upon the evidence of the appellant and the
      fact that her husband had not given evidence. It was also arguable the
      judge failed to consider the objective evidence in support of the
      claim.

   5. The respondent made a rule 24 response submitting that the First-tier
      Judge gave full and comprehensive consideration to the claim and
      provided adequate reasons for the findings made, taking into account
      all of the evidence.

   6. At hearing, Mrs Brakaj referred to the judge's observations about the
      presence of the appellant's husband at the hearing and the judges
      comments about his not giving evidence. She also said that a
      substantial amount of country information about honour killings was
      submitted on behalf of the appellant but this was not referred to by
      the judge. She confirmed that no issue has been taken about the
      logistics of return.

   7. In response, Mr Diwnycz pointed out that the judge stated there was no
      requirement for corroboration. An appeal must be determined on the
      basis of the evidence produced but the weight to be attached to oral
      evidence may be affected by a failure to produce other evidence in
      support. To this end I was referred to TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ
      40.ST(see also Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004]UKIAT00119)

   8. There has been a change of representatives on behalf of the appellant
      between the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the Upper Tribunal
      hearing. The original bundle contained in article from the Kurdish
      Daily dated 29 August 2007 which confirmed the existence of Mr RD. He
      was described as a Defence Forces Commander. Whilst this confirms his
      existence there is no link with the claim that he was a patron of the
      appellant's cousin. The remainder of the material focuses upon the
      position of women in Iraq and the prevalence of `honour-based'
      violence.

   9. The focus in the decision of First-tier Judge Buchanan's decision is
      on the facts. In the First tier this is a sensible approach .It is
      reasonable to take it that from the background material provided and
      the nature of the claim the judge was well aware such violence occurs.
      It is my conclusion no material error of law is established. Gender
      violence is well documented and the judge does not need to set this
      out in any detail. From the factual analysis the judge was entitled to
      reject the claim made. The decision clearly has been carefully
      prepared with the judge giving adequate reasons for the conclusion.



Decision

   I find no material error of law established in the decision of First-tier
   Judge Buchanan. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appellant's
   appeal shall stand.






   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly
   13th October 2017





















