
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01641/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 22 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     zbb
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Paraskos, Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14:  The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of the proceedings.  We find  that
it is appropriate to continue the order.  Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member
of her family.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the  appellant  and  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  24  September
    1979.

3.   The appellant was convicted at South Norfolk Magistrates'  Court  on  4
    May 2006 of obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception, having a  false
    instrument with intent and remaining in the UK  beyond  a  time  limit.
    She was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment  and  recommended  for
    deportation.

4.   In light of the above conviction she was notified on  1  November  2006
    of a decision to make a deportation order against her.  She  lodged  an
    appeal against this decision  on  7  November  2006.   Her  appeal  was
    dismissed on 30 August 2007.  A deportation  order  was  signed  on  11
    March 2008.

5.   In a letter dated  22  September  2015  a  decision  was  made  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to revoke a deportation order  made  on  1
    November 2006 and maintained the deportation order signed on  11  March
    2008 by virtue of  Section  5(2)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   In
    addition to this a decision was made to  refuse  both  the  appellant's
    protection and human rights claims.

6.   The decision of 22  September  2015  was  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in a decision promulgated on 27 June 2016 the  appeal  was
    allowed.

7.   The respondent sought permission to appeal against  that  decision  and
    this was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 1 September 2016.

Submissions on Behalf of the Secretary of State

8.   Mr Jarvis advised at the outset that he only intended to argue  one  of
    the grounds of appeal which was in the following terms:

         "There is a further error in the FTTJ's assessment  of  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the appellant's children to remain in the
         UK without her.  He has identified nothing  compelling  other  than
         the normal expected result of deportation  and  in  doing  so,  has
         failed to apply the principles recognised in current  jurisprudence
         that separation either between an  appellant  and  his  partner  or
         children is an inevitable consequence of deportation resulting from
         their criminal behaviour and as such is lawful."

9.   Mr Jarvis's  submission  was  not  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    applied the wrong test in considering this issue, it was, however,  his
    position  that  having  regard  to  the  whole  circumstances  that  no
    reasonable decision-maker would have reached the decision that  it  was
    unduly harsh for the children to leave the  United  Kingdom  or  remain
    here without the appellant.

10.  In support of his submission he reminded us that the unduly harsh  test
    set a particularly high threshold.  No reasonable decision-maker  could
    have reached  the  view  that  that  high  threshold  was  met  in  the
    circumstances of this case.

Reply for the Appellant

11.  Counsel's submission can be summarised as this: the  ground  of  appeal
    advanced on behalf of  the  respondent  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the finding of the First-tier Tribunal and the desire
    to have this Tribunal re-assess the facts by the back door.

Discussion

12.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision overall is  a  carefully  and  fully
    considered one.  In particular, we are persuaded that the consideration
    of the unduly harsh test is a careful and full one.   The  question  is
    considered over some five lengthy and detailed paragraphs (48  to  52).
    A large number of factors are considered by the First-tier Tribunal all
    of which are relevant considerations.  We  were  not  referred  to  and
    cannot  identify  any  relevant  and  material  factor  which  was  not
    considered.  Detailed consideration  is  given  to  both  the  children
    remaining in the United Kingdom without the appellant and  leaving  the
    United Kingdom  with  her.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  is  careful  to
    articulate the factors which it considers  are  beyond  the  inevitable
    consequences of deportation and these are contained in paragraphs 50  -
    52.   Thereafter a careful proportionality assessment is  carried  out,
    which as recognised by Mr Jarvis,  had  proper  regard  to  the  public
    interest.  We are satisfied that there was sufficient  material  before
    the First-tier Tribunal to entitle it to conclude that the unduly harsh
    threshold was met.  We are unable to identify  any  material  error  of
    law.

Decision

13.  For the above reasons we refuse the appeal.


Signed   Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
