
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01186/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 13th November 2017               |On: 10th January 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                   YH + 1
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Denholm, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica born in 1971.  She  appeals,  on
    human rights and protection grounds, against the Respondent's  decision
    to deport her from the United Kingdom.  The dependent to this appeal is
    her son, Z, who faces deportation as her family member.


 2. This is the re-made decision in the appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision dated the 13th  February
    2017 but following a hearing on the 19th June 2017 I set this  decision
    aside.  My  written  'error  of  law'  decision  is  appended  to  this
    determination.


    Anonymity


 3. The Appellant is a foreign criminal who would  not  ordinarily  benefit
    from any protection of her identity. This case  does  however  turn  in
    large part on the presence in the United Kingdom of her minor children,
    two of whom are the subject of orders from the Family Court. I have had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders. I am
    concerned  that  identification  of  the  Appellant   could   lead   to
    identification of her children and I therefore consider it  appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her,  any  member  of  her
        family, or any member of her children's families.   This  direction
        applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
        court proceedings"

    Background and the Respondent's Decision to Deport


 4. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in June 2000. She had leave to
    enter as a visitor but that soon expired and she became an  overstayer.
    She has never had any lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


 5. The Appellant has committed numerous criminal offences.  She  has  been
    convicted of a minor road traffic offence, a drugs  possession  charge,
    possession of an  article  for  use  in  fraud  and  no  fewer  than  9
    convictions for shoplifting.   The convictions that brought her to  the
    attention of the Respondent, and this Tribunal, were however altogether
    more serious.

 6. In October 2008 she went out drinking in Manchester with her two  adult
    sons. They were in a club when they encountered a woman with  whom  the
    Appellant had some past conflict. An argument ensued.  The  woman  left
    the club, and the Appellant and her sons followed. The Appellant's  son
    hit the woman over the head with a bottle. The bottle fell to the floor
    and the Appellant picked it up.  Using  the  bottle  she  attacked  the
    woman, who sustained serious injuries to  her  hand  trying  to  defend
    herself. The trial judge noted that the victim  suffered  psychological
    trauma following  what  must  have  been  a  terrifying  attack.    The
    Appellant was arrested and bailed.

 7. Whilst awaiting trial she took part, in April 2010, in  a  two  further
    assaults. Having again got into an altercation in a club the  Appellant
    hit a woman in the face with a shoe and took part in a physical assault
    on another man with her son. An aggravating factor  in  these  assaults
    was the use by  the  Appellant  of  homophobic  language  against  both
    victims.


 8. On the 15th November 2010 the Appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment for the  unlawful  wounding  in  October  2008,  4  months
    imprisonment for an assault in April 2010 and 2  months  for  a  common
    assault in April 2010. All sentences were to be  served  consecutively.
    These were the terms of the index offending which led the Respondent to
    make a decision to deport the Appellant, in accordance with  s32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007:

         32  Automatic deportationE+W+S+N.I.


         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
         (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a) who is not a British citizen,

           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

         (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months.

         (3) Condition 2 is that-

           (a) the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of State
           under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal), and

           (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

         (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
         (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
         public good.

         (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
         of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).

         .....


 9. The deportation order was signed on the 11th January 2016.

    The Appellant's Case

10. The Appellant accepts that she is a foreign criminal and that  she  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a period greater than  12
    months.  She accepts, in accordance with s32 of the Borders  Act  2007,
    that her deportation  would  be  conducive  to  the  public  good.  She
    contends, however, that she should not in fact be deported, because two
    of the 'exceptions' in s33 of the 2007 Act apply in her case:


         33 ExceptionsE+W+S+N.I.


         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
         (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-

           (a) do not apply where an exception in this section applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and

           (b ) are subject to sections 7 and 8 of the Immigration Act 1971
           (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other
           exemptions).

         (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

           (a) a person's Convention rights, or

           (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
         Convention.

           ....


11. In respect of exception 1 (b) the Appellant maintains that  she  is  at
    risk in Jamaica from the gang that she originally fled  from  in  2000.
    This gang were a powerful presence in her local area in  Kingston.  She
    was gang-raped by five members of this gang. She went to the police and
    offered to give evidence. This led to the arrest and prosecution of  at
    least one  gang  member.  The  Appellant  was  placed  in  the  witness
    protection  programme  for  her  own  safety.  The  gang  responded  by
    targeting members of the Appellant's family. This retribution  included
    her father's house being burned down; her aunt being attacked with acid
    and her nephew being murdered.  The Appellant escaped Kingston to  live
    rough in the countryside where she was forced to work as  a  prostitute
    in order to survive.     The  Appellant  avers  that  her  brother  was
    murdered by this same gang  in  2004,  and  she  believes  this  to  be
    connected to her decision to testify.  The Appellant maintains that she
    would be at risk today should she be  returned  to  her  home  area  of
    Kingston. She has no reasonable internal flight alternative because she
    would be a single woman with no connections and no support network. She
    would be destitute and vulnerable to exploitation.


12. In respect of exception 1 (a) the Appellant contends that it would be a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR should she be deported; she places  particular
    reliance on the presence in the  United  Kingdom  of  her  three  minor
    children:


         X - female, born July 2003
         Y  - male, born April 2004
         Z  - male, born February 2006


13. The application of exception 1(a) of s33(2) is elaborated in paragraphs
    398-399 of the Immigration Rules:
         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and
         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or
         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
         (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
         years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision;
         and in either case
         (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country
         to which the person is to be deported; and
         (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
         without the person who is to be deported; or
         ....
14. The Appellant submits that she has  been  the  primary  carer  for  her
    children for much of their lives. She is presently the full time  carer
    for Z, and spends a good deal of time  with  X  and  Y,  who  are  both
    subject to Special Guardianship Orders, made in favour of two  paternal
    aunts.    She  submits  that  the  children   have   already   suffered
    significant disruption in their lives and that the impact upon them  of
    her deportation would be substantial: it would go beyond 'missing  her'
    or being 'upset' by her absence. She relies on the assessment of  their
    Special Guardians and an independent social worker to submit  that  the
    detriment they would likely suffer would be severe enough to  meet  the
    high threshold of 'unduly harsh'.


15. Should the Appellant succeed in demonstrating that either  or  both  of
    the s33 (2) exceptions are made out, her appeal must be allowed.


    Exception 1(b): Asylum


16. On the 5th April 2002 the  Appellant  claimed  asylum.  Her  claim  was
    rejected and on the 27th August 2004 the First-tier  Tribunal,  sitting
    in Glasgow, heard the Appellant's appeal against that  decision.    The
    Tribunal's decision in the appeal is dated the 16th September 2004. The
    factual basis of the claim was that in  1998  the  Appellant  had  been
    raped by five men who  were  all  members  of  the  same  gang  in  her
    neighbourhood of Kingston. The Appellant had reported the  incident  to
    the police and had been placed under  police  protection  for  her  own
    safety. The gang had sought violent retribution. Unable  to  reach  the
    Appellant it turned against her family, inter alia murdering her nephew
    and badly injuring her sister by throwing acid over her.   The Tribunal
    proceeded on the implicit basis that those facts  were  made  out,  but
    dismissed the appeal on the grounds that the Appellant  had  thereafter
    entered the witness protection programme: it found at paragraph 29 that
    although there might be difficulties faced by the  police  in  Jamaica,
    there is a  sufficiency  of  protection.   She  had  left  the  witness
    protection scheme voluntarily  and  could  be  reasonably  expected  to
    return to it. The appeal was dismissed on that ground.

17. The factual basis of that claim has been consistently maintained by the
    Appellant. I note, for instance, that in 2007 the Appellant's Probation
    Officer recorded how she wept in relating this ordeal[1] which had left
    her with feelings of depression, anxiety and  self-blame  (the  officer
    records being shown "considerable scarring" to the  Appellant's  wrists
    which she attributed to self-harm).  I note that trial judge His Honour
    Judge Hamilton, in sentencing the Appellant upon her conviction for the
    index offence,  made reference to this "difficult background".

18. In 2015 the Appellant saw, for the first  time,  Dr  Chris  Maloney,  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist instructed at that time in  connection  with  a
    civil claim that the Appellant was  making  against  the  Home  Office.
    For his report[2] Dr Maloney reviewed the Appellant's  medical  records
    going back to 2002. These show her GP to have recorded  a  'history  of
    rape' in December 2003, and repeated, regular attendances seeking  help
    for  low  mood,  depression,  anxiety,  self-harm,  insomnia,  suicidal
    ideation and substance abuse. In February 2005 the Appellant's then  GP
    made a note on file:  "multiple  rapes  in  Jamaica,  still  has  panic
    attacks from this. Brother killed last year by same mob in Jamaica that
    raped her".    The  Appellant's  medical  records  are  extensive,  and
    provide a consistent picture of someone who has been regularly  seeking
    help for the psychological  sequalae  of  trauma  over  fifteen  years.
    Having made a detailed assessment  of  the  Appellant  the  Dr  Maloney
    concluded that she is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder but
    said this: "the concept of a simply acute PTSD,  however,  has  limited
    applicability for people who have been exposed to  multiple  successive
    traumas since an early age, when many of the symptoms have both  become
    part of, and shaped their personality". Dr  Maloney  believes  that  in
    addition to PTSD the Appellant has  'Emotionally  Unstable  Personality
    Disorder', also known as 'Borderline Personality Disorder'.


19. In October of this year the Appellant was interviewed by a  Ms  Natalia
    Dawkins MBE, an expert on human trafficking.  This  was  in  connection
    with the Applicant's claim to have been trafficked for the  purpose  of
    sexual exploitation in the United Kingdom.  Ms  Dawkins  has  15  years
    experience in working in  the  voluntary  sector,  and  specialises  in
    advocacy and support for women and children affected  by  Gender  Based
    Violence. She was a co-founder of the Poppy Project  and  assisted  the
    Ministry of Justice with  the  development  of  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM). Her MBE was awarded for services to  vulnerable  women
    in London, in relating  to  her  work  on  trafficking.   Although  not
    directly relevant to the trafficking claim the Appellant gave the  same
    account of gang rape to Ms  Dawkins,  who  records  the  most  detailed
    version of the Appellant's account to date. Ms Dawkins  attributes  the
    level  of  detail  to  the  particular  methodology  she   employs   in
    interviewing survivors of gender based violence, which she describes as
    "the strict ethical and safety guidance provided by  the  World  Health
    Organisation". She also points out that she of Jamaican origin herself.
    It would seem that  this  has  assisted  her  in  making  her  positive
    assessment  of  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's  account.   She
    footnotes the account with matters derived from her own knowledge,  for
    instance explaining that when the Appellant described her neighbourhood
    as a 'garrison' she means an area characterised by political loyalty to
    one of the main parties in Jamaica (either the PNP or  the  JLP)  where
    "violence, corruption and criminal behaviour is prevalent".  Ms Dawkins
    confirms that the 'Bi Bow gang', the gang that the  rapists  were  part
    of,  are known as a "violent posse with alleged  affiliation  with  the
    People's  National  Party  who  dominated  the  garrison  called   'the
    Jungle'".


20. I have considered all of the evidence relating to the Appellant's claim
    to have been raped by gang members in Jamaica in  1998.   This  account
    has not been materially challenged by the Respondent and I am  entirely
    satisfied that it is true. I accept that this assault was a  prolonged,
    perpetrated by five different men and that the Appellant was frightened
    for her life. I accept that she continues to suffer  from  the  serious
    psychological consequences of that attack.


21. In March 2011 the Appellant was notified of the  Respondent's  decision
    to deport her and invited to make submissions as to why she should  not
    be returned to Jamaica. She said that she was afraid  to  return.  This
    was treated as a further asylum claim. The facts  stated  were  as  the
    Appellant had recounted in her earlier claim with the additional matter
    that in 2004 her brother D had been removed from the United Kingdom. He
    had subsequently been shot dead. She believed that he had  been  killed
    by members of the Bi Bow gang and that this was further retribution for
    the Appellant's decision to go to the police. She was told that by  his
    partner. I have read the Appellant's interview record. I have read  the
    country  background  evidence   including   that   contained   in   the
    Respondent's Country Policy  and  Information  Note  Jamaica:  Fear  of
    organised  criminal  gangs  (Version  2.0:  March  2017),  the  country
    guidance case of AB (protection -criminal gangs-relocation) Jamaica  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00018.   I note that the only reason that  the  Respondent
    has given for rejecting this part of the account was that the Appellant
    failed to produce  D's  death  certificate.   I  find  the  Appellant's
    account of violent retribution being sought against her family  members
    consistent with the background material.  I note  that  D's  death  has
    been consistently reported by  the  Appellant  to,  for  instance,  her
    doctors, since 2004. Applying the lower standard of proof I am prepared
    to accept that her assessment is correct and that D was murdered by the
    Bi Bow gang.


22. I am satisfied, to a high standard of proof,  that  the  Appellant  has
    suffered very serious harm in the past.

23. Neither Respondent nor the First-tier Tribunal were satisfied that this
    was a claim capable of engaging the Refugee Convention. The Appellant's
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal tried to argue  that  the
    Convention reason was 'imputed political opinion' on the  grounds  that
    the Appellant had shown  defiance  to  a  politically-aligned  garrison
    gang; that was rejected by the Tribunal on the grounds that the assault
    was motived by nothing more than criminal intent.  In her assessment of
    the 2011 asylum claim the Respondent rejected the claim on the grounds,
    inter alia, that 'victims of crime' are not members  of  a  'particular
    social group'. I am satisfied that the claim is  one  that  potentially
    engages the Convention for two reasons. First, a  key  element  of  the
    assault, and the subsequent hounding of this family, has been that  the
    Appellant is a woman. Women in Jamaica are accepted by  the  Respondent
    to be members of a 'particular social group': see 2.2.1 of the  Country
    Policy and Information Note Jamaica: Women  Fearing  Domestic  Violence
    (Version 2.0: March 2017). Second, the persecution she now fears is not
    because she is a victim of  crime,  it  is  because  she  has  been  an
    informant. She went to the police and she helped to secure a conviction
    of a member of the gang. This is not something she can ever wash  away.
    It is an immutable characteristic; she cannot change her  history.  The
    persecution that the Appellant fears would be inflicted for reasons  of
    her being an informer.


24. I am therefore satisfied that the Appellant  has  suffered  persecution
    for a Convention reason in the past.


25. My starting point in assessing risk is the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made in 2004.  The appeal was dismissed on  the  grounds  that
    the Appellant left the witness  protection  programme  voluntarily  and
    that she would approach the police in Jamaica and ask to be  readmitted
    to that programme.  I have been shown no evidence to the  contrary.  In
    the CPIN Jamaica: Fear of organised criminal gangs it  notes  that  the
    programme continues to  exist,  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  National
    Security, and that no witness who has abided by the rules of entry  has
    ever been killed.  In his submissions Mr Denholm submitted that it  was
    unlikely that the Appellant would today be admitted to that  programme,
    because the events in question happened so long ago.  It  seems  to  me
    that it would be the Jamaican authorities who would be best  placed  to
    assess whether the Appellant still required their special protection. I
    do not doubt that the Appellant would continue to face a risk from  the
    Bi Bow gang if indeed any of the men involved at that  time  are  still
    alive today.  I cannot see why the Jamaican authorities would  reach  a
    different conclusion. They benefitted from her willingness to  testify,
    they offered her protection then and as the CPIN illustrates,  continue
    to promote the witness protection programme as a means  of  encouraging
    citizens to testify against criminals in their communities: see  9.1.3.
    I am bound by the country guidance in AB which holds that the programme
    constitutes a sufficiency of protection. That accords with the  finding
    of the First-tier Tribunal and I have been provided  with  no  evidence
    that could lead me to depart from those conclusions. The asylum  ground
    is  accordingly  rejected  on  the  grounds  that  there  would  be   a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in Jamaica today.


    Exception 1(a): Human Rights


26. There is no dispute  that  the  Appellant's  children  X,Y  and  Z  are
    'qualifying children', that is that they have spent a continuous period
    of seven years or more living in the United Kingdom: see  s117D  (1)(b)
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  Indeed,  as  Mr  Duffy
    fairly pointed out, each child was born in this  country  and  has  now
    lived here for a continuous period of over  ten  years;  as  such  they
    would all qualify to naturalise as British citizens[3].


27. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy expressly conceded that the Appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with each child X, Y
    and Z. I am satisfied that this was a  concession  properly  made.  The
    consistent evidence is that X and Y spend a considerable amount of time
    with their mother. Although X lives with her Special Guardian 'Aunty J'
    and Y with his Special Guardian 'Aunty N',  both  children  spend  each
    weekend with the Appellant, from Friday  night  until  Monday  morning,
    enjoy the  occasional  midweek  stay  and  spent  their  entire  school
    holidays with her. I have had regard to the evidence of Aunty N, and to
    the independent social worker who  has  interviewed  Aunty  J  and  the
    children themselves (for which see below) and I can find no evidence to
    indicate  that  this  is  anything  other  than  a   genuine   parental
    relationship. There has never been any dispute as to the position of Z;
    indeed the Respondent intends to deport him with his mother.

28. Those prerequisites having been fulfilled, it is for the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate, on a balance of probabilities, that it  would  be  'unduly
    harsh' for one or more of those children to a)  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without her and b) go to Jamaica with her.  Both limbs must  be
    met. The proper approach to the 'unduly harsh' test has been considered
    by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617:
         22.     I turn to the interpretation of the phrase "unduly harsh".
         Plainly it means the same in section 117C(5) as in Rule 399.
         "Unduly harsh" is an ordinary English expression. As so often, its
         meaning is coloured by its context. Authority is hardly needed for
         such a proposition but is anyway provided, for example by VIA Rail
         Canada [2000] 193 DLR (4th) 357 at paragraphs 35 to 37.
         23.     The context in these cases invites emphasis on two factors,
         (1) the public interest in the removal of foreign criminals and (2)
         the need for a proportionate assessment of any interference with
         Article 8 rights. In my judgment, with respect, the approach of the
         Upper Tribunal in MAB ignores this combination of factors. The
         first of them, the public interest in the removal of foreign
         criminals, is expressly vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1).
         Section 117C(2) then provides (I repeat the provision for
         convenience):
         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal."
         24.     This steers the tribunals and the court towards a
         proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in any given
         case. Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in his
         removal, the harder it will be to show that the effect on his child
         or partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in my judgment
         dislocates the "unduly harsh" provisions from their context. It
         would mean that the question of undue hardship would be decided
         wholly without regard to the force of the public interest in
         deportation in the particular case. But in that case the term
         "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different
         idea. What is due or undue depends on all the circumstances, not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the given case. In the
         present context relevant circumstances certainly include the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history.
29. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant's  deportation  will  have  a
    harsh impact upon the children. In applying the principle in the Rule I
    am required to assess whether the impact of deportation on X,Y and/or Z
    would  be  inordinately  or  excessively  harsh,  that  is  to  say  so
    detrimental that it outweighs the very substantial public  interest  in
    their mother's removal from this country. With that high test in  mind,
    I assess the evidence before me.


30. The principle evidence in respect of the children comes from  Mr  Peter
    Horrocks, independent social worker, who  has  extensively  interviewed
    the relevant actors for two reports, dated 7th December  2016  and  5th
    October 2017.  He  has,  on  two  occasions,  spoken  to  both  Special
    Guardians, the Appellant, and all three children. For his  most  recent
    report he has also spoken to a third paternal  aunty,  Aunty  K.    The
    Respondent takes no issue with Mr Horrocks' objectivity or expertise. I
    have further had regard to the written statements of Z's  father  Mr  F
    (dated 25th January 2017), the Appellant herself (24th  January  2017),
    the Appellant's adult son D  (30th  January  2017),  Aunty  N[4]  (30th
    October 2017) evidence  from  the  children's  schools/local  authority
    education services, social services and the family courts.  I have  not
    found it necessary to summarise all of the 1200+ pages  of  evidence  I
    have been given, but the parties can be assured that  I  have  read  it
    all. I assess the evidence in respect of  each  member  of  the  family
    individually.

    Child X

31.  Child X was born in the  UK  on  the  6th  July  2003.    She  is  the
    Appellant's only daughter, coming 4th in a line of her 6  children.  Of
    these brothers, one is a full blood  brother:  Y.  Their  father  is  a
    Jamaican national currently serving a sentence of imprisonment  in  the
    Netherlands.  When X was born she lived in a house in Glasgow with  her
    mother, father and three elder brothers. The  social  services  records
    reveal, and the Appellant acknowledges, that soon after X's  birth  she
    and her brothers were placed on the child protection  register  because
    of concerns about neglect. X's father was deported from the UK in 2004.
     When X was 2 years old the family moved to Manchester.  The  Appellant
    describes her life during this period as "spiralling out  of  control".
    She formed a relationship with another man, who was a violent drunk. He
    knew the Appellant from 'back home' and would abuse her about her past.
    He would beat her and call her a  prostitute.  The  Appellant  candidly
    admits that her daughter witnessed these scenes. This  man  was  Mr  F,
    the father of Child Z.  The Appellant explains that during this  period
    she herself began to  drink  and  take  drugs  in  order  to  kill  the
    psychological (and presumably physical) pain she was experiencing.  She
    admits to being withdrawn and failing to  meet  her  children's  "basic
    needs".


32. Child X lived with her mother until the 6th  September  2010  when  the
    Appellant was convicted. Her mother was immediately taken into custody.
    Child X remained living in the family home with Mr F and her  brothers.
    A female friend of the family moved in to the house in  order  to  look
    after the children but at some point this arrangement came  to  an  end
    because Mr F was evicted from the property. The  Appellant's  sister  J
    stepped in to look after X and Y. She lives  in  Bromley.  Kent.    The
    children briefly returned to live with their mother  in  2011-2012  but
    when she was recalled to prison[5] they were  placed  in  foster  care.
    They continued to visit her regularly.

33. In March 2013 X was placed in the care of her paternal aunt,  Aunty  J,
    who lives in Haringey, London.  At that time X was  9  years  old.  She
    joined a family consisting of  Aunty  J,  and  four  cousins.  Aunty  J
    reports that when X first arrived she had very bad memories of being in
    foster care and was very negative about how she  had  been  treated  in
    care. She missed her Mum a lot and  one  occasion  packed  clothes  and
    announced that she was going to live with her Mum in prison.   Aunty  J
    describes X's relationship with her mother  as  "very  close"  and  she
    acknowledges that she would like to live with her full time. Since  her
    mother was released from detention  and  moved  to  London  X  has  had
    staying visits with her  mother  every  weekend.  She  stays  with  her
    throughout the holiday periods and only returns to Aunty J's  if  there
    is a special family event happening.  Aunty J states that X  has  found
    the threat of deportation hanging over her  mother  very  difficult  to
    deal with.   The day she found out about it she had  a  nightmare.  She
    can become very withdrawn.    Aunty  J  told  Mr  Horrocks  that  X  is
    "desperate" to live with her mother.  Aunty J's main concern is that if
    the Appellant were to be deported, X  would  "bottle  things  up".  She
    would be emotionally traumatised.  X is  currently  in  year  10  at  a
    girls' school in North London.   She  is  "doing  great"  but  is  very
    focussed on spending more time with her  mother,  who  lives  in  South
    London. It is as if she "lives for one weekend to the next".  The  main
    concern that Aunty J has about any potential separation between  X  and
    the Appellant is that X would become withdrawn. When X is worried about
    her situation she shuts herself off and no-one can  talk  to  her.  She
    shuts herself in her room and goes  without  food.  Aunty  J  expressed
    concern  that  X  could  "look  for  love  elsewhere"  ie  by  becoming
    prematurely sexually active.  She does not elaborate  on  why  she  has
    identified that particular behaviour, but I note  that  earlier  social
    workers reports make comment to similar effect.


34. Mr Horrocks interviewed X on the 7th December 2016 when she was 13. She
    was then in year 9 at secondary school.  She told him that she is doing
    reasonably well at school and that she would like to be  a  lawyer.   X
    told Mr Horrocks that she  likes  living  with  her  Aunty  J  and  her
    children but that she "feels different" to them; at school other  girls
    talk about their mums whilst she has to talk about her aunt. X believes
    that no one can give you love like your mum. Because she  is  the  only
    girl in the family she and  her  mum  have  a  special  bond.  Her  mum
    encourages her to do well and work hard and achieve her dreams. They do
    girlie things together, a bit  like  sisters  as  well  as  mother  and
    daughter. X describes the period when  she  was  taken  away  from  her
    mother and placed in foster care as  "terrible".   Even  when  she  was
    placed with Aunty J she was still having nightmares that social workers
    would come to take her away in the night and she would wake up  crying.
    When they were reunited it was "excellent" and very  emotional  -  they
    just kept hugging and kissing each other. X never wants to be separated
    from her mother again. Now that Aunty J has reassured her that she  can
    see her mum whenever she wants it has put her mind at rest.    Asked by
    Mr Horrocks how she would feel if her mother was deported, X  explained
    that she is someone who does not like to express her emotions. Although
    her aunt and teachers have told her it is good to talk she can't -  she
    just shuts herself off and withdraws. When her mum went away last  time
    she was upset (she was initially told that her mum had gone on holiday)
    and she just stopped talking. The difference is that that time she knew
    that she would come back, that they would be together again. This  time
    round it would be different. X said that she would do  anything  to  be
    with her mum. She told Mr Horrocks that she lost her oyster  card  (and
    so couldn't take the tube) she still went to see her - she had  to  get
    four buses and it took one and half hours. More than anything she would
    like to live with her Mum again. Her Mum means everything to her.


35. Mr Horrocks has seen X again more recently.  She  is  now  14  and  has
    started her GSCEs. As  well  as  the  core  subjects  her  options  are
    Spanish, History, Drama and separate (ie triple) science.  It's  a  lot
    of work, but she still goes every weekend to see her mum.    She  stays
    over from Friday to Monday - she gets up at 5.30am on a Monday so  that
    she can get to school on time. She spends all the holidays with her.  X
    said that she would find it very hard to focus on her  studies  if  her
    mum were to be sent to Jamaica - she knows she would just spend all  of
    her time thinking about her.  X also expressed concern  about  how  the
    deportation might affect her brothers - she thought that Y would become
    violent and Z would be really upset.

36. As well as his interviews with Aunty J and X Mr Horrocks also spoke  to
    the Appellant, Aunty N and another paternal aunt, Aunty K.  His opinion
    is that X is a  child  who  internalises  her  emotional  distress  and
    trauma. If her mother were to  be  removed  she  would  see  this  very
    differently from the earlier separation because she is  old  enough  to
    understand that it would be permanent. There is a high likelihood  that
    she would become socially withdrawn. This type  of  self-management  of
    trauma brings with it a very high risk of self-harming  behaviour,  and
    the risk of long-term mental  health  problems.  Mr  Horrocks  endorses
    Aunty J's assessment  that  X  may  also  "look  for  love  elsewhere",
    becoming prematurely sexually active. As she put  it,  she  missed  her
    mother's love for those years and so compensates for it - when she  was
    younger she did this by playing mum herself in  a  computer  game  that
    required her to look after 'babies'.


    Child Y


37. By the time that Y was born in Glasgow in  July  2004  his  father  had
    already been deported.  The family consisted of mum, sister X and three
    older half-brothers. They moved to  Manchester  when  Y  was  still  an
    infant.   As the Appellant has reported in respect of  X,  family  life
    when Y was a young child was chaotic. In Manchester she was living with
    Mr F, who was regularly subjecting her to verbal  and  physical  abuse.
    She began drinking and habitually taking drugs at this time, and by her
    own estimation was not looking after the children properly.


38. When the Appellant was sent to prison in September 2010 Y was  6  years
    old. He initially remained living in the family home with his siblings,
    and was cared for by Z's father and a family friend. He and his  sister
    were placed in foster care for some time and  then  in  March  2013  he
    moved to London to live with Aunty N.  Aunty N told  Mr  Horrocks  that
    when Y arrived he was very violent and aggressive. She described him as
    "quite disturbed".   Within six weeks of starting primary school he had
    been permanently excluded.  He would swear at people and ran away on  a
    regular basis. On three occasions she had to call the  police  to  look
    for him. He continued to be very aggressive throughout the period  that
    his mother was in prison;  Aunty  N  had  to  cope  with  this  extreme
    behaviour for approximately two years. Once his  mother  was  released,
    and he started to see her regularly, he gradually calmed down.  Whereas
    at one time Aunty N was being called into school as many as three times
    per week, now he is settled down.  He started to receive therapy. Aunty
    N attributes Y's problems to a lack of stability in the past. He  knows
    that she is his aunt and that she loves and  cares  for  him,  but  she
    cannot replace his mother.   In her statement she writes "my opinion is
    that [Y]'s difficult behaviour is always  linked  to  his  feelings  of
    separation from his mother".


39. Aunty N told Mr Horrocks that  as  long  as  Y  is  seeing  his  mother
    regularly, she can manage his behaviour. If the Appellant  were  to  be
    returned to Jamaica "there would be a deterioration  in  his  behaviour
    and she doubts that she could continue to care for him. In addition  he
    is likely to be once again permanently excluded from school and will be
    aggressive at home as well".  Y spends every weekend with  his  mother,
    from Friday to Monday and sees her in  the  holidays.    At  one  point
    Aunty N  tried  to  control  him  seeing  his  mother  as  a  means  of
    disciplining him - preventing him from visiting if he had behaved badly
    at school - but that just made things worse.  She  understands  that  Y
    needs to see his mother and that those visits have a positive influence
    on him.  She told Mr Horrocks that Y loves his mother very  much.  Both
    he and his sister would live by the side of the road in a box  if  they
    could be with her. Even if Aunty N had a mansion, Y would rather be  in
    that box with his mother.


40. As to the present situation Aunty N reports that she and the  Appellant
    are co-parenting and that this is a situation that is working well  for
    Y. She gives him stability, safety and security and  his  mother  gives
    him nurturing. He continues to  receive  therapy  at  CAMHS  and  looks
    forward to these sessions. She told Mr Horrocks and she and Aunty J are
    currently providing the Appellant with support as well, and  that  this
    is something that they would be happy  to  continue  to  do.   Aunty  N
    believes that if his mother were to be  deported  Y's  behaviour  would
    "immediately deteriorate".   When he  was  told  about  the  threat  of
    deportation he had an episode of extreme aggression - worse than before
    - which was resolved by Aunty N, school and CAMHS, who explained it was
    only a letter.   Aunty N is strongly of the view that if the  Appellant
    were to be removed there would be a "high risk of placement breakdown";
    Aunty N anticipates a high risk of Y running away, being excluded  from
    school,  fighting  and  becoming  involved  in  criminality.   She   is
    particularly  concerned  about  the  attraction  of  gangs,  drugs  and
    alcohol. She believes strongly that he would end up in  prison.  He  is
    trying to work out how to deal with authority: if the authorities  were
    to remove his mother his trust in them would  be  undermined.    He  is
    getting bigger and if he reverts  to  being  aggressive  she  does  not
    believe that she - or her sons - would be able to  tolerate  him  being
    violent towards her. She knows that he loses control  of  his  emotions
    when he is upset and that he does not mean to hurt her but a 'red mist'
    descends.  Conversely if things remain stable for Y  he  has  a  bright
    future. Aunty N states that he is a very intelligent child with  a  lot
    of potential: he could have a really positive future.


41. Mr Horrocks has twice interviewed Y. The first  time  was  in  November
    2016 when he was 12.  He said that he really likes living with Aunty  N
    and that she is "really funny", but that he would rather  be  with  his
    mum. He recalled that after he was taken away from his mother  he  used
    to cry every night, and that he stopped crying when he saw  her  again.
    Not having her made him feel angry.  If people spoke about her he would
    get angry and smash things up, or even hurt  the  person.   Y  told  Mr
    Horrocks that if his mother were to be sent  to  Jamaica  he  does  not
    believe that he would be able to control himself. He does not know what
    kind of state he would get into. He would be devastated. But  when  she
    is here he feels happy and calm - he  loves  being  with  her  and  his
    sister. He would ideally like to transfer to a school near his mum  and
    live with her.

42. In his more recent interview with Mr Horrocks, on the 2nd October 2017,
    Y reported that he is now in year 9. He is doing OK  but  got  excluded
    again this year for fighting. He says he is trying hard but some of the
    boys said things about his mum and he got angry. He goes to CAMHS every
    Friday and that helps. He is choosing his GCSE's this  year.  He  would
    like to do electrical engineering when he is  older.   He  has  a  good
    group of friends now at school and  has  a  best  friend  there.     He
    continues to see  his  mum  from  Fridays  to  Mondays  and  the  whole
    holidays. He also sees Y and Z, and their older brother when  he  comes
    down from Manchester.   He would like it if his mum would move to North
    London so he could see her more - so he  could  easily  call  in  after
    school. He knows that the authorities would like his  mother  to  leave
    the UK because she went to prison. Of this he says that his  mother  is
    not a bad person, its just she wasn't thinking straight. He  says  that
    she is a good person and a good mother. He joked that she is the second
    best mum in the world because she tells rubbish  jokes  which  let  her
    down.   Y says that his mum is the person that he trusts  most  in  the
    world.


43. As well as his interviews with Aunty N and Y Mr Horrocks also spoke  to
    the Appellant, Aunty J and another paternal aunt, Aunty  K.   He  finds
    that Y is the opposite to his sister. Where she internalises, Y  lashes
    out.  He concurs with Aunty N's view that there is  a  very  high  risk
    that Y could become involved with gangs, crime, violence and  drugs  if
    he faces further trauma.  There  is  a  very  high  risk  of  placement
    breakdown, and of permanent exclusion from mainstream schooling, if his
    mother is deported.  His behaviour would become "unmanageable".


    Child Z


44. Child Z is the son of the Appellant and Mr F. He was born in Manchester
    in February 2006 and spent the first years of his life living with  his
    mother, father and siblings.  As I note above in respect of  X  and  Y,
    these years were characterised by his father being abusive towards  his
    mother, and her increasing dependence on drugs  and  alcohol.  She  was
    sent to prison when Z was four years and seven months  old.    He  then
    spent 14 months living with his father and a female family friend.  The
    Appellant was released from prison in November 2011 and Z  returned  to
    live with her. She was recalled to  prison  approximately  five  months
    later and spent a  further  15  months  inside,  including  immigration
    detention.  Z has lived with his mother since her release in July 2013.
     They initially lived in a hostel and then with her sister  and  mother
    in London before she was given her own accommodation in October 2015.


45. In his assessment of Z Mr Horrocks  spoke  with  the  Appellant  and  Z
    himself on two occasions.  At the date of the first report he  was  10.
    He is described by his mother as a shy child to struggled to adjust  to
    school at first. Now he is settled and likes it.   She  said  that  she
    knows that Z worries about her. His misses his brother and  sister  and
    is "desperate" for them to come and live with  him.  She  is  extremely
    concerned at how Z might cope if he were removed  to  Jamaica.  He  has
    grown  up  here  and  doesn't  know  anything  about  that  culture  or
    environment. The Appellant said that she has not really  discussed  the
    possibility of him coming to Jamaica. She says he is  a  sensitive  boy
    and she is worried about how the life in Jamaica would affect him.  She
    is worried that he would see things there that he is not really able to
    cope with. He would find it very distressing and she expressed  concern
    about his mental health.  As for the possibility that Z could remain in
    the United Kingdom with his father, the Appellant said that this is not
    possible. Z has told  her  that  there  is  domestic  violence  in  the
    relationship between his father and  his  current  partner.  His  half-
    sister on his father's side is prevented from going there by her mother
    because of it.  At the date of the second interview Z had turned 11 and
    had started secondary school.  He had  adapted  well  and  was  getting
    extra help.  He is no longer withdrawn and engages  well  with  people.
    Outside of school he enjoys playing football with his friends and looks
    forward to the weekend when X and Y come.

46. In the first interview Z told Mr Horrocks that he likes living with his
    mum.  They play games and have fun, she is the best cook and he  sleeps
    in her bed. He looks forward to his brother  and  sister  visiting.  He
    does not want to go to Jamaica because it is "not a nice place to  go".
    When he lived with his father he used to cry for his mum and missed her
    all the time. He still sees his father regularly  and  enjoys  spending
    time with his four sisters on that side. In the more  recent  interview
    he said  that  he  likes  living  with  his  mum  but  that  she  tells
    embarrassing jokes. He has things to do at her home - he has  toys  and
    they go  out  and  can  see  his  friends.  He  only  sees  his  father
    occasionally  now,  during  the  holidays.  He   still   expresses   an
    unwillingness to go to Jamaica. He  has  heard  bad  things  about  and
    wouldn't want his mum going there either.

47. Mr Horrocks believes that if he is removed to Jamaica, Z  would  suffer
    "great distress and trauma". The  deportation  would  remove  him  from
    everything familiar in his life, his father,  siblings,  friends,   and
    school.   Removing him from everything he has known since  birth  would
    have an "overwhelming" effect on his ability to manage change.  He  has
    nothing but negative feelings about Jamaica  and  returning  him  to  a
    country that he  believes  to  be  dangerous  would  likely  result  in
    emotional harm.  He would be obviously different and would stand out in
    terms of his behaviour and accent,  leaving  him  vulnerable  to  being
    picked on. Mr Horrocks believes that moving to  live  with  his  father
    would have a "fundamental impact" upon Z.  He would struggle to  settle
    and would have difficulties in adapting to a new school and home. There
    would likely be harm to his educational development.

48. I have also been provided with a statement by Mr F, signed on the  25th
    January 2017.  Mr F confirms that he was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in 2002. In addition to Z he has seven other  children,  all  of
    whom are in the UK bar his eldest who lives in Jamaica.   At  the  time
    of writing his statement Mr F had regular weekend contact with the five
    of his children who live with their mothers in London.  The  other  two
    live in Manchester so he only sees them in the holidays.    Mr  F  says
    that Z is close to his siblings on that side, and is particularly close
    to his younger sister who was born when Z was living with his dad.   He
    is really good with her.  Mr F says that he and his children  would  be
    "devastated" if Z were to be removed from the United Kingdom.  When  he
    found out that the deportation order had been extended to  cover  Z  he
    resolved that he would refuse to let him go.  He says he  was  "broken"
    and could not sleep for days because he could stop thinking about  what
    might happen to him if he were removed.  Mr F explained that he and the
    Appellant are from the same area in Kingston. It is not a  nice  place.
    It is not an easy place to grow up as a young man. There is  a  lot  of
    gun violence. Mr F would worry about Z being out playing on the  street
    in a place where boys can get killed in the crossfire - it's  something
    that happens all the time there.  It is Mr F's strong opinion  that  it
    would be in Z's best interests to remain with his  mother  in  the  UK.
    Although he would be willing to look after him he works long hours  and
    does not have a lot of time. He said that it would be really hard on  Z
    if he were to  live  with  him:  "every  child  needs  their  mum,  the
    relationship that [Z] has with his mum is a different  relationship  to
    the one I have with him; you can't compare it. I can't  give  [Z]  that
    kind of relationship".


    The Appellant


49. At least some of the Appellant's account of events in  Jamaica  is  set
    out above in the context of the asylum appeal.  As  significant  as  it
    is, the attack by the gang was not the only event that shaped her life.
     It is her case that she was sexually abused by an uncle  from  a  very
    young age. She estimates that he first  penetrated  her  when  she  was
    about nine years old. This incestuous abuse  continued  well  into  her
    teens. This uncle (now deceased) was the father of her eldest children,
    her twin sons. The Appellant states that once she tried to tell her mum
    what was happening but her mum got angry with her and beat her. This is
    when, in the Appellant's words,  she  began  to  "go  off  the  rails".
    After her sons were born 'word got around' about who their  father  was
    and she experienced discrimination and abuse.  Facing  destitution  and
    ostracization the Appellant moved to  another  part  of  Jamaica,  Ocho
    Rios, where she was  forced  into  prostitution  in  order  to  support
    herself.


50. By her evidence, the Appellant's life did not improve after she arrived
    in the United Kingdom. The concise version is that she was offered help
    in Ocho Rios by a man who told her that he would get her to  safety  in
    this country, where she would get work. He turned out to be a liar, and
    a people trafficker. The Appellant ended up imprisoned in a brothel  in
    North London where she was subjected to a prolonged period of  beating,
    sexual assault and rape.  I mean no  disrespect  to  the  Appellant  in
    truncating this part of her account.  I do so partly because it is  the
    only element of her account that  is  still  in  issue,  the  Competent
    Authority having found no 'conclusive grounds' that  she  was  in  fact
    trafficked[6]; I do so mainly because it is not directly material to my
    decision.  I have found as fact that the  Appellant  was  subjected  to
    high levels of serious  harm  whilst  in  Jamaica.  I  have  before  me
    evidence from numerous independent sources including clinicians, social
    workers and probation officers that in the years since she  arrived  in
    this country her life has been marred by domestic  violence,  substance
    abuse and self-harm. The picture is therefore clear. I am able to  find
    that the Appellant has had an extremely harrowing life without  needing
    to stray into contested areas of evidence.


51. The Appellant has twice been assessed  by  Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr
    Chris Maloney, who has written two detailed  and  lengthy  reports,  in
    addition to another, produced in conjunction with  Home  Office  expert
    witness Dr Ravi Mehotra.  He has taken account  of  a  vast  number  of
    documents in relation to the Appellant's  case,  including  her  entire
    medical history going back to 2002,  her court,  prison  and  probation
    service records, the  assessments  made  by  social  services  and  the
    evidence relating to the trafficking claim.    No issue is  taken  with
    Dr Maloney's expertise or objectivity,  and  the  Respondent  does  not
    challenge any of his conclusions. The reports are dated 13th July 2015,
    30th August 2015, and the 9th August 2017.   The  key  findings  of  Dr
    Maloney (and Dr Mehotra) are as follows:

        . The Appellant has  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder,  exhibiting
          symptoms   including   recurrent   and   involuntary    intrusive
          distressing memories, persistent self-blame, persistent anger and
          shame, reckless and self-destructive behaviour, hyper  vigilance,
          sleep disturbance and problems with concentration.

        . Her presentation is complicated by the fact that she had suffered
          multiple  successive  traumas  from  an  early  age.   In   those
          circumstances such  symptoms  become  part  of,  and  shape,  the
          individual's personality. Dr Maloney finds that  the  personality
          disorder  that  best  fits  the   Appellant's   presentation   is
          'Emotionally  Unstable  Personality  Disorder'  (also  known   as
          'Borderline Personality Order'). One of the features of this is a
          difficulty in controlling anger,  which  can  sometimes  lead  to
          violence.  Other  markers  of  diagnostic  significance   include
          recurrent  suicidal  gestures   and   threats   including   self-
          mutilation, chronic feelings of emptiness, impulsivity,  and  her
          having had a succession of relationships with men who abuse her.


        . Dr Ravi Mehotra[7] found the Appellant to have moderate to severe
          PTSD and severe depression. He recorded inter alia a medical note
          in 2004 that the Appellant was using cocaine and heroin. In  2010
          she told a doctor in  prison  that  she  had  in  the  past  used
          cannabis and crack cocaine. At paragraph 10.1.10  he  notes  that
          there does appear to have been a  history  of  excessive  use  of
          alcohol, but that she has not been drinking excessively since her
          release from detention. He does not consider that  she  has  ever
          been alcohol dependent. At paragraph 10.1.11 he records that  the
          Appellant is abstinent from poly-substance usage,  and  that  her
          "recent use of cannabis has reduced to recreational use".

        . In his initial  report  Dr  Maloney[8]  noted  past  episodes  of
          substance abuse, but did not consider that  these  had  dominated
          the clinical picture:  the use of cannabis and alcohol  had  been
          coping strategies used when the Appellant was facing difficulties
          with violent and  abusive  relationships.   In  his  more  recent
          report he records the Appellant's evidence that she has not  used
          recreational drugs since her release from prison,  save  for  the
          occasional social use of cannabis. Dr Maloney underlined his view
          that  substance  abuse  is  not  a  significant  issue  for   the
          Appellant.

        . Dr Maloney concludes that the Appellant has complex mental health
          conditions which require  co-ordinated  specialist  psychological
          and psychosocial interventions.  The  treatment  can  broadly  be
          categorised  as  'containment'  and  'change'.    In  respect  of
          containment Dr Maloney recommends that  individual  symptoms  are
          reactively treated, and that the  Appellant  is  given  emotional
          support to get through the day-to-day. In respect of  change,  he
          writes  that  the  individual  concerned  must  recognise   their
          capacity  to  behave  in  ways  that   are   self-defeating   and
          inappropriate.  He notes that the  Appellant  responded  well  to
          short-term  change-orientated  interventions  when  she  was   in
          prison; he recommends that in the long term both elements of  the
          treatment are undertaken by a multi-disciplinary team  of  mental
          health professionals.

        . The Appellant's medical records make repeated reference to  self-
          harm, low mood, depression, anxiety  and  increasing  reports  of
          migraine. The notes indicate that in 2016 her GP referred her  to
          a psychiatrist and neurologist for assessment, and that  she  has
          been receiving support from  mental  health  crisis  services  in
          Bromley. She has now been referred to  'ADAPT',  an  organisation
          providing focused therapeutic interventions to  adults  suffering
          from  'Anxiety,  Depression,  Affective  Disorders,   Personality
          Disorders and Trauma'. Dr Maloney recommends that  this  referral
          be pursued, since interventions to date have been 'crisis led'.

52. In  respect  of  the  Appellant's  offending  behaviour  the  Appellant
    admitted to Dr Maloney that on two occasions  since  she  was  released
    from prison she has shoplifted, both times in 2015. She did it  because
    she had no money, and because "sometimes it makes her  feel  better  if
    she takes something". She did it because  she  felt  "desperate".   She
    admitted that on another occasion she had  gone  to  a  shop  with  the
    intention of stealing but had stopped herself because she knew  it  was
    wrong and she didn't want to get into trouble.  That was in  June  2017
    when Aunty J and Aunty N went on holiday leaving  her  with  all  three
    children for a month. She had no  money  and  was  extremely  concerned
    about how she was going to provide for them (her income is  limited  to
    emergency support for herself and Z).  She became distressed during the
    consultation and said that she just wanted to be able to  work  like  a
    normal mother. She felt like she had been put in  a  box  and  the  key
    thrown away.   Dr Maloney considered the Appellant's exercise of  self-
    control in this instance as a good prognostic sign, as is her continued
    abstinence from alcohol and drugs.


53. Dr Maloney has been asked to comment on the impact  of  deportation  on
    the Appellant's mental health.  Applying the relevant clinical guidance
    Dr Maloney identifies 16 risk factors in  the  Appellant's  case  which
    would,  taken  cumulatively  alongside  the  diagnoses  of   Borderline
    Personality Disorder, lead to  a  'high'  risk  of  suicide.  The  only
    protective factors that he is able to identify are  the  fact  that  in
    this country she is able to access mental health services, and that she
    has responsibility  for  her  children.  He  writes:  "caring  for  her
    children appeals to be the only element of her life that has meaning at
    present".   These protective factors, coupled with her  own  motivation
    to abstain from self-harm and substance abuse,  and  to  avoid  abusive
    situations, has lowered the current overall risk to 'moderate'.  As  to
    how that might change if the Appellant were to be removed,  Dr  Maloney
    writes:

         "If  her  situation  deteriorates,  and  particularly  if  she   is
         separated from her children, her risk will increase  significantly.
         A crucial protective factor (ongoing responsibility  for  children)
         will be removed, and instead she  will  have  intense  feelings  of
         loss. This will be particularly difficult for her, as she does  not
         appear to have anything else that gives meaning to her life.


         [The Appellant]  fears  return  to  Jamaica,  which  she  describes
         vividly  as  'that  dirty  wicked  gunshot-killing  place'.  Family
         members have been killed there,  including  her  brother,  and  she
         herself suffered extensive abuse when living there, as detailed  in
         the original Psychiatric Report. She fears return, and if she  were
         to face deportation she  is  likely  to  become  more  anxious  and
         unstable, due to her fear of return, and due  to  the  prospect  of
         separation from her other two non-adult children  [X  and  Y].  She
         speaks particularly of  her  distress  at  the  prospect  of  being
         separated from her only daughter X.


         If she were to face deportation, and  then  actually  be  deported,
         problems are likely to increase in all  her  symptom  domains.  Her
         mood is highly  likely  to  deteriorate,  with  more  distress  and
         instability. Her depressive symptoms  are  likely  to  become  more
         pervasive, with impairments of  energy  levels,  and  higher  order
         skills such as  concentration,  thinking  memory  organisation  and
         initiation  of  tasks,  in   addition   to   subjective   distress.
         Instability of mood also impairs capacity to relate to others,  and
         thus impedes social integration and the pursuit  of  ones  interest
         within society. Obvious distress and neediness  may  well  lead  to
         further exploitation of her vulnerability  if  she  does  not  have
         access to material and emotional support. She has had to resort  to
         sex work in the past, and this remains a risk if she is  alone  and
         unsupported: there is also risk that she may  return  to  self-harm
         and/or substance abuse. All these factors would  in  turn  increase
         her suicide risk, which is likely to become high"

54. Dr Maloney expresses concern about how the Appellant is  likely  to  be
    able to continue to care for Z in the face of such  adversity.  As  the
    stressors upon her increase, the less potent the protective  factor  of
    his presence will become.


55. I have had regard to the OASys report produced by the Probation Service
    in May 2012.


    Other Family Members


56. In addition to X, Y and Z the Appellant  has  three  older  sons.   The
    twins are now aged 27. One of them lives in  Manchester.  He  has  been
    recognised as a refugee on the grounds that he has a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Jamaica for reasons of his membership of a particular
    social group (he is homosexual). The Appellant, X, Y and Z have a  good
    relationship with him and he regularly visits them in London.  His twin
    was deported from the United  Kingdom  in  2011.    The  Appellant  has
    intermittent contact with that son. She has no  means  of  calling  him
    because he is of no fixed abode in Jamaica. He has told her that he  is
    living  hand-to-mouth  and  has  had  to  sleep  on  the  streets.   He
    occasionally manages to call her, for instance  most  recently  on  her
    birthday. The third son is now aged 24. He is also living  in  Jamaica,
    having been removed from the United Kingdom. The  Appellant  speaks  to
    him more regularly. He is living with relatives on  his  father's  side
    (his father was killed by gunshot wound when he  was  a  toddler).  His
    paternal aunt and grandmother are living in the United States and  they
    pay for  him  to  attend  college.  He  lives  with  relatives  in  his
    grandmother's house. He has very minimal contact with his  brother.  He
    recently told the Appellant that he has not heard from him for  "ages".
      Asked why she cannot live with this son if returned  to  Jamaica  the
    Appellant explained that his family are not hers: they  will  not  keep
    her. Money is tight and the house is full. Those people have no  reason
    to support or help her and Z.


    Undue Harshness


57. The parties agreed that the test in paragraph 399  is,  in  essence,  a
    proportionality balancing exercise.  I must weigh all relevant  factors
    in the balance to determine whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect
    these children to remain in the United Kingdom  without  their  mother,
    and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them to go with  her  to
    Jamaica.


58. First among those factors is  the  very  powerful  public  interest  in
    deporting a violent criminal who has  never  had  any  valid  leave  to
    remain in the entire time that she has lived in this country.  Although
    that sentence gives some  indication  of  the  magnitude  of  the  case
    against the Appellant, it hardly does justice to the  profoundly  anti-
    social behaviours that she has exhibited  since  her  arrival  in  June
    2000:

              i) Even if the period to February 2005 is discounted  (because
                 she claims to have been trafficked and then claimed asylum)
                 it is clear that since that date (when  her  appeal  rights
                 were exhausted) the Appellant has chosen to remain in  this
                 country knowing full well that she had no permission to  be
                 here.


             ii)  She  has,  at   last   count,   eleven   convictions   for
                 shoplifting/fraud offences, including two (in  2015)  since
                 her release from prison.  By  her  own  admission  she  has
                 regularly used shoplifting as a means  to  support  herself
                 and her children. When assessed by probation  services  she
                 indicated that it had never occurred to her that these were
                 crimes which have an impact on anyone (whether on the shops
                 involved, or on society as a whole,  because  of  increased
                 prices).

            iii) She has used hard street drugs including crack cocaine  and
                 heroin.  I have no  doubt  that  her  use  of  these  drugs
                 exacerbated  her  tendency  to   commit   crime   such   as
                 shoplifting and fraud in order to pay for her habit. Nor am
                 I in any doubt that her use of narcotics had a  devastating
                 impact on her children.

             iv) Her past inability to look after her children has  resulted
                 in extensive social services involvement  and  considerable
                 public  expense.   The  deeply  troubled  nature   of   the
                 children's past has resulted  in  significant  recourse  to
                 public funds. For example: Y has been provided with support
                 by specialised mental health clinicians (CAMHS) on a weekly
                 basis for the past three years and  it  is  envisaged  that
                 this will have to continue well into his early adulthood.

              v) She has herself benefitted from extensive NHS  services  to
                 which she has never been entitled. Her medical  notes  make
                 clear that, for instance, she has regularly seen the GP for
                 a variety of physical and mental ailments.

             vi) In  October  2008  the  Appellant  committed  a  horrendous
                 assault on a woman outside a club in  Manchester,  using  a
                 weapon, namely a glass bottle.   The  interviews  conducted
                 with probation services  at  the  time  indicate  that  the
                 Appellant showed minimal insight and little remorse for her
                 part in that attack[9]. She sought to justify it  variously
                 on the grounds that there was an ongoing dispute, that  she
                 was provoked, that the woman had attacked  her  first,  and
                 that she was drunk.  Whatever happened inside the club  the
                 plain fact is that the Appellant was convicted on the basis
                 of CCTV footage: she followed the woman outside, and as the
                 woman was walking away, she hit her with a  bottle.  It  is
                 summarised by probation services as follows:  "This  was  a
                 predatory assault and involved  a  repeated  and  sustained
                 attack on [the victim] which was aggravated by the use of a
                 weapon. That she has committed this offence in tandem  with
                 her son, on  the  female  victim,  who  was  attempting  to
                 retreat from  the  scene  and  with  scant  regard  to  the
                 injuries she may have caused causes grave concern.  It  was
                 fortunate that the injuries were not  more  serious,  which
                 would likely have occurred  had  the  victim  not  had  the
                 forethought to put up her hand to protect herself".

            vii) Somewhat incredibly, whilst on bail awaiting trial for  the
                 assault summarised above, the  Appellant  took  part  in  a
                 further attack on two other individuals, in April 2010. The
                 probation  report[10]  sets  out  the  circumstances.   The
                 victims were one adult male and one adult female.  The  man
                 at least was known to the Appellant and her son (I am  told
                 that the man was a former partner of  the  Appellant's  son
                 who had made adverse comments about him on  social  media).
                 Following  a  social  event  the  Appellant  and  her   son
                 approached the victims and subjected them  to  threats  and
                 homophobic abuse. The Appellant hit the woman with her shoe
                 and participated in an assault on the man  by  hitting  and
                 punching  him.  Again,   probation   services   noted   the
                 Appellant's unwillingness to accept responsibility for  her
                 part in what must have been a terrifying assault,  although
                 I do note that she  did  in  fact  plead  guilty  to  these
                 charges.

59. Even if statute did not mandate it, I am satisfied that it would be  in
    the public interest to deport the Appellant. She has committed a series
    of crimes, including the index offences which were of a disturbing  and
    violent nature, and has done so when she had no right to remain in this
    country. It is in the public interest to  remove  persons  who  do  not
    abide by the law, not just to deter others from similar  behaviour  but
    to protect the public and reflect public revulsion at such offending.


60. Against these matters I must balance the remaining  factors,  including
    the impact on the children  and  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant
    herself.  I need not  make  a  separate  analysis  of  where  the  best
    interests of X,Y and Z might lie, because  having  heard  the  evidence
    himself Mr Duffy was able to concede that this would quite obviously be
    with them and their mother remaining in the UK. He further agreed  that
    the Appellant's removal would have harsh consequences for her children.
     Those concessions (which I am satisfied are properly made) go  nowhere
    in diluting the public interest in  their  mother's  removal.  That  is
    because in deportation cases the scales tip heavily in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State, to an extent that they can only  be  outweighed  by
    some very compelling  feature  in  the  opposing  case.   I  have  been
    conscious throughout my evaluation of the  evidence  that  this  is  my
    starting point, and that the burden lies on the Appellant  to  identify
    and  prove  that  compelling,  or  exceptional,  feature  in  order  to
    demonstrate that the harsh impact upon her children would be "undue".

61. I begin with some preliminary observations about this family and  their
    history. It is clear from the Appellant's own candid evidence that  she
    has not been a great mother in the past. X, Y and Z were in their early
    years exposed to what might broadly be deemed "chaotic" lifestyles.  In
    the years from birth until September 2010 when the Appellant  was  sent
    to prison, the children lived in extreme poverty in houses  where  drug
    abuse and alcohol consumption were commonplace and where they witnessed
    repeated scenes of domestic violence against  their  mother.  Had  that
    been the position today, I would have found it very difficult to accept
    the Secretary of State's concession that it would be in the  children's
    best interests to remain in contact with her.   The  picture  today  is
    however altogether different.  Having  heard  from  the  Appellant  and
    having read all of the evidence before me I am in no  doubt  about  the
    efforts that she has made since her release from immigration  detention
    in July 2013. She has abstained from substance abuse.  She  has  sought
    help for her complex mental health needs. Apart from her  relapse  into
    shoplifting in 2015 she has not committed any further offences, and she
    has made efforts  to  avoid  offending  behaviour.    She  has  avoided
    entering into any further relationships with abusive partners. She  has
    shown a willingness to work constructively with other family members to
    provide the best possible  outcomes,  in  the  circumstances,  for  the
    children.  She has, in the past few years, managed to revert from chaos
    to some level of stability. The chronology  makes  it  clear  that  the
    catalyst for that change was the period of  imprisonment  (extended  by
    immigration detention) between 2010 and 2013.


62. Against that background I apply the test in paragraph 399.


63. In doing so I note that the  Secretary  of  State  has  made  one  more
    important concession. It is not the Secretary of State's case  that  it
    would be appropriate to remove X and Y to Jamaica. Her case is confined
    to an assertion that it would not be unduly harsh  to  expect  them  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without their mother. The  centrepiece  of
    that case is the existence of the Special Guardianship Orders in favour
    of Aunty J and Aunty N.  These women have provided  the  children  with
    stable and loving homes, and it is contended that they  could  continue
    to do so after the Appellant was deported.

64. X clearly  loves  her  mother  above  all  others  and  has  repeatedly
    emphasised to Aunty J and the Appellant that she  would  like  to  live
    with her full time.   Both women have expressed concern about how upset
    X would be to be separated from her on a permanent basis. Whilst  I  do
    not doubt that evidence to be true, ditto similar evidence  in  respect
    of Y and Z,  it is not in itself  a  factor  capable  of  swinging  the
    balance in the Appellant's favour. The vast majority of  children  love
    their mothers and want to be with them. The vast majority  of  children
    would be upset if their mothers were deported. The fact that X, Y and Z
    would be upset does not elevate this case out of the ordinary.

65. What separates these children from the commonplace  is  their  history,
    and the significant detriment that they  would  likely  suffer  in  the
    future  if  further  dislocated  from  their   mother   and   siblings,
    notwithstanding the commitment and dedication exhibited by their aunts.

66. X is a child who has already suffered considerable hurt and loss.   She
    has grown up without a father, and in those circumstances it is natural
    that her primary attachment figure is  the  Appellant.  Notwithstanding
    the Appellant's own damning assessment of her parenting abilities prior
    to her incarceration it is the evidence of Aunty J that X did not share
    that view. X has consistently expressed nothing but love for her mother
    and a desire to be with her.  When her mother was sent to prison X  did
    not have another parent to care for her. The three years that  followed
    that event were extremely disruptive for her. She was first left in the
    care of Mr F, an arrangement that appeared to be based on nothing other
    than the maintenance of the status quo. That arrangement came to an end
    when the family were evicted. A period in foster care followed,  during
    which, it is reported, X was extremely withdrawn and  distressed.   She
    describes it herself as "terrible".  There was then a short  period  of
    residence in London with a maternal aunt before she was  reunited  with
    her mother and siblings back in Manchester. The Appellant was  recalled
    to prison soon after and X was sent back to London, this time  to  live
    with Aunty J, a paternal aunt whom she barely knew.   In the years that
    followed Aunty J and her children have provided X  with  a  stable  and
    happy home environment, albeit one coloured by her constant  desire  to
    be with her mother.


67. That is the context in which  Aunty  J's  evidence,  and  Mr  Horrocks'
    conclusions,  must  be  read.    It  forms  the  background  to   their
    observations about X's current personality and  ability  to  cope  with
    further change in her life.  Those observations are these. That X is  a
    child who finds it difficult to express her emotions. She keeps  things
    "bottled up" and this is a trait  which  increases  the  likelihood  of
    emotional harm; in the past at moments of crisis she has been unwilling
    to talk (for instance to Aunty J) and  as  Mr  Horrocks  puts  it,  has
    "internalised her trauma and distress". He  concludes  from  this  that
    there is a significant risk that permanent separation from  her  mother
    would  result  in  self-harming  behaviour,  long-term  mental   health
    problems and in the short term, detriment to  her  education.  He  also
    posits that X could "look for love" elsewhere, leading  to  a  risk  of
    premature sexual activity and the  attendant  dangers  that  holds  for
    vulnerable  young  people.    I  was  initially  sceptical  about   the
    evidential basis for that latter suggestion but having read the  record
    of interview with Aunty J I  see  that  it  is  a  fear  that  she  has
    expressed, based on her own observations of X's behaviour.      What  I
    have no reason to doubt is that the Appellant's deportation would  have
    a profound impact upon X over and  above  the  'commonplace'  level  of
    distress that a child might suffer when a parent is deported.


68. Like his sister, Y is a child who has suffered profound disturbance  in
    his  upbringing,  has  built  a  good  relationship  with  his  Special
    Guardian, but has consistently expressed a  desire  to  live  with  his
    mother. The evidence  about  the  potential  impact  upon  him  of  the
    proposed deportation is however altogether more stark.   When  Aunty  N
    took custody of X he was  "quite  disturbed".    Within  six  weeks  of
    starting primary school he had been  permanently  excluded  because  of
    violent outbursts in the classroom.   Aunty N had to deal with  extreme
    levels of aggressive behaviour throughout the period that the Appellant
    was in prison. She is very clear in her evidence that he  only  started
    to calm down, with a marked improvement  in  his  behaviour  and  well-
    being, once his mother had been released and he resumed regular staying
    contact with her.   Aunty N records in her statement  very  challenging
    incidents where Y would become distressed at being separated  from  his
    mother, or get upset about not being able to see her, but now  that  he
    knows that he will see her at the weekends he  is  much  happier.  That
    routine has resulted in such improvements in his behaviour that he  has
    been able to return to mainstream school after two years in  a  special
    unit.  She is in regular contact with the Appellant and  together  they
    have formulated a  good  care  plan  that  is  working  well.  Aunty  N
    emphasises that the level of contact that Y has  with  his  mother  has
    been approved by social services.  Aunty N acknowledges the  role  that
    long-term therapy has played for  Y,  but  maintains  that  it  is  his
    regular staying contact  with  his  mother  that  is  underpinning  his
    progress.


69. Aunty N is also clear in her opinion that the gains that have been made
    in  terms  of  Y's  behaviour  and  happiness  would  be  lost  if  the
    deportation is carried out.  She strongly  believes  that  the  current
    placement will break down if Y's mother is removed from  the  equation.
    He is also aware that this is a real risk: Aunty N recounts how  he  is
    finding it very difficult to cope  with  the  uncertainty  and  how  in
    moments of anger and fear he says things like "what's the point, my mum
    will go and I will go back into care".     Aunty N expresses fear  that
    Y would lash out at authority if his mother  were  to  be  removed.  Mr
    Horrocks agrees that this is a "very high" risk. They  both  articulate
    that risk to be one of placement breakdown,  permanent  exclusion  from
    school, involvement in gangs (with the attendant risk of  violence  and
    criminality)  and  drug/alcohol  misuse.  His  behaviour  would  become
    "unmanageable". There is nothing in the evidence before me to  indicate
    that this might be  an  overly  pessimistic  assessment,  and  I  place
    substantial weight  on  their  combined  evidence.  Mr  Horrocks  is  a
    professional who has produced a detailed and comprehensive  assessment;
    Aunty N is a witness who knows the child well. I note that their  views
    are entirely consistent with Y's own view, as expressed to Mr Horrocks.
     Y told him that if his mother were to be sent to Jamaica he  does  not
    believe that he would be able to control himself. He does not know what
    kind of state he would get into. He would be devastated.   When she  is
    here he is happy: Y says that his mum is the person that he trusts most
    in the world.


70. I am satisfied that the evidence concerning X and Y  is  such  that  it
    goes well beyond  the  'commonplace'  distress  that  any  child  would
    experience when being separated from a parent. These are both  children
    who have already suffered significant disruption in their lives.  I  am
    satisfied that in respect of X there is a  real  risk  that  she  would
    "internalise" her loss, leading to social withdrawal, a short-term  but
    profound detriment  to  her  education,  and  long-term  mental  health
    difficulties as a result of the emotional  trauma  she  would  feel  at
    being separated from her primary attachment figure.   In respect of X I
    have very substantial concerns about his future should  his  mother  be
    removed. Aunty N has coped admirably  with  his  extremely  challenging
    behaviour to date, but she herself is  at  pains  to  stress  that  the
    stability that he now enjoys could not have been achieved  without  the
    Appellant's input. She repeatedly stresses her strong  belief  that  he
    would become "unmanageable" if the deportation goes ahead.

71. Before I conduct my final balancing exercise in respect  of  X  and  Y,
    there is one more facet of the evidence  that  requires  consideration.
    That is the evidence concerning the Appellant  herself.    I  need  not
    repeat here the brutal detail of her life, save to  note  that  on  the
    accepted facts it  has  included  rape,  prostitution,  the  murder  of
    numerous family members and acquaintances, extreme  poverty,   class  A
    substance abuse and domestic violence. To that dreadful list one  might
    add trafficking and incestuous child abuse.  It may seem  obvious,  but
    it is worth saying: a hard life is no excuse  for  violently  attacking
    people with bottles and shoes.  Why then is  the  Appellant's  personal
    history relevant?

72. First because it must be understood in order to properly  contextualise
    the evidence about the children. The Appellant is a profoundly  damaged
    person, who has suffered in ways unimaginable to most of  us,  and  yet
    she has, at least in the  period  since  she  emerged  from  detention,
    worked hard to be there for her children and to be a good mother.  That
    much is evident not just from  the  assessments  of  the  professionals
    involved with the family, and the evidence of Aunties J and N, but from
    the powerful devotion that her children have in her.


73. Second, because it must be understood in order to evaluate  the  nature
    of  her  offending,  and  the  likelihood  of  such  violent  offending
    reoccurring.  I am satisfied, having had regard to the reports from the
    probation services, Dr Maloney and Mr Horrocks that there  has  been  a
    significant change in  the  Appellant.  She  had,  in  her  own  words,
    "spiralled out of control" before she was sent to  prison;  she  showed
    few signs of consequential thinking and had  little  insight  into  her
    offending:  her personal history goes some way to explaining why. I  am
    satisfied that today, the Appellant does have an understanding not just
    about how her past has affected her and her children, but  of  how  her
    behaviour impacts upon others.  She is seeking help, and I am satisfied
    that she has at least started the difficult process of turning her life
    around.

74. Third, it is to be hoped that the revulsion that the public justifiably
    have for her behaviour might be diminished, if only in some small  way,
    were the details of her personal history to be known.

75. I have been conscious throughout my evaluation of the evidence  of  the
    public interest in removing the Appellant, but that evidence has led me
    to an inescapable conclusion: that the severity  of  the  detriment  to
    these children would be huge, and well beyond the ordinary run of cases
    where children face  separation  from  a  criminal  parent.  It  cannot
    adequately be described in terms of 'upset'  or  'distress'.  It  would
    likely lead to profound psychological consequences which would  have  a
    very serious impact on their lives, as well as upon society as a whole.
    For those reasons I am satisfied that the Appellant's  appeal  must  be
    allowed on the grounds that her deportation would be unduly  harsh  for
    her children X and Y.

76. It follows that I need not go into any great detail in considering  the
    case of Z, whom the Respondent  intends  to  deport  with  his  mother,
    implicitly accepting that it would be unduly harsh to separate him from
    her now.  For the reasons I now explain, that is fortunate.

77. The case put to me at hearing was that Z would suffer  profoundly,  not
    just because of the  separation  from  his  siblings  and  father,  but
    because of his terror at being sent to live in Jamaica, a  place  about
    which  he  has  -  quite  understandably  -  an   exceptionally   bleak
    perspective.  His father echoes this fear in his statement, writing  of
    his concern about the Appellant taking Z with her back to the  garrison
    town that they two had  grown  up  in,  with  its  poverty,  crime  and
    violence.

78. What I was not told at the hearing is that there is nothing  inevitable
    about the Appellant and Z having to go back to settle  in  a  garrison.
    That is because in April 2016 the Appellant reached a  settlement  with
    the Home Office  arising  from  her  claim  for  damages  for  unlawful
    detention. The long and short of it is that if she  agreed  to  make  a
    voluntary return to Jamaica (that is to say prior to enforced  removal)
    she would be awarded the sum of 20,000, on top of 10,000 that she had
    already been given whilst still in the UK.  I was informed  about  this
    matter by email on the 8th December 2017, some weeks after the hearing.
     Since Mr Denholm did not,  for  some  unfathomable  reason,  think  it
    necessary to mention this matter during the course of  the  hearing,  I
    did not have the benefit of oral submissions on how  this  money  might
    have improved Z's life upon arrival in Jamaica, or how  it  might  have
    assisted his mother to  cope,  for  instance  by  using  it  to  obtain
    accommodation or mental health  support.   Nor  was  Mr  Denholm  in  a
    position to advise me about how much of the settlement, if  any,  would
    have been clawed back by the legal aid agency.  Mr Duffy was put in the
    very difficult position of having to return to a  case  that  had  long
    since left his desk in order to  make  further  submissions.    In  his
    email Mr Denholm suggests that it would have been "preferable  if  this
    matter had been addressed in terms at the hearing". He is right.


79. As a result of this unsatisfactory state of affairs I am faced with the
    prospect of making my assessment of Z's deportation without a  complete
    picture of the facts. I have no idea how much the Appellant might  have
    left out of the money once legal fees have been recouped,  or  how  far
    that kind of sum would take her in Jamaica. Nor do I  know  whether  it
    would help her to pay  for  satisfactory  mental  health  support  -  a
    particularly egregious omission given that one  of  the  planks  of  Mr
    Denholm's case was the real danger of a  deterioration  in  her  mental
    state and her attendant ability to cope with parenting Z.  As I  result
    I do not consider it appropriate to make any findings in respect of  Z.
    In order to have done so the hearing would need to be reconvened and in
    the since the appeal is allowed on other grounds that is not necessary.
    Should this matter continue to be litigated beyond  this  Tribunal  the
    matter of Z will have to be considered afresh, in light of all  of  the
    relevant information.

    Decisions

80. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  it
    is set aside.


81. The decision is remade as follows:  "the appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds. The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds".

82. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            5th January 2018

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Pre-sentence report prepared by Juliet Rose 7th December 2007, page 323
bundle A
[2] Psychiatric Report dated 10th July 2015 prepared by Dr Chris Maloney,
at page 1 bundle A
[3] I am told that applications for naturalisation have been made on behalf
of X and Y but they have been rejected on the basis that some relevant
document was missing. The children's paternal aunt K informed Peter
Horrocks that she was assisting with this matter and has now sought advice
in order to make fresh applications. An application for Z cannot be made
unless and until these proceedings are resolved in his favour, since it is
the Respondent's published guidance not to grant citizenship where an
individual is subject to deportation proceedings.
[4] I note that Aunty N did attend court to give oral evidence but was
called away because her granddaughter was sick and she had to collect her.
Mr Duffy indicated that he had not intended to challenge any of her
evidence in any event.
[5] In November 2011 the Appellant was released on licence. In breach of
her licence conditions the Appellant contacted her adult son D (who had
been a co-defendant to the charges) and asked him to bring the children
back from London to the hostel where she was living in Wigan. The children
lived with their mother until April 2012 when she was recalled because of
the breach, and for a failure to attend an appointment with immigration
services.

[6] That decision is the subject of an application for judicial review,
based inter alia on the Respondent's failure to have regard to the report
produced by Natalia Dawkins (see above)
[7] Report dated 5th August 2015, prepared upon instructions from the
Government Legal Department.
[8] Report dated 10th July 2015, prepared upon instructions of the
Appellant's solicitors.
[9] Report by National Probation Service 9th August 2010
[10] Report by National Probation Service 4th November 2010

