
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th May 2018                              |On 23rd May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    [H D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Mace  made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 20th February 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 2nd January 1989.  He says
    that he arrived in the UK on 13th December 2016 and he  claimed  asylum
    on 15th December 2016.  He was refused on 4th January 2018  and  it  is
    this refusal which was the subject of the appeal before Judge Mace.

 3. It was not disputed that the appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity from the
    Alevi faith from the  southeast  of  Turkey.  The  judge  outlined  her
    reasons for finding that the appellant was  not  credible  in  claiming
    that he had been detained and  ill-treated  as  a  consequence  of  his
    involvement with the DTP.

 4. The appellant then sought permission  to  appeal  against  the  judge's
    decision challenging a number  of  her  adverse  credibility  findings.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Holmes on 5th April 2018.

Submissions

 5. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that the judge did not have regard to  the
    totality of the evidence when reaching her decision.  Specifically  she
    did not refer to the appellant's  appeal  statement  when  counting  it
    against the appellant that he had incorrectly identified the  dates  of
    the massacres at Maras and Civas at interview. The appellant's case was
    that he was stressed and confused but after the  30  minute  break  had
    composed himself.  The Immigration Judge did not  give  weight  to  the
    appellant's explanation.

 6. The judge  highlighted inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account  of
    his detentions at interview but in doing so failed to  have  regard  to
    his  appeal  statement  in  which  he   clarified  the  dates  of   his
    detentions.  Moreover at paragraph 21 she held it against the appellant
    that he had made a visit application to come  to  the  UK  without  any
    logical reason.  There was no inconsistency in the appellant seeking to
    leave Turkey by making an application at the British Embassy.

 7. Finally, the judge had not taken any  account  of  her  submissions  in
    relation to the country guidance case of IK [2004] UKIAT 00312  CG  and
    had accordingly not lawfully assessed the  issue  of  risk  on  return.
    This appellant had  a  number  of  risk  factors,  namely  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity, Alevi faith, the fact that  he  was  an  undocumented  young
    single male from southeast Turkey who had been absent for a  period  of
    time with family connections to the DTP; they  had  not  properly  been
    assessed.  It was not disputed that the  appellant  was  a  sympathiser
    with the DTP cause and any association with the PKK was  a  major  risk
    factor on return.

 8. Mr Jarvis defended the determination and submitted that the  judge  had
    made a number of powerful adverse findings which were not challenged in
    the grounds.  The witness statement had been mentioned at paragraph  19
    of the determination and it was wrong to suggest that the judge had not
    properly understood the appellant's case.  She was entitled  to  reject
    the appellant's explanation that he had  been  stressed.   Overall  the
    determination was a clear assessment of the appellant's claim  and  she
    was entitled to reject it for the reasons which she gave.

 9. So far as IK was  concerned  the  lack  of  reference  to  the  country
    guidance case  was  immaterial  because,  on  the  judge's  sustainable
    findings, the appellant would not be in a risk category  identified  in
    the country guidance.

Findings and Conclusions

10. I am satisfied that this is a sustainable determination.  Her  findings
    and conclusions were plainly open to her.

11. First,  it  is  right  to  say  that  a  number  of  her  findings  are
    unchallenged.  She observed that, at the appellant's initial  interview
    on 15th December 2016, he was asked to explain the reasons why he could
    not return to his own home country.  He said that his cousin  had  been
    killed by the police because she was Kurdish and the  authorities  were
    looking to take him and torture him because he  was  Kurdish  and  that
    this had last happened on 17th September 2016.  When asked  whether  he
    had ever been detained he said just in Turkey for  being  Kurdish.   He
    said that he had never been involved with any political organisation.

12. However six months later, at  the  substantive  asylum  interview,  the
    appellant said that he had been arrested as a terrorist  and  had  been
    distributing leaflets and had been involved with the  DTP  since  2009.
    It was put  to  him  that  he  had  failed  to  mention  any  political
    involvement in his initial interview and he explained  that  the  agent
    had told him that he should answer that at his official interview which
    would be later on.  He did not know what would happen.

13. The judge set out clearly why she found this explanation to be  lacking
    in credibility. She found it difficult to understand why the  appellant
    would fear  that  he  would  be  sent  back  for  mentioning  political
    involvement when this was the basis of his asylum claim.

14. There was a further inconsistency between the initial interview and the
    account given later.  The appellant initially stated  that  his  cousin
    had been killed and all of his family had been affected and left  their
    town. At the hearing he said that his family were still in the  village
    and always had been.

15. Moreover there is no challenge to the judge's finding that,  whilst  it
    was not disputed that the killing of one  [DD]  had  taken  place,  the
    appellant had been unable to produce any documents to show that he  was
    related to her as he claimed.  There was nothing from any  relative  or
    anyone from the appellant's village by way of evidence.   He  had  said
    that he had parents, cousins, nieces and nephews in his home village as
    well as siblings with whom he was in contact.  It was open to the judge
    to remark that the appellant had left the country  using  an  agent  in
    December 2016 when his family were still in the village  and  therefore
    in a position to send documents at the time and since.

16. It is not true to say that the judge did  not  make  reference  to  the
    appeal statement.  She did so in paragraph 19.  She was,  for  example,
    fully aware of the appellant's explanation for  the  confusion  in  the
    dates of the massacres at Maras  and  Civas,  to  which  she  referred.
    However, as she said, the appellant claimed that he had been  attending
    demonstrations since 2009 on an annual basis for the  anniversaries  of
    the events.  Not only had he  attended  them  but  he  had  distributed
    leaflets in order to organise support.   They  were  well-known  events
    which were commemorated every year.

17. The judge was also entitled to hold it against the appellant that there
    were inconsistencies in the accounts given by him  of  his  detentions,
    particularly in relation to one where he said that he was detained at a
    protest in 2014 which was before the  Suruc  massacre  had  even  taken
    place.  There were also discrepancies in his claims of how long he  was
    detained and whether he was tortured.

18. Finally the judge was  entitled  to  observe  that  the  appellant  was
    discrepant in his evidence that he could not move to another city  when
    he had been able to travel to the British Embassy to apply for  a  visa
    using false documents.  Moreover the appellant said that  there  was  a
    man in the embassy who could organise the visa  when  in  fact  it  was
    rejected because false documents were used, which is inconsistent.

19. The judge's credibility findings were open to her.

20. So far as the IK point is concerned  it  is  clear  from  the  skeleton
    argument relied on by his representative at the hearing that it was not
    being said that the appellant would be at risk solely on account of his
    Kurdish ethnicity, the fact that he came from the southeast  of  Turkey
    and was of the Alevi faith.

21. At paragraph 13 of the skeleton argument it says:

         "The appellant's case is that it is the cumulative  effect  of  his
         Kurdish ethnicity, area of origin, involvement with and support for
         the HDP, family involvement with  pro  Kurdish  parties,  perceived
         assistance to the PKK, Alevi faith and his absence from Turkey will
         place him at risk on return particularly in the current climate  in
         Turkey and following the failed coup attempt  on  15th  July  2016.
         There has been continuing interest as against  the  appellant  with
         raids at his family home."

22. At paragraph 22:

         "It is submitted  that  upon  investigation  of  such  records  the
         appellant's previous encounters with the authorities,  support  for
         the HDP and suspected support for the PKK will come  to  the  fore.
         In those circumstances it is submitted that upon  investigation  of
         his particulars the appellant will be perceived as a separatist and
         will be transferred to the anti terror branch where the risk of ill
         treatment/persecution remains high."

23. It is quite clear that the case was put on the basis not  only  of  the
    appellant's area of origin, his  ethnicity  and  faith,  but  also  his
    claimed suspected history of association with an illegal  organisation.
    The judge was entitled  to  reject  the  appellant's  account  of  such
    history in its entirety.  Accordingly the lack of engagement  with  the
    country guidance case of IK is not material.

Notice of Decision

The  original  judge  did  not  err  in  law.   Her  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 21 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

