

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01217/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 21 September 2016                          |On 17 November, 2016         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL L J MURRAY

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Neale, instructed by the Migrant Legal Project

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. For ease of reference I refer to the Appellant  in  this  appeal  as  the
   Secretary of State and the Respondent as the Claimant. The Claimant is  a
   citizen of Morocco. The Secretary of State made a decision on 3 September
   2015 to refuse his protection and human rights claim on the basis that he
   was a foreign criminal and his deportation was conducive  to  the  public
   good because none of the exceptions in section 33 of the UK  Borders  Act
   2007 applied.


2. The Claimant appealed against that decision under section 82 (1)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was  allowed  on
   asylum grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 17 March 2016. The Secretary of State sought permission to
   appeal that decision and permission  was  granted  on  renewal  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kekic. The grant of permission  states  that  all  grounds
   relied on by the Secretary of State are arguable.

   The Grounds

3. The Secretary of State  submits  that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal on  the  Claimant's  sexuality  are  wholly  circumstantial  and
   reliant upon irrelevant evidence to support the conclusion  that  he  was
   gay as claimed. It is asserted that the First-tier tribunal accepted that
   the Claimant suffered sexual abuse as a child and therefore was likely to
   be confused about his sexual identity but this did not establish  he  was
   gay. The grounds state that the medical evidence suggests  as  a  general
   presumption that victims of sexual abuse may identify themselves  as  gay
   but that this does not establish that the Claimant is a homosexual but is
   indicative of a trend of responses noted by Dr Battersby.

4.  The  Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
   "circumvented" its role as judicial fact  finder  by  using  the  medical
   evidence to establish the Claimant's credibility which is said not to  be
   the correct approach (Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367). It is  further
   submitted that the Claimant has an appalling immigration history and  the
   First-tier Tribunal is quick to diminish those adverse credibility points
   on the generalised presumption that such  practices  are  commonplace  in
   protection claims. The Secretary  of  State  submits  that  this  finding
   misses the point as the Claimant has a poor immigration history  and  has
   sought to circumvent controls  by  arriving  in  the  UK  using  a  false
   document, repeatedly using false documents to evade detection, failing to
   claim asylum in the first safe country and delaying  claiming  asylum  in
   the UK until he became liable for deportation. It  is  argued  that  such
   conduct is not indicative  of  a  person  with  a  well-founded  fear  of
   persecution as highlighted by s8 of the 2004 Act.  These  factors  should
   not be ignored in the  overall  assessment  of  credibility  and  it  was
   incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal to engage fully with  the  Secretary
   of State's complaints in this regard particularly as there is a  lack  of
   corroborative evidence in relation to the core of his  case,  namely  his
   sexuality.


5. The Secretary of  State  asserts  that  the  medical  evidence  does  not
   establish the Claimant's sexuality and nor does the evidence of Mr S, his
   witness. The mere fact that he was seen in gay club with European men  is
   said not to support the contention that he is gay. It is argued that  the
   First-tier Tribunal's findings on asylum are rendered  unsound.  Further,
   the First-tier  Tribunal  is  said  to  have  made  no  findings  on  the
   likelihood that the Claimant would require  international  protection  on
   the basis of perceived reprisals from the Muslim  Brotherhood  and  noted
   that there was insufficient basis to suppose  outside  of  sexuality,  it
   would be unreasonable for him to internally relocate within Morocco.
6. With regard to deportation, the Secretary  of  States  submits  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal has made no findings in relation  to  the  Claimant's
   deportation beyond the asylum findings. The Secretary of state  maintains
   that deportation would be appropriate.


   The Hearing


7. Mr Richards said that the Claimant claimed asylum in 2014 having come  to
   the UK 16-17 years ago. He claimed asylum on the basis of  his  sexuality
   and it was conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State that if  he  were
   gay he would be at risk on return to  Morocco.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
   found that he was gay and he was as a consequence at risk. The First-tier
   Judge in effect relied on the medical evidence to  establish  credibility
   which was not the correct approach. The Judge in  effect  relied  on  the
   medical evidence in  discounting  the  Claimant's  appalling  immigration
   history. He came here with a forged  Belgian  passport  and  stayed  here
   illegally before making his asylum claim. As was highlighted by section 8
   the conduct exhibited by the Claimant was not indicative of a person with
   a well-founded fear of persecution and the Judge failed to give weight to
   section 8 in his findings. The Judge referred to the  Claimant's  witness
   who was not the sexual partner but his evidence at paragraph  38  of  the
   determination was that he had seen him in gay clubs and believed that  he
   was gay. It could not be sensibly argued that someone who attends  a  gay
   club is gay.  The Judge  in  effect  concluded  that  he  was  gay  as  a
   consequence of inadequate reasoning and  made  no  findings  against  the
   Claimant's deportation beyond the asylum findings. The decision should be
   set aside and reheard.


8. Mr Neale submitted that this was a disagreement with the findings of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and it was a way of disguising a perversity challenge
   in different clothes. At paragraphs 63  to  66  the  Secretary  of  State
   misunderstood the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning. The Judge  was  saying
   at paragraph 63 that in light of the fact that he was sexually abused and
   persecuted in Morocco the discrepancies and inconsistencies found by  the
   Respondent were explained.  He was not saying that he was sexually abused
   as a child and therefore he was gay.  Judge  O'Brien  had  accepted  that
   there was a  psychological  explanation.  Judge  O'Brien  had  taken  the
   medical evidence into account as corroborative evidence  in  relation  to
   sexuality. Dr Clarke's report strongly corroborated his account  and  the
   Judge was entitled to take it  into  account.  Paragraph  6  of  skeleton
   argument set  out  how  the  medical  report  should  be  approached.  Dr
   Battersby did not assess whether he was gay but she was able to say  that
   his mental condition was consistent with his history.  She  had  taken  a
   psycho-sexual history. The Judge had considered the medical  evidence  in
   the round and had concluded that it supported his  credibility.   It  was
   not an error of law that the Judge found him to be credible. The case  of
   JT (Cameroon) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 878 made clear that s8 did not  compel
   an  adverse  finding  on  credibility.  The  Judge  had  considered   the
   Appellant's immigration history at paragraph 60 and 63 and explained  why
   it did not undermine a  finding  of  being  gay.  There  were  compelling
   realistic reasons why the Claimant could not raise his feelings with  the
   Secretary of State's decision-maker. The Judge was entitled to make  that
   finding. What the Secretary of  State  was  really  doing  was  making  a
   perversity challenge and a perversity challenge would not have succeeded.
   There was no error of law of any kind. The Secretary  of  State  did  not
   like the result. The Judge  did  not  think  the  witness'  evidence  was
   determinative of the claim and he took  into  account  the  evidence  and
   found it to be corroborative. He took it into account in the round as one
   of the many factors and was entitled to do that.

9. Mr Richards said that the Judge  made  findings  at  paragraph  63,  then
   quoted from guidelines and quoted from Dr  Battersby's  report  and  then
   accepted that he was gay. If one asked the question "why  do  you  accept
   that he is gay?" there was no sensible answer and he  took  into  account
   irrelevant considerations and the decision was wrong in law.

   Discussion and Findings

10. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Claimant  was  a  vulnerable
   witness and suffering from moderate complex PTSD and moderate depression,
   with at least a degree of cognitive deficit. There were  two  aspects  of
   the Claimant's claim to be at risk of  persecution.  He  claimed  firstly
   that he would be at risk of reprisals  from  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  in
   Morocco because he had provided the names of individuals  to  the  police
   and suffered a serious physical and sexual assault as a result  from  the
   families of those arrested. The First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 62
   of the decision that the Claimant's account of being severely beaten  and
   raped by the families of Muslim activists was  reasonably  likely  to  be
   true.   No direct challenge has been made to this finding in the  grounds
   or in submissions. The First-tier Tribunal gave cogent reasons,  grounded
   in the medical evidence, why he considered this aspect of the  Claimant's
   account to be true. However, he did not  consider  whether  the  Claimant
   would have a well-founded fear of persecution on return as  a  result  of
   this aspect of his account and did not allow the appeal on this basis. He
   specifically stated that in the light of his finding  that  the  Claimant
   was gay and was entitled to a grant of asylum on this basis  it  was  not
   necessary to consider the alternative.


11. The First-tier Tribunal's findings and reasons as to  why  the  Claimant
   was gay are set out at paragraphs 63 to 67 of the decision:


   "63. Turning to whether the Appellant is gay, as he claims,  I  recognise
    that he did not raise this issue until the  end  of  his  first  asylum
    interview. I take into account also the Respondent's submissions as  to
    the apparent inconsistencies in this aspect of his account. However, it
    has been the Appellant's consistent account that he  was  abused  as  a
    young child by his teacher and  he  was  deeply  ashamed  of  what  had
    happened. It appears to be accepted by the  Respondent  that  gays  are
    persecuted in Morocco. It is unsurprising then that the Appellant would
    go to extreme lengths to disguise his sexual preferences.


   64.      The UNHCR Guidelines in International  Protection  dealing  with
    claims  to   refugee   status   based   on   sexual   orientation   etc
    (HCR/GIP/12/09) say at paragraph 33:


      'Being compelled to conceal one's  sexual  orientation  and/or  gender
      identity may also result in significant psychological and other harms.
      Discriminatory and disapproving attitudes, norms and values  may  have
      serious effect on the mental and physical health of LGBTI  individuals
      and could in particular  cases  lead  to  an  intolerable  predicament
      amounting to persecution. Feelings  of  self-denial,  anguish,  shame,
      isolation and even self-hatred which may  accrue  in  response  to  an
      inability to be open about one's  sexuality  or  gender  identity  are
      factors to consider, including the long-term.'


   65.       Indeed,  Dr  Battersby  remarks  on  the  Appellant's  apparent
      confused  sexual  identity,  of  his  pattern  of  needing  to  become
      intoxicated before having sex, and of 'blaming'  the  childhood  abuse
      for his sexuality. In the circumstances, I accept that it is  entirely
      plausible that he would not know Steve's surname, or birthday,  whilst
      still considering them to be in a  relationship,  and  also  that  the
      Appellant would use pejorative terms for other gay men.


   66.      It was not challenged that Mr Saleh had seen  the  Appellant  in
      the company of European gay men at gay clubs in  around  2009.  Whilst
      that in itself would not weigh heavily in the balance, it  adds  to  a
      general picture of a culturally conflicted individual, wanting  to  be
      openly gay but scared of the reaction of his community.


   67.      Considering the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  accept  that  the
      Appellant is gay. I further accept that he wishes to live openly as  a
      gay man and  that,  if  returned  to  Morocco,  would  only  hide  his
      sexuality through a well-founded fear of  the  consequences  of  doing
      otherwise. "


12. The Respondent set out in the refusal letter why she concluded that  the
   Claimant was not gay. There were  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  his
   account. Firstly, he had claimed during his third asylum  interview  that
   when he was aged 17 or 18 he was in a sexual  relationship  with  a  male
   British national named David who was staying in Tangiers. He also  stated
   that he had sexual experiences with other men.  However,  in  his  second
   interview he had claimed that he was gay only when he arrived in the  UK.
   He had further given an inconsistent account in interview as to  who  was
   aware he was gay in Morocco. In his second interview  he  had  said  that
   there were threats to his  life  because  he  was  gay  from  the  Muslim
   Brotherhood and had said at a different point in interview that no one in
   Morocco was aware he was  gay.  He  had  also  provided  an  inconsistent
   account of the relationships he had had in the UK  stating  that  he  had
   three sexual partners and all had been male and at another point that  he
   had sexual relationships with two females in the UK. He had  stated  that
   he was in a relationship with an Australian male named  Steve  for  three
   years and that he visited every August. He sometimes spent  a  week  with
   him and sometimes a night but did not know his surname and where  he  was
   from in Australia. He did not know his exact age or date  of  birth.  The
   Respondent had concluded that he should have been able  to  provide  more
   than this basic information about an individual that he claimed  to  have
   been in a relationship with for three years.  He  had  also  provided  an
   inconsistent account about when he last saw Steve, stating that  he  last
   saw him in August 2013 and on New Year's Eve 2012.


13. Further, the Secretary of State concluded in  the  refusal  letter  that
   his account was not believable because he had only claimed asylum in  the
   UK after 16 or 17  years  living  here  and  after  his  arrest  and  his
   notification of liability for deportation. Further, he had  only  claimed
   he was gay at the very end of his asylum interview.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal's at paragraph 63 appears to conclude that  the
   inconsistencies in the Claimant's account with regard to  being  gay  are
   explained by his abuse as a young child by his teacher. This on the  face
   of it appears to be a non-sequitur. However, reading the determination as
   a whole, at paragraph 42 the Judge records Dr  Clark's  observation  that
   the late disclosure of reported childhood sexual abuse and of his  sexual
   orientation could be caused  by  gender-based  persecution  which  causes
   shame and stigma which could in turn affect  memory  and  disclosure.  He
   records her opinion that there were  also  significant  medical  reasons,
   including features of PTSD, which might account for late  disclosure  and
   discrepancies in interview.

15. However, what the First-tier Tribunal does not do in paragraph 63 is  to
   make a finding that the medical evidence in relation  to  the  Claimant's
   account explains the inconsistences. Whilst the medical  evidence,  which
   was not overtly referred to in paragraph 63 of the decision,  provides  a
   reason which might account for discrepancies in interview this  does  not
   obviate the need for the Tribunal to make a finding of why in  this  case
   it does, particularly in view of  the  large  number  of  inconsistencies
   highlighted by the Respondent  and  addressed  by  the  Claimant  in  his
   statement.

16. The First-tier Tribunal also relies at paragraph 65 of the  decision  on
   Dr Battersby's evidence in relation to the Claimant's  apparent  confused
   sexual identity as explaining why the Claimant  would  not  know  Steve's
   surname or birthday. The part of  Dr  Battersby's  report  relied  on  is
   summarised by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 47  of  the  decision.
   The Judge records that Dr Battersby observed that it was not uncommon for
   male victims of sexual assault to claim that they were gay because of the
   assault (as the Claimant had done) and the  need  to  become  intoxicated
   before sex was likely to be as a result of  abuse.  What  the  First-tier
   Tribunal does not do, however, is to adequately explain why, in the light
   of the Claimant's three year summer relationship with Steve, his confused
   sexual  identity  and  childhood  abuse  explains  the  discrepancies  in
   relation to the lack of knowledge of his exact age, his name and the last
   time he saw him.

17. The  inconsistencies  in  relation  to  the  Claimant's  sexuality  were
   numerous and the lateness of his claim after his arrest and the  decision
   to deport were matters that needed to be engaged with fully. It is  clear
   from JT (Cameroon) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 878 that the First-tier  Tribunal
   was  not  required  to  find  that  section  8  inevitably  damaged   his
   credibility. However, in this case I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   relied on the medical evidence and did  not  make  sufficiently  reasoned
   findings in the light of the numerous inconsistencies in the evidence and
   adverse points made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  the
   Claimant's credibility.

18. With regard to ground 2, the First-tier Tribunal did  not  set  out  the
   legal framework in relation to  deportation  in  the  decision.  However,
   having found that the Claimant was a refugee he was entitled to find that
   he met one of the exceptions to automatic deportation in section  33  (2)
   of the UK Borders Act 2007 and was entitled to allow the appeal  on  this
   basis. However, I have found that there was an error of law  in  relation
   to his findings on the asylum claim.

19. The findings of fact in relation to the  Claimant's  past  treatment  by
   the Muslim Brotherhood are preserved. In the light of  the  fact  finding
   required taking account of Part 7.2 (a) of the  Practice  Statements  for
   the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper-
   Tier Tribunal I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision with the findings of fact referred to in  paragraph
19 above preserved.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

