
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA014382016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated and sent                 |
|On 19 July 2017                      |On 10 August 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TAHIR MEHMOOD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     M   s J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, instructed by Warnapala & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, whom I shall call the  "Claimant",  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on protection grounds
    against the Secretary of State's decision to make a  deportation  order
    against him.  That decision followed the  claimant's  conviction  of  a
    serious criminal offence as a result of which he was sentenced to  four
    years and six months imprisonment.

 2. Judge Grimmett allowed the appellant's appeal.  It was allowed  on  one
    ground only.  That is to say that the  appellant  was  properly  to  be
    regarded as a Christian.  It was accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State
    that if the appellant had converted to Christianity he was at  risk  of
    ill-treatment contrary to article  3  if  returned  to  Pakistan.   The
    Secretary of State appeals to this Tribunal and has permission  on  the
    ground that the judge's judgement insufficiently takes into account the
    Secretary of State's position and is insufficiently reasoned to  comply
    with the obligation of a judge to show the reasons for the decision.

 3. I have heard submissions based on the grounds from Ms Isherwood; I have
    not needed to call upon Ms Tobin for the claimant.  As Ms Isherwood has
    said, this is a case in which there  was  very  substantial  reason  to
    doubt the claimant's word.  Many of the issues raised were raised  only
    after the deportation decision was  made.   He  is  a  person  who  has
    continued to deny a responsibility for the  offence  of  which  he  was
    convicted.  He made and, so far as is known, continues to rely  on,  an
    application based on his family life in the United Kingdom although  he
    has separated from his wife and there  is  no  continuing  relationship
    with his wife or his stepchildren.  He made at one stage an  allegation
    based on a medical need to  remain  in  this  country  because  of  the
    condition relating  to  his  kidneys.   That  assertion  has  not  been
    pursued.  His story of the circumstances and his history before he left
    Pakistan for the United Kingdom has been disbelieved and his claim that
    he is at risk particularly from members of  his  family  on  return  to
    Pakistan has also been disbelieved.

 4. Those are matters which are not only part of the Secretary  of  State's
    decision but were endorsed by the judge in making  her  decision.   The
    judge's judgment is a short one  which  runs  in  total  to  twenty-two
    paragraphs including the formal ones at the end.  This is not a case in
    which, in my judgment, it can reasonably be said  that  in  making  the
    decision that she did in favour of the  claimant  the  judge  had  lost
    sight of the many adverse factors in the claimant's case, some of which
    I have already set out.  It was necessarily in that  context  that  she
    considered the claimant's claim that he is indeed a Christian.   As  Ms
    Isherwood has accepted, essentially the entire case before  the  judge,
    and thus before this Tribunal, turns on whether the claimant was to  be
    believed when he said that he had embraced Christianity, and  thus  was
    to be regarded as a person who was a Christian  convert  and  hence  an
    apostate so far as Islam is concerned.

 5. The principal difficulties to which the Secretary of State's refers and
    referred in relation to that are, first, what the  Secretary  of  State
    has described as the "convenience" of  a  conversion  that  so  closely
    coincided with the decision to deport him, and, secondly, the fact that
    both at his initial asylum interview and at his detailed  interview  he
    sidelined what he now  claims  was  a  genuine  full-hearted  Christian
    conversion.  In his screening interview he indeed gave his religion  as
    Sunni  Muslim  at  a  time  after  he  claimed  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity; and in  his  detailed  interview  he  asserted  that  the
    chaplain in the prison had said that it was perfectly all right for him
    to continue to attend services at the prison mosque.  In addition,  the
    Secretary of State points out that there appears  to  be  a  difference
    between the various accounts the claimant has given of the date of  his
    conversion  to  Christianity.   The  Secretary  of  State,  through  Ms
    Isherwood, says to me, as through Mr Hogg she said  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, that taking those factors with the general reasons  for
    disbelieving the claimant, his claim to have converted to  Christianity
    simply should not be accepted.

 6. So far as the arguments put to the First-tier Tribunal  are  concerned,
    that, as it seems to me, is a perfectly acceptable way of  putting  the
    case.   When the matter comes to this Tribunal  however,  Ms  Isherwood
    has to show that the judge was not entitled to reach the view  for  the
    reasons she did,  or  alternatively  that  the  reasons  she  gave  are
    inadequate.  I am wholly  unpersuaded  that  the  judge  did  not  have
    properly in mind the Secretary of State's points made  in  writing  and
    orally before her and to a large extent referred to specifically in her
    short judgment.  The judge had in mind that this was a case which stood
    or fell by the honesty or otherwise of the  claimant's  claim  to  have
    converted to Christianity.  There were the adverse factors to  which  I
    have already referred.  The judge, as I say, appears to have had  those
    in mind, and the fact that she does not specifically refer to  them  at
    paragraph 15 of her judgement, it seems to me helps  the  Secretary  of
    State's case not at all.

 7. The judge had the following evidence before her  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, which was in  April  2017  some  time  (obviously)  after  the
    Secretary of State's interviews and decision letter.  First, there  was
    the claimant's own claim that he had  converted.   If  the  matter  had
    depended on that alone it might have been difficult to  understand  why
    the judge should accept that whilst rejecting virtually everything else
    that the claimant said; but the claimant's own claim was  supported  by
    an oral witness before her, a Miss Cuthbert, who herself gave  evidence
    not merely about her own views, (although accepting that she could  not
    know a person's heart): she was a person  of  some  experience  working
    with individuals in prison; she also reported the views of  the  prison
    chaplain and also the views of an Urdu-speaking  Christian  friend  who
    had been interacting with the claimant.  There does not appear to  have
    been any serious challenge to Miss Cuthbert's evidence at the  hearing.
    She was asked a number of questions but there was no  suggestion  as  I
    understand both from the judge's note and from what  Ms  Isherwood  has
    told me that there was any reason to disbelieve what Miss Cuthbert said
    about the claimant's own activities and experiences.  The claimant had,
    according to Miss Cuthbert's evidence,  been  studying  the  bible  for
    about two years, was in regular contact with the chaplain at the prison
    where he was and then with Miss Cuthbert at the  prison  where  he  is.
    She had been impressed by his study, she had  been  a  witness  to  his
    baptism, it was she who spoke about the Christian friend at  his  views
    and it was she who said that the claimant had been attending  an  alpha
    course.  There was also some evidence at some stage that  the  claimant
    had been attacked by Muslim  prisoners  as  (presumably)  an  apostate;
    looking at the judge's note, it appears that the  claimant  said  that.
    Looking at the judge's judgment it appears that  it  was  confirmed  as
    something about which Miss Cuthbert also knew  and  evidently  did  not
    dissent from.

 8. The judge's task was to consider the evidence before her and to reach a
    conclusion on whether this aspect in particular was to be believed.  It
    seems to me that the judge did that job.  Her reasoning on this crucial
    factor occupies two of  the  twenty-two  paragraphs  to  which  I  have
    already referred in a brief judgment.  It seems to  me  that  she  gave
    adequate attention to this point; she had the adverse factors  in  mind
    but the truth is simply that she was persuaded by the oral evidence  in
    front of her, not merely from the claimant but  as  supported  by  Miss
    Cuthbert who  reported  the  views  of  other  individuals.   Thus  the
    Secretary of State's ground of appeal amount really to disagreement.  I
    can easily understand that the Secretary of State  does  disagree  with
    the judgment but it was the judge's task to decide the  issue  and  she
    did her job in so deciding it.

 9. I therefore find that the judge made no error of law and  her  decision
    allowing this appeal on human rights grounds therefore stands.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 8 August 2017
