
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 26, 2018                        |On October 4, 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reza, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He claimed to have  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2005 and he applied  on  March  22,  2012  for
    indefinite leave to remain. The respondent refused this application  on
    August 10, 2012 as he had provided forged passports.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on January 13,  2017  but  the  respondent
    refused his application in a  decision  dated  January  9,  2018  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on January 22, 2018.   His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hosie  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on February 20, 2018 and in a decision  promulgated
    on March 22, 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on April 5,  2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford on May  21,
    2018. The appellant renewed his grounds of appeal on June 7,  2018  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty found  it  arguable,  on  July  24,
    2018, that the Judge had not given adequate and sufficient reasons  for
    rejecting the witness evidence.

 6. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Reza adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge had
    erred at paragraph 68 of the decision in the assessment of the witness
    evidence. The Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting
    the evidence of Mr H or why he had attached little weight to the
    evidence of Mr A. Whilst there were some weak aspects to the
    appellant's case he submitted the Judge had failed to balance those
    findings against the evidence of the witnesses.

 8. Mr Tufan submitted that whilst he accepted the Judge's reason for
    rejecting Mr A's evidence was flawed he submitted it was not a material
    error because the Judge had given detailed reasons for rejecting the
    appellant's account on grounds of credibility. He referred the Tribunal
    to the Judge's conclusion at paragraph 72 of the decision. The Judge
    had also been entitled to take into account Section 8 of the Asylum and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 because the
    appellant had not only used false passports to both enter the United
    Kingdom and obtain employment illegally but had delayed in making his
    claim for asylum until after his other application had been rejected.

    FINDINGS

 9. The appellant claimed asylum because he was homosexual and argued  that
    if he was returned to Bangladesh he would be at  risk.  The  Judge  who
    heard his appeal had  to  consider  evidence  given  not  only  by  the
    appellant but also by two witnesses.

10. Mr Tufan accepted that the Judge's finding at paragraph 68  was  flawed
    in the sense that the Judge  had  been  wrong  to  state  that  he  was
    attaching little weight to Mr A's evidence because  he  had  previously
    been married with children. One of the  issues  I  have  to  decide  is
    whether this amounted to a material error in law.

11. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing  and  the  Judge's  decision
    sets out in some detail what happened at the hearing. At  paragraph  60
    the Judge reminded himself that where a doubt existed he should keep an
    open mind until the question of whether there was a  risk  was  finally
    considered.

12. At paragraph 63 the Judge assessed the appellant's credibility and gave
    detailed reasons for making those findings. The grounds of appeal  took
    no issue with those findings.

13. The Judge was critical that witnesses who had provided  statements  had
    failed to attend the hearing in circumstances  where  they  could  have
    attended. The Judge was entitled to attach little weight  therefore  to
    their evidence. This finding was  not  challenged  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. Similarly, the findings made at paragraphs  65  and  66  remain
    unchallenged. The Judge also made findings under section 8 of the  2004
    Act on credibility.

14. The issue is whether the Judge's approach to the witness  evidence  was
    so flawed that it would have undermined the  Judge's  findings  on  the
    other evidence.

15. The Judge was aware of the witness  evidence  as  he  set  out  in  his
    decision and whilst there was an error in the way he dealt with Mr  A's
    evidence I am satisfied that at paragraph 67 there were  ample  reasons
    given for rejecting aspects of Mr A's evidence and whilst  the  Judge's
    finding at paragraph 68 in respect of Mr A was unhelpful and  incorrect
    I do not accept that this on  its  own  would  undermine  the  previous
    unchallenged findings about the appellant's claim. The  Judge  did  not
    believe the appellant was homosexual and did not accept the evidence of
    either witness.

16. The other finding at paragraph 68 in respect of Mr H  had  to  be  read
    against the background of the whole decision. Whilst Mr H claimed  that
    they had had sex this was something the Judge had rejected based on his
    earlier rejection of the appellant's own account.

17. The Judge's findings were open to him and any error highlighted in  the
    permission was not material.

    DECISION

18. There is no error in law I uphold the original decision.

Signed                              Date     29/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis






FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     29/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
