
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01793/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  Ahmad [K]
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Grier (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 27 March 2019, to dismiss his appeal against the  Secretary  of
         State's decision of 11 February 2019, to the effect that he is not
         entitled to international protection.

      2. This decision of the Upper Tribunal is short and that  is  because
         there was agreement between the parties before me. So, it  is  not
         necessary for me to go into detail about the issues in the  appeal
         or to deal with all the arguments which had been  deployed  before
         the tribunal.

      3. One of the bases for criticism of the tribunal's decision, in  the
         grounds drafted and relied upon by Mr Grier, was that the tribunal
         appeared to have considered and relied upon extraneous material in
         the form of an Australian Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade
         Report. That report appeared to have informed its view that if the
         claimant was a person with a significant  oppositionist  political
         profile, he would not have been able to leave Egypt and nor  would
         his wife, using normal immigration channels.

4.    It is apparent that what I shall now simply call the  "the  Australian
Report" is quoted in the Country Policy  and  Information  Note  Egypt  (the
CPIN) of July 2017. The Secretary of State's written explanation  to  refuse
international protection appears to quote from the CPIN where that  document
is, in turn, quoting from the Australian Report. The tribunal, at  paragraph
30 of its written reasons, seems to be quoting from  the  Australian  Report
itself though, I accept, the position is not entirely clear.  But  Mr  Grier
suggested that a likely scenario was that the tribunal  had  looked  at  the
Australian Report for itself  after  the  hearing  and  Mrs  Pettersen  also
agreed that that was a likely scenario.

5.    I cannot, of course, be  certain  as  to  what  has  happened.  It  is
possible that what is quoted at  paragraph  30  of  the  tribunal's  written
reasons is simply a longer extract from the quotation  from  the  Australian
Report in the CPIN itself. But the position is, at least,  uncertain.  There
is agreement between the parties that the most likely scenario is  that  the
tribunal has read and relied upon the Australian Report for itself  although
it does not say that that is what it has done.

6.    In the circumstances, and bearing in mind the agreement between  them,
I have decided to proceed on the basis suggested by the two  representatives
and to conclude that either the tribunal has looked at  extraneous  material
or that its decision suggests that  it  may  have.  On  that  basis  I  have
concluded it is appropriate to set aside the tribunal's  decision  as  I  am
invited to do. Mrs Pettersen suggested I  should,  in  those  circumstances,
remit and urged me to do so. Mr Grier was of the same mind. I have  decided,
therefore, to remit to the tribunal for a complete rehearing.

7.     My  having  decided  to  remit  I  am  statutorily  obliged  to  give
directions for the rehearing of the appeal. However, I do  not  need  to  be
overly detailed or prescriptive in doing so. I will, therefore, direct  that
there will be a further hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  will
not involve the particular judge who  conducted  the  tribunal  hearing  and
decided the appeal  previously.  All  of  the  directions  with  respect  to
listing and attendant matters may be left to the tribunal.

8.    This appeal to the Upper Tribunal then is allowed on the basis and  to
the extent explained above.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law. Accordingly, this appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  and  its
decision is set aside. Further, the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing.

I do not direct anonymity. The First-tier Tribunal did not do so and  I  was
not urged to do so.


Signed


                                            M R Hemingway
                                            Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Dated 14 August 2019


