
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01912/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 26 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     K A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain instructed by Alison Law Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Hillis promulgated on 6 June 2019 in which the Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.






Background


     2. The Judge notes the appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1
        January 1998 who arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 September  2018
        and who claimed asylum the same day.
     3. The Judge had the  benefit  of  considering  not  only  documentary
        evidence but also of seeing and hearing oral evidence being  given,
        as noted in the decision under challenge. The Judge's findings  are
        set out from [28] in which the Judge  notes  the  appellant's  age,
        gender as a male, nationality, Islamic faith, and  relationship  to
        his brothers is not in dispute in the appeal.
     4. The Judge had the benefit of also receiving oral evidence from  one
        of the appellant's brother's Sarwar who lives in Birmingham and who
        confirmed that he and another brother, also in the UK, take care of
        the appellant and his needs in this country and  who  confirmed  he
        could send the appellant money if the  appellant  was  returned  to
        Kabul [34].
     5. The Judge noted an earlier  determination  by  First-Tier  Tribunal
        Judge Rose in a decision promulgated in 2018  to  which  the  Judge
        refers at [37] in the following terms:


           "37.   I concur with  Judge  Rose's  findings  of  fact  in  his
                 Decision of 2018 and conclude that the Appellant has simply
                 attempted to  adopt  the  account  given  by  his  brother,
                 Sarwar, which was not found to be credible  by  Judge  Rose
                 and that the Appellant has failed to  show,  to  the  lower
                 standard required, that he refused attempts by the  Taliban
                 to recruit him to their ranks as claimed.  The  Appellant's
                 account of how, where, when and by  whom  his  three  older
                 brothers were killed in Afghanistan is not consistent  with
                 the  account  given  to  Judge  Rose  by  Sarwar  in  2018.
                 Additionally, he stated in his oral testimony  that  Sarwar
                 gave him the details of this account after  he  arrived  in
                 the UK."


     6. The Judge did not accept the appellant's account that  his  brother
        no longer has any contact details for their parents [39] and it was
        found there was no new evidence before the Judge to show that Judge
        Rose's findings of fact were in error [40].
     7. At [41] the Judge finds that the appellant had failed  to  show  to
        the lower standard required that his brother was by 2017 still  not
        in contact with his parents in Afghanistan and that  the  appellant
        was not deliberately sent to the UK to join his brothers.  At  [42]
        the Judge finds the appellant's account that he did not know  where
        Sarwar and Momin were in the UK when he  arrived  was  equally  not
        plausible.
     8. At [46] the Judge finds the  appellant  was  simply  following  his
        father's wishes to come to the UK to join his brothers and that  is
        the reason why he did not claim asylum in Greece, Italy or France.
     9. The Judge considers  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  could
        relocate to Kabul referring to the  country  guidance  case  of  AS
        (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).
    10. The Judge also considers an expert report provided by psychological
        therapist between [50 - 55] giving reasons why  little  weight  was
        placed upon that report.
    11. At [55] the Judge writes:


           "55.   I conclude that I can place little evidential  weight  on
                 the experts report, for the reasons set out above, that the
                 Appellant  will  suffer  undue  hardship  on   removal   to
                 Afghanistan due to any mental health difficulties. There is
                 no submission before me that the  Appellant  has  a  health
                 condition that engages the terms of Article 3 of the  ECHR.
                 At answer A12  the  Appellant  stated  he  had  no  medical
                 conditions and there was no evidence adduced at the  appeal
                 hearing that he had sought or been  offered  any  treatment
                 following the receipt of the experts  report  on  15  March
                 2019."


    12. The Judge finds that the appellant, on his own account,  cannot  be
        anything higher than of low-level interest to the  Taliban  meaning
        he came within headnote (i) of AS which reads:


              i)  A person who is of  low-level  interest  for  the  Taliban
                 (i.e.  not  a  senior  government  or   security   services
                 official, or a spire) is not a  real  risk  of  persecution
                 from the Taliban in Kabul.


    13.  The  appellant's  account  was  that  he  faced  a  real  risk  of
        persecution on removal to Afghanistan at the hands of the Taliban.
    14. The Judge concludes at [59]:


           "59.   I conclude on the evidence taken as a whole the Appellant
                 has failed to show, to the lower standard required, that he
                 faces a risk of  death,  persecution  or  ill-treatment  on
                 removal to Kabul Afghanistan for a reason recognised by the
                 Refugee Convention and, in particular, an imputed political
                 opinion. He can safely relocate to Kabul city where he will
                 be able to receive financial support and emotional  support
                 using modern methods of communication from his two brothers
                 in the UK. Additionally, he will be able  to  turn  to  his
                 family  in  Afghanistan  for   further   emotional   and/or
                 financial support as they are within travelling distance of
                 Kabul."


    15. Permission to appeal was granted by  another  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal on 8 August 2019 the operative part of the grant  been  in
        the following terms:


           "3.    The Judge found that Art 15(c) applied to the appellant's
                 home area in Afghanistan but, applying the CG  decision  in
                 AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118
                 (IAC), he could  reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate  to
                 Kabul. The Court Appeal has now overturned  AS  and  it  is
                 being remitted to the UT to redetermine  (see  [2019]  EWCA
                 Civ 873). As a result, the Judge arguably erred in  law  in
                 applying the legally flawed decision in AS. For the reason,
                 permission to appeal is granted."



Error of law


    16. No legal error is made  out  in  the  manner  in  which  the  Judge
        considered the psychological therapists  report.  Adequate  reasons
        have been given for the finding of the Judge regarding  the  weight
        to be given to this document.
    17. In AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 the  Upper
        Tribunal held that having regard to the security  and  humanitarian
        situation in Kabul  as  well  as  the  difficulties  faced  by  the
        population living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and
        other returnees, which are not dissimilar to the  conditions  faced
        throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it will not, in general
        be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single  adult  male  in  good
        health to relocate to Kabul even if he does not have  any  specific
        connections or support network in Kabul.  However,  the  particular
        circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken into account
        in the context of conditions in the place of relocation,  including
        a person's age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections
        with Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
        language, education and vocational skills when determining  whether
        a person falls within that  general  position.   A  person  with  a
        support network or specific connections in Kabul is likely to be in
        a more  advantageous  position  on  return,  which  may  counter  a
        particular vulnerability of an individual on return.
    18. The Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  873
        found that the Upper Tribunal erred in law in that  its  conclusion
        as to the percentage risk  of  being  a  victim  of  indiscriminate
        violence was not available to it on the evidence.  Error was  found
        on this limited basis and the case remitted on the basis the  Upper
        Tribunal needed to consider only the extent of the risk to returned
        asylum seekers from security incidents.  It was  however,  for  the
        tribunal to consider in the light of the new  UNHCR  guidelines  on
        returns, whether a more extensive  basis  for  reconsideration  was
        required.
    19. An earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal in relation to  which  no
        statistical error has been shown to have arisen,  which  considered
        the correct 0.1% rate of civilian casualties, was AK  (Afghanistan)
        [2012] UKUT 163 in which the tribunal reconfirmed the  adoption  of
        an "inclusive approach" that is that in assessing whether levels of
        indiscriminate violence had reached the  Article  15(c)  threshold,
        all types of violence having a potential bearing were to  be  taken
        into account. They  noted  that  whilst  they  must  guard  against
        working with a  fixed  equation  in  which  targeted  attacks  were
        subtracted from the level of civilian casualties it was relevant to
        consider whether civilians were targeted on a wide  scale,  whether
        the violence was targeted to certain categories  of  civilian  only
        and whether when particular categories of civilians  were  targeted
        there was heavy  "collateral"  damage  (paras  162  to  164).  When
        deciding that the overall Article 15(c) threshold was  not  reached
        they first considered the figure for civilian deaths and casualties
        in the context of the size of the overall population and noted that
        the total number of casualties for the year (hostages, wounded  and
        dead) came to less than 0.1 percent of  the  population.   Secondly
        although they said this had to be done with caution, they looked at
        figures for Somalia and Iraq for comparison.   Thirdly  they  noted
        that a significant number of acts  of  violence  against  civilians
        arose  in  the  context  of  attacks  targeting  certain  types  of
        civilians without such attacks having routinely  caused  widespread
        harm to other unconnected civilians.  They  also  considered  state
        ineffectiveness,  support  from   aid   agencies   and   population
        displacement.
    20. Mr Hussain submitted this decision had been overruled by the  Upper
        Tribunal in AS but that is not correct  as  the  head  note  in  AS
        specifically stated. In AK it was not found by the Upper  Tribunal,
        despite what appears to be accepted as the correct percentage  rate
        of civilian casualties rising in Afghanistan, that the appellant in
        that case was  able  to  succeed  in  a  claim  to  entitlement  to
        humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to   article   15(c)   of   the
        Qualification Directive.
    21. The Qualification Directive (Council Directive  2004/83/EC)  of  29
        April  2004  is  a  directive  on   minimum   standards   for   the
        qualification and status of third country  nationals  or  stateless
        persons who qualify as refugees or as persons  who  otherwise  need
        international protection and the content of the protection granted.
        Article 15 (c)  refers  to  serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
        civilian's life or person by reason of indiscriminate  violence  in
        situations of international or internal armed  conflict.   This  is
        replicated in immigration rule 339CA (iv).
    22. It states:


           "A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the  United
           Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


           (i)    they are in the United Kingdom or have arrived at a  port
           of entry in the United Kingdom;
           (ii)   they do not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
           2 of The Refugee or Person in Need of  International  Protection
           (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
           (iii)  substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that
           the person concerned, if returned  to  the  country  of  return,
           would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is  unable,
           or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail  themselves  of  the
           protection of that country; and
           (iv)   they are  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
           protection.


    23. There have been a number of other cases in which it has been  found
        that failed asylum seekers being returned to  Kabul  will  face  no
        real risk, without more. In AK, when assessing whether  Kabul  city
        was a viable internal relocation alternative,  the  Upper  Tribunal
        found that in general, return to  Kabul  was  safe  and  reasonable
        (paragraph 249B (iv)).
    24. In AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) handed
        down on 28 March 2018, the Upper Tribunal held, regarding  internal
        relocation to Kabul, that:  'Having  regard  to  the  security  and
        humanitarian situation in Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced
        by the population living there (primarily the urban poor  but  also
        IDPs  and  other  returnees,  which  are  not  dissimilar  to   the
        conditions faced throughout may other  parts  of  Afghanistan);  it
        will not, in general be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single
        adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he does  not
        have  any  specific  connections  or  support  network  in   Kabul.
        'However, the particular circumstances of an  individual  applicant
        must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
        place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
        of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
        physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set  out  above.  'A  person  with  a  support
        network or specific connections in Kabul is likely to be in a  more
        advantageous position on return, which  may  counter  a  particular
        vulnerability of an individual on return.' Although Kabul  suffered
        the highest number of civilian  casualties  (in  the  latest  UNAMA
        figures  from  2017)  and  the  number  of  security  incidents  is
        increasing, the proportion of the population directly  affected  by
        the security situation is tiny. The current security  situation  in
        Kabul is not at such a  level  as  to  render  internal  relocation
        unreasonable or unduly harsh' [paras 241(ii-v)].
    25. Whilst the UNHCR Guidelines referred to by the Court of Appeal post-
        date the promulgation of AS - where the evidence was  dated  up  to
        December 2017 - the country  information  considered  by  both  the
        UNHCR and the Upper Tribunal  was  broadly  similar  in  range  and
        calibre. The  June  2019  European  Asylum  Support  Office  (EASO)
        Country Guidance Afghanistan made similar findings  to  AS.  Having
        considered the general situation  in  relation  to  food  security,
        shelter, hygiene and basic healthcare and subsistence,  EASO  noted
        that the general circumstances prevailing in Kabul (alongside Mazar-
        e-Sharif and Herat) did not preclude the reasonableness  to  settle
        there.
    26. The Court of Appeal's judgement in AS was handed  down  on  24  May
        2019. That Court allowed the appeal which is reported with  neutral
        citation AS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2019] EWCA Civ 873.  Although  the  appeal  before  the
        Judge was heard on 2 May 2019 a judicial decision 'speaks' from the
        date it is handed down which, in this case, was on 6 June 2019  and
        therefore after the Court of Appeal's decision.
    27. The Court of Appeal in AS held the Upper Tribunal made an error  of
        law by concluding that the level of civilian deaths and injuries as
        proportion of the population of Kabul was less than 0.01%,  whereas
        the correct percentage was 0.1%.  The  Court  Of  Appeal  therefore
        allowed the appeal on that basis  and  ordered  that  the  case  be
        remitted back to the Upper Tribunal 'on  the  basis  that  it  need
        reconsider its conclusions only (my emphasis) on  the  question  of
        the extent of the risk to  returned  asylum-seekers  from  security
        incidents of the kind considered at paras. 190-9  of  its  Reasons'
        [para 80].
    28. It is also important to note that the Court  of  Appeal  considered
        the Upper Tribunal's approach to assessing  the  reasonableness  of
        internal relocation at [72] and noted that, aside from the  factual
        error as to the percentage of civilian  casualties,  there  was  no
        error  of  law  in  its  approach  [para  73].  It   also   earlier
        acknowledged that the Upper Tribunal's reasons are clear [12].
    29. The UNHCR's approach to the reasonableness of  internal  relocation
        in the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  is  based  on  how  the  UNHCR
        considers the wider concept of internal relocation.  The  Court  of
        Appeal in AS noted that the approach represented to it by the UNHCR
        was potentially discordant with that of  the  English  courts  (see
        paras 62-63).
    30. It  is  also  relevant  to  consider  that  the  available  country
        information continues to be consistent with, and supports the Upper
        Tribunal's assessment and  observation,  in  AK  and  AS  and  that
        internal relocation to Kabul is generally likely to be  reasonable,
        subject to consideration of whether there  are  particular  factors
        relevant to the person's individual circumstances, for  example,  a
        single woman or female  head  of  household,  or  other  vulnerable
        persons, which might prevent them from internally relocating.
    31. In relation to the weight to be given to the UNHCR report, a number
        of domestic cases have been considered including AZ  (Ivory  Coast)
        CG [2004] UKIAT 00170 the Tribunal  noted  UNHCR's  view  that  the
        return of individuals from  the  Ivory  Coast  outside  of  Abidjan
        should be avoided, but took the view that  UNHCR  had  a  range  of
        interests that went beyond the  relatively  narrow  questions  that
        Adjudicators  and  the  Tribunal  asked  when  determining  whether
        returns would be contrary to the Human Rights Act  1998.  The  main
        reason for UNHCR's opinion appeared to be the avoidance of internal
        displacement. UNHCR  opinions  did  not  mean  that  conditions  or
        security concerns  about  internal  displacement  in  Abidjan  were
        sufficiently severe to amount to a breach of Article 3.   If  UNHCR
        meant that, they would say so.
    32. In YK(Serbia and  Montenegro)  [2004]  UKIAT  00207  the  appellant
        relied on a UNHCR position paper about the risk to Roma in  Kosovo.
        The Tribunal said that UNHCR's position paper was a guide only  and
        was not a substitute for making an assessment of the  facts  of  an
        individual case.
    33. In R (on the application of Mohn Golfa) [2005] EWHC 2282  Admin  Mr
        Justice Moses said that it was not irrational for the Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department not to follow UNHCR's  recommendation
        against removals to Liberia.   UNHCR  should  command  respect  and
        support but its  policies  were  not  co-extensive  with  those  of
        individual states and it was lain from the  terms  of  its  reports
        that it did not confine consideration to persecution on the grounds
        specified in the Refugee Convention or whether removal would breach
        Article 3.  The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  should
        take UNHCR recommendations into account but was not bound by them.
    34. In HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409(IAC) the
        Tribunal decided, though very considerable weight is almost  always
        to be attached to UNHCR guidelines on risk categories in particular
        countries, it is not accepted that departure  from  the  guidelines
        should only take place for a cogent and  identified  reason.  Cases
        are to be decided on the basis of all the  evidence  and  arguments
        presented to the Tribunal.
    35. In HF  (Iraq)  and  others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 the Claimant failed asylum  seekers
        unsuccessfully  challenged  the  most   recent   country   guidance
        decisions relating to Iraq. The Court  rejected  an  argument  that
        there was justification  for  conferring  a  presumptively  binding
        status on UNHCR reports merely because of their source.  The  Court
        had to assess all the evidence affording such weight  to  different
        pieces of evidence as it saw  fit.  It  was  said  that  UNHCR  was
        responsible not merely for objectively assessing risk but also  for
        assisting returnees and the court was entitled to be alive  to  the
        possibility  that  the  latter  function  might  colour  the   risk
        assessment even if only subconsciously
    36. It was not made out before  the  Judge  that  the  appellant  is  a
        vulnerable individual and it was not made out  that  the  appellant
        would face a risk of serious harm as a result of the  security  and
        humanitarian situation in Kabul or as a  result  of  any  practical
        difficulties the appellant  may  face  living  there,  such  as  to
        warrant it being found in the Judge erred in law in concluding  the
        appellant had not established it will  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
        harsh for him, as a single healthy male, to return to Kabul. It  is
        not made out the view of the UNHCR is determinative in relation  to
        this matter.

Decision

    37. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    38. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 25 September 2019












