
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01334/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2017                     |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     d c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wylie (the judge), promulgated on 7 April 2017, in which
    he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  That appeal had  been  against
    the Respondent's decision of 17 September 2015, refusing the protection
    and human rights claims of the Appellant and his two  dependants  (they
    being his wife and child).  The essence of  the  Appellant's  case  was
    somewhat unusual in nature.  It was said that he  had  been  the  joint
    owner of a security personnel firm in Sri Lanka and that his  firm  had
    had links with another company.  In turn, this company had been  linked
    to the Rajapakse family, a powerful political dynasty in that  country.
    Corruption  allegations  were  circulating  around  the  company,   the
    Appellant claimed that his own business had become involved, and  as  a
    result he was of adverse interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  now.
    Part of his claim was that there was an extant arrest  warrant  against
    him and that that would of itself place him  at  risk  on  return.   In
    addition, he had been taken in for questioning in 2015 and that his own
    business activities put him at risk of  being  detained  on,  or  after
    arrival, and ill-treated.



The judge's decision

 2. Relying upon a documentation verification report (DVR) produced by  the
    Respondent, the judge concludes that the warrant  was  not  a  reliable
    document (paragraphs 54 to 57).  The whole  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    ownership of the security business and any links with the  company  are
    dealt  with  very  briefly  in  a  single  paragraph  [59],  the  judge
    concluding that there was nothing to suggest  that  the  Appellant  was
    concerned in any proceedings.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's assessment of the  warrant,
    asserting that the DVR's reliance upon the Sri Lankan CID as  a  source
    of information was problematic, and that the judge had failed  to  deal
    with this issue.  Further the judge had not dealt adequately  with  the
    evidence from two Sri Lankan attorneys as to  the  reliability  of  the
    warrant.

 4. The second ground asserts that paragraph 59 of the judge's decision  is
    inadequate given the large amount of evidence adduced by the  Appellant
    to establish not only his joint ownership of the security business  but
    the links between that and the company.  There is  also  the  assertion
    that the judge has failed to consider the claim that the Appellant  had
    been taken in for questioning once before in 2015.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McGinty
    on 16 August 2017.



The hearing before me

 6. At the outset of the hearing Ms Anzani clarified  that  the  Respondent
    had conceded at the hearing that the Appellant was in  fact  the  joint
    owner of the security personnel business.  There had been no concession
    as to the links of that business with the company, however.  As to  the
    challenge relating to the warrant, Ms Anzani submitted that  the  judge
    had simply failed  to  deal  with  the  Appellant's  case  against  the
    reliability of the DVR, in particular the use of the CID as a source of
    verification and  the  competing  evidence  from  the  two  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys.   As  to  the  more  general  issue  of  links  between  the
    Appellant's business and the company Ms  Anzani  submitted  that  there
    were no findings on this and no consideration of the evidence about the
    questioning by the CID in 2015.

 7. Ms Ahmad acknowledged that the judge's treatment  of  the  warrant  was
    somewhat thin in its reasoning and that  it  had  not  dealt  with  the
    substance of the Appellant's arguments or evidence,  particularly  that
    relating to the two attorneys.  In respect of the wider issue, Ms Ahmad
    acknowledged that paragraph 59 was very limited and that there were  no
    findings on relevant evidence.



Decision on error of law

 8. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    material errors of law in the judge's decision and I therefore  set  it
    aside.  My reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

 9. It is of course the case that a judge  need  not  specifically  address
    each and every item of evidence and/or submission made by an  appellant
    in any given case.  We have been reminded of this recently by the Court
    of Appeal.  However, matters relating to the core of the claim must  be
    adequately dealt with by way of  sound  approach,  clear  findings  and
    adequate reasons.

10. In respect of the arrest warrant I am satisfied that  there  have  been
    material errors.  I am satisfied that before the  judge  the  Appellant
    asserted that the  Sri  Lankan  CID  were  not  a  reliable  source  of
    information on which to base  the  DVR,  and  that  there  was  also  a
    potential breach of confidentiality by the  Respondent  in  using  this
    source in the Appellant's case.  The judge  has  not  dealt  with  this
    point.  There is no consideration as to whether the CID were a reliable
    source, whether the weight attributable to information from this source
    should be reduced or at least treated  with  caution,  or  whether  the
    Respondent had indeed potentially breached a duty of confidentiality in
    respect  of  making  enquiries  with  the  security  services  of   the
    Appellant's home country.

11. There is also the evidence from the two attorneys.   Having  read  this
    evidence for myself,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  potentially  highly
    material to the issue of the reliability of the warrant.  This  is  not
    to say that it was bound to be preferred to  the  evidence  originating
    from the Respondent, but it clearly required substantive consideration.
     The only reason seemingly provided by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the
    attorneys' evidence entirely is generic evidence from the British  High
    Commission in Colombo asserting that a large  number  of  letters  from
    lawyers were found, "not to be  credible  on  verification".   This  by
    itself was inadequate by way of assessment and/or reasoning  given  the
    particular nature of the evidence from the two different attorneys.

12. In respect of the bigger picture, as it were, the judge simply does not
    engage with the evidence adequately.  Paragraph 59 is  very  brief  and
    there is clearly a failure  to  make  findings  on  the  claimed  links
    between the Appellant's business and the company, the allegations being
    made against the company, the potential consequences  this  might  have
    upon the Appellant, and his claim that he had already been taken in for
    questioning by the CID in 2015.

13. As a consequence of these two errors the assessment of risk  on  return
    is flawed.

14. I therefore set aside the judge's decision.



Disposal

15. There was a discussion as to whether this case should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper Tribunal.   Ms  Anzani
    suggested that retaining it might be appropriate in this  case  because
    issues of potential breaches of confidentiality by  the  Respondent  in
    another Sri Lankan case are currently being  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  She indicated that these other proceedings may be  set  down
    before a panel in the near future for  consideration  of  issues  which
    have a bearing on the appeal before me.  I indicated that  there  might
    be logistical difficulties in seeking to link the Appellant's case with
    these other proceedings  but  I  suggested  that  I  would  reserve  my
    position on disposal and await updated information from the Appellant's
    solicitors as to what was happening with the other case.  In default, I
    would remit this case.

16. At the time of writing up my decision, there has been no correspondence
    from the Appellant's representatives.

17. I therefore remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
    re-hearing.

18. The issue of the use of the Sri Lankan CID as a source  of  information
    will need to be considered in  light  of  the  recent  decision  in  VT
    (Article 22 Procedures Directive - confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka  [2017]
    UKUT 00368 (IAC). The evidence from  the  two  attorneys  will  require
    careful analysis. Even if the warrant is deemed to be  unreliable,  the
    First-tier Tribunal  will  also  need  to  address  the  wider  picture
    relating to the Appellant's circumstances. It is to be noted  that  the
    Respondent has conceded that the  Appellant  was  joint  owner  of  the
    relevant business.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 26 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

