
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01436/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 November 2016                  |On: 9 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Cutting of R C Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  of  1
February 2016 refusing her asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  23  May  1983.  She  last
entered the UK in January 2014. Following the  refusal  of  her  application
for an extension of her visa she claimed asylum in August 2015.  Her  asylum
claim was refused. Her appeal was heard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  23
August 2016 and was dismissed on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  in  a
decision issued on 15 September 2016. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal was granted on 29 September 2016.

The appellant's asylum claim was based upon a previous abusive  relationship
in the UK with  a  Pakistani  national  who  had  subsequently  returned  to
Pakistan and a fear of her former partner and her own father  on  return  to
Pakistan arising out of that  relationship.  It  was  also  the  appellant's
claim that she had since formed another relationship in the UK  with  a  new
partner MR, with whom she had entered into  an  Islamic  marriage,  and  was
expecting his child. The respondent did not consider the  appellant's  claim
to be credible and did not  accept  that  she  was  at  risk  on  return  to
Pakistan.

By the time the appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  she
had given birth to a daughter, EMR, on 25 April 2016, and  her  relationship
with MR was said to be over. It was not in dispute that EMR  was  a  British
citizen.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eames  rejected  as  incredible   the
appellant's claim in regard to the previous abusive relationship  and  found
that she would be at no risk on return to Pakistan.  He  accepted  that  the
appellant and MR were the biological parents of EMR and  that  MR  had  some
involvement with his daughter but did not accept that the  appellant  had  a
family life with MR  beyond  some  shared  child  care  or  that  MR  had  a
subsisting family life with his daughter and did not accept the  appellant's
claim that MR would take legal steps to  block  her  removing  her  daughter
from the UK to Pakistan or that  he  would  have  any  success  in  such  an
application. When considering  paragraph  EX.1(a)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules, the judge accepted that EX.1(a)(i) was met  but  did  not
accept that it would be unreasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  child  to
leave the UK for the purposes of EX.1(a)(ii). He found  that  the  appellant
could not succeed under the parent route in Appendix FM and that  she  could
not meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis  of  private  life
and he considered that the appellant's removal would  be  proportionate.  He
dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

The appellant sought, and was granted, permission to appeal  that  decision,
in relation only to Article 8, on the basis that the judge's  finding,  that
it was reasonable to expect the appellant's child to leave the UK,  arguably
conflicted with the  principles  in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (European  citizenship)
[2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from both parties. Mr  Cutting
relied on Zambrano and ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2011]  UKSC,  as  well  as  the  Home  Office  guidance  in  the
Immigration Directorate Instruction Family Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section
1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes
dated August 2015, in particular with reference to the judge's  findings  at
[102] of his decision. Mr Clarke  submitted  that  the  Zambrano  point  had
never been raised before the First-tier Tribunal or the  grounds  and  that,
if anything, the opposite was argued since it was claimed that there  was  a
relationship between MR and his daughter. He accepted, however, that he  was
in some difficulty with the second ground relating to the best interests  of
the child, the reasonableness of expecting the child to  leave  the  UK  and
the public interest, given the Home Office's own guidance  and  the  judge's
findings at [102].

I have to agree with Mr Cutting that, in view of  the  judge's  findings  at
[102], the Home Office guidance leaves little room for any conclusion  other
than that the appeal has to succeed.

Section 11.2.3 of the Home Office guidance states as follows:

    "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not  take
    a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a  British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force  that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the  age  of  that  child.
    This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.

    Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent  or
    primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,  the  case  must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with  that  parent  or  primary
    carer. In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
    the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
    the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship.

    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse  to  grant  leave  where  the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations  of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK  or  in  the
    EU.

    The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

    (    criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph  398
    of the Immigration Rules;

    (    a very poor immigration history, such  as  where  the  person  has
    repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

At [102] the judge said as  follows:  "It  is  true  that  the  daughter  is
British. That is a powerful factor  in  reasonableness  terms:  she  has  an
absolute right to be in the UK and cannot exercise that  right  without  her
mother." Having found that the appellant's removal would  necessitate  EMR's
departure from the UK, the judge's  only  basis  for  concluding  that  that
would not be unreasonable was that EMR could return to the UK  later  as  an
adult. Clearly that was a material error and it  is  inconsistent  with  the
Zambrano principles and with the Home Office's own guidance  which  provides
that the only circumstances in which it may  not  be  appropriate  to  grant
leave were where the conduct of the primary carer gave rise to such  weighty
considerations justifying separation as criminality and  a  repeated  breach
of immigration rules. Whilst the appellant had  presented  an  asylum  claim
that was not found to be credible, Mr Clarke was, quite properly,  reluctant
to conclude that that would fall within those weighty considerations.

In accordance with the terms of the Home Office's own guidance, it seems  to
me that, on the basis of the findings made by the judge as  to  the  limited
relationship between EMR and her father, and his findings at [102], it  must
be concluded that it would be unreasonable to expect EMR to  leave  the  UK.
Accordingly, the criteria in EX.1(a)(ii) have been met  and,  following  the
undisputed conclusion of the judge at [101] in regard to the other  criteria
in section R-LTRPT.1.1, the appellant is able to meet the  requirements  for
leave to remain as a parent under  Appendix  FM.  The  appeal  is  therefore
allowed on human rights grounds under the immigration rules.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is  re-made  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
