
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01821/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     mA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1985.  On 9  January
    2009 she claimed asylum in the UK on the basis of fearing  her  abusive
    husband and his parents would kill her.  Her application was refused on
    24 January 2014 and a subsequent appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    heard by Judge Herlihy on 19 June 2014, was dismissed.   The  appellant
    then made new submissions claiming to face a risk on return to Pakistan
    because she now had a daughter who was born on 18 December 2015 out  of
    wedlock.  She claimed to be at risk both because of her daughter  being
    illegitimate and  because  she  had  committed  adultery,  which  is  a
    criminal offence in Pakistan.

 2. On 7  February  2017  the  respondent  refused  the  application.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Andonian.  In a decision  promulgated  on  11  September
    2017 the judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  is  now  appealing
    against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge accepted that the appellant had an illegitimate child born in
    the UK but not that she would face a risk on return because of this. He
    rejected  the  appellant's  contention  that  her  husband  and  family
    presented a danger to her.  He  also  found  that  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan would, in the event that there was a threat to  the  appellant
    from her husband or family, provide her with sufficient protection  and
    that it would be reasonable for her to relocate internally.

 4. At paragraph 36 of the decision the judge stated that he did  not  find
    it credible that the appellant's husband would have  the  resources  or
    inclination to look for her outside of her home area.

 5. At paragraph 38 the judge stated that:

         "Whilst it is accepted  that  a  person  may  face  some  practical
         difficulties in starting life at a new place and may have a genuine
         concern about uncertainties involved there, the appellant  has  not
         provided any evidence to suggest that she would have  an  inability
         to lead a relatively normal  life  in  another  safe  part  of  her
         country judged by the  standards  that  generally  prevail  in  her
         country of nationality."

 6. The judge concluded at paragraph 41 that:

         "The  appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  the  authorities  in
         Pakistan will be unable or unwilling to offer her protection if she
         sought it".

Analysis

 7. Both parties agreed that the judge made a material error of law.

 8. The uncontested evidence was that the appellant has  a  child  who  was
    born out of wedlock on 18 December 2015.  The appellant's case was that
    because she would be returning to Pakistan with an illegitimate  child,
    having committed adultery, both she and the child would be at  risk  of
    persecution from the state, as well as from her husband  and  his  (and
    her) family. In addition, she  maintained  that  she  would  face  very
    significant obstacles such that  removing  her  to  Pakistan  would  be
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

 9. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal included the Home  Office's
    Country Information and Guidance titled Pakistan: Women fearing gender-
    based harm/violence, dated February 2016.  Section  9  of  this  report
    includes the following:

         "9.1.1   The offence of zina  defines  'adultery'  and  is  covered
              under the Offence of Zina Ordinance, 1979, which  states,  'A
              man and a woman are said to commit 'Zina'  if  they  wilfully
              have sexual intercourse without being married to each  other.
              Zina is liable to hadd (the punishment decreed by the Quran):
              stoning to death, or 100 lashes.  The Hudood  laws  apply  to
              both Muslims and non-Muslims although the punishments differ.
               The authorities have never carried out the penalty of  death
              by stoning, partly due to  strict  evidentiary  requirements.
              However, in many rural areas of Pakistan, jirgas issue  death
              sentences for couples or women deemed to  have  offended  the
              conservative  culture.   Reuters  reported  in   2014   'Such
              killings are illegal in Pakistan, but  the  police  force  is
              weak and often ignores them.  Even if the cases  are  brought
              to court, they can take years to be heard  and  the  national
              conviction  rate  hovers  between  5  to  10   percent.    If
              convicted, the victim's family can forgive the  killers  -  a
              major loophole since  the  killers  often  are  the  victim's
              family.

         ...

         9.2.1    As  sexual  relations  outside  of  marriage  is  strictly
              prohibited under the 1979 Hudood Ordinances, having  a  child
              outside of marriage caused huge social  stigma  in  Pakistan.
              Deutsche Welle noted in a report dated 21  April  2015  that,
              'In Pakistan, abortion is  illegal,  and  so  is  adultery  -
              creating a situation where hundreds of children born  out  of
              wedlock are secretly killed  each  year.   Their  bodies  are
              literally thrown out with the garbage.  Illegitimate children
              were referred to as 'harami', meaning forbidden under  Islam.
              They do not have rights  of  inheritance  and  could  not  be
              registered  with  the  National  Database  and   Registration
              Authority without providing the father's name.  Not having an
              ID card caused difficulties in accessing vital government-run
              services."

10. One of the issues that the judge needed  to  address  when  considering
    risk on return was the implication of the appellant having a child born
    out of wedlock and potentially being perceived as having broken the law
    of Pakistan by committing adultery.  Reading the decision as  a  whole,
    and in particular paragraphs 37 to 38, it is apparent  that  the  judge
    has concluded that the appellant could return to Pakistan  and  lead  a
    relatively  normal  life  without  taking  this  critical  factor  into
    consideration.  This was a material error of law.

11. In addition, the judge erred in the approach taken  to  sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities in Pakistan.  The judge found that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that the authorities would be  unwilling
    or unable to offer her protection if she sought  it.   This  conclusion
    appears to be based on the judge's assessment of the risk the appellant
    would face from non-state actors, i.e. her husband and family. However,
    the appellant's claim is that because of her circumstances she would be
    at risk not only from non state actors but also  from  the  authorities
    themselves. In failing to address the claim (and the  evidence  adduced
    to support the claim, as cited above) that the appellant  would  be  at
    risk from the state, the judge has made a material error of law.

12. Both parties submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal as in order for it  to  be  remade  all  of  the  factual
    circumstances would need to be considered afresh.  Mr Walker's position
    was that the matter should be reheard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    various  issues  which  in  his  view  were  highly  damaging  to   the
    appellant's  credibility,  such  as  the  use  of  a  false  name  when
    registering the birth of her child,  would  need  to  be  brought  into
    consideration. Having considered the arguments on  this  point  by  the
    parties, and having regard to section 7 of the Practice Statements  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal, I am in agreement that the matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Andonian.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  19 February 2018     |

