
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01025/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 August 2017                           |On 7 August 2017                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               RK (SRI LANKA)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Loshana &
Co Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Abrebese sitting at Taylor House on 27 October 2016)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his
    protection and human rights claim. Given the nature of  his  protection
    claim (fear of the authorities as a suspected Tamil separatist  and  as
    the member  of  a  proscribed  organisation)  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant should be accorded anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 16 June 2017 First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on three grounds: (a) it was
    arguable that the judge had erred in his treatment of  the  psychiatric
    report of Dr Dhumad; (b) it was arguable that the judge  had  erred  in
    his treatment of  Dr  Al-Wakeel's  scarring  report;  and  (c)  it  was
    arguable that the Judge was wrong not to consider specifically  whether
    the Sri Lankan authorities would be interested in the appellant because
    of his connection with TGTE, a proscribed organisation.

Discussion

 3. After hearing Mr  Paramjothy  develop  the  above  grounds,  Mr  Tarlow
    conceded that the decision was unsafe and should be set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

 4. Given the concession, which I am satisfied was properly made,  I  allow
    the appeal for the reasons given in  the  permission  application  read
    with Judge Landes' detailed reasons for granting permission.

 5. In brief, although the Judge referred to the cases of  Mibanga  and  SA
    (Somalia), he did not follow their guidance. The  scarring  report  had
    independent probative value as the  expert  observed  scarring  on  the
    appellant's body which was typical of the mechanism of injury allegedly
    inflicted on him in detention, which was burning by hot metal  objects.
    So it was a clear error of law for the Judge to make an adverse finding
    on the appellant's general credibility, based on inconsistencies in his
    account, before considering the scarring report;  and  this  error  was
    compounded by the Judge dismissing the  scarring  report  because  "the
    assessment has been made on the basis of what the  appellant  told  the
    expert".

 6. Although the psychiatric report was mainly  based  on  the  appellant's
    account of his symptoms and their alleged causes, it was also based  on
    a mental state examination conducted by Dr Dhumad, and  the  Judge  was
    wrong not to acknowledge  that  it  had  some  probative  value  as  an
    independent assessment of the appellant's mental state carried out by a
    qualified professional. He was also wrong to reject  it  on  the  basis
    that he had not found the appellant to be credible on core  aspects  of
    his claim, as he had failed overtly  to  consider  whether  there  were
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account which might have arisen from
    the appellant's traumatised state rather than from the appellant making
    things up as he went along. In short, the Judge needed to show that  he
    had  considered  the  medical  evidence  first,  before  coming  to   a
    conclusion on the appellant's credibility.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

(1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  for
a de novo hearing before any Judge apart from Judge Abebrese.

(2)  None of the findings of fact made by the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

(3) The time estimate is three hours.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 04 August 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge















