
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 June 2017                       |On 23 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appellant is a citizen of Albania and was born in July 1998.  On 9
    September 2015 the respondent refused an asylum and human rights  claim
    but granted leave to remain until 6 January  2016  because  he  was  an
    unaccompanied minor and there were  inadequate  reception  arrangements
    for him in Albania.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro ("the FtJ") at a hearing on  6  March
    2017.  She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is in a blood feud  which
    started when he was caught with his neighbour's daughter in an  illicit
    relationship.  They were seen together, the appellant  having  had  his
    arm around her. He was aged 15 and she was 13.  He said that the cousin
    who saw them threatened that he would  tell  their  parents.   I  shall
    refer to the girl as E.

 4. The day after they were seen, E's father came to his house and spoke to
    the appellant's father, saying that he had disowned E and  that  no-one
    would now want to marry  her.   E's  father  wanted  to  speak  to  the
    appellant and take revenge on him by killing  him.   After  E's  father
    left, the appellant's own father beat him, and the appellant thereafter
    stayed indoors.

 5. Initially, the appellant's father arranged for him to go to Italy, from
    where he came to the UK in 2014.  The appellant was sent back to  Italy
    and thereafter the Italian authorities returned him to Albania.

 6. In February 2015, whilst he was unloading his  father's  friend's  van,
    the appellant was attacked by two men who tried to drag  him  to  their
    car and told him that they would take him to E's father.  The appellant
    started screaming and shouting which brought the neighbours out and the
    men left.  The men threatened to come back and  said  that  E's  father
    would kill him.  Again, arrangements were made  for  the  appellant  to
    come to the UK, which he did in March 2015.

The FtJ's findings

 7. At [26] the FtJ referred to guidance in respect of  the  assessment  of
    the evidence of a minor.  She also referred to the  psychiatric  report
    of a Dr Halari which  states  that  the  appellant  has  cognitive  and
    psychological difficulties which impact on his  ability  to  understand
    and answer questions.  In the light of the conclusions in  the  report,
    the FtJ said that she did not find that the appellant's credibility was
    undermined by any inconsistencies that arose during his interviews.

 8. The FtJ referred to background material, quoting extensively  from  the
    Country of Origin Report on Albania  dated  2016  ("COI"),  which  also
    deals with domestic violence.

 9. She concluded that the appellant had not given a  credible  account  of
    having been seen in public with his arm around E, taking  into  account
    the background evidence of domestic violence and patriarchal traditions
    and customs, and having regard to the appellant's own witness statement
    at [10].  In that paragraph of the  appellant's  witness  statement  he
    made reference to his difficult upbringing, the old-fashioned and  less
    tolerant views that prevailed in the area where he lived,  as  well  as
    that his father was  a  protective  man,  with  the  appellant  needing
    permission for everything that he did.   The  appellant  said  that  he
    believed that as he was the only son his father would find him  a  good
    wife and arrange everything for him.  Thus, the FtJ found that  it  was
    not  credible  that  the  appellant  and  E,  being  aged  15  and  13,
    respectively, would have started a relationship.  Even if they had,  it
    was not credible that they would have been  careless  enough  to  allow
    themselves to be seen in a "compromising  position"  publicly,  knowing
    the attitudes of this society that they lived in and  the  consequences
    of being caught.

10. She further concluded that E's father would have been  violent  towards
    her as well, but there was no evidence of that from the appellant, even
    though she had lived next door to him.  That  lack  of  detail  in  his
    account undermined his credibility, she found.

11. With reference to the background material, she noted that the appellant
    had not provided evidence that any blood had been shed which she  found
    was an important ingredient of a blood feud.  That background  evidence
    indicated that children were never part of a blood  feud,  which  again
    undermined his claim.  Furthermore, in view of the appellant's  age  at
    the time, if there was going to be a blood  feud  it  would  have  been
    against the appellant's  father  for  allowing  his  minor  son  to  do
    something viewed as dishonourable.  The appellant had not provided  any
    evidence  that  his  father  had  any  problem  with  E's  father,  his
    neighbour, after he left Albania.

12. Further, if E's father wanted to kill the appellant he would  have  had
    the opportunity to do so when the appellant left  his  home  to  go  to
    Italy on the first occasion.  That this  did  not  happen  was  because
    there was no threat to kill the appellant by E's father.  She concluded
    that there was no blood feud.

13. She rejected the appellant's contention that he was attacked by two men
    on his initial return to Albania.  She found that the  men  would  have
    waited to attack the appellant when he  was  away  from  his  place  of
    residence such that he  would  not  be  able  to  get  assistance  from
    neighbours or family members.

14. With reference to the decision in EH (blood feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 348 (IAC), she concluded that the appellant  had  not  established
    that an active blood feud existed.   The  appellant  had  not  provided
    evidence of any blood being spilled, and there was no credible evidence
    that he or any member of his family was pursued by another family.  The
    appellant was unable to establish an active blood  feud  affecting  him
    personally or evidence of its existence in relation to his family.

15. She concluded in relation to the  appellant's  mental  health  and  the
    assessment that he suffers from PTSD, that the appellant had  not  been
    truthful and honest in his account and the findings of Dr  Halari  were
    based on a false account by the appellant.  Accordingly,  she  attached
    no weight to Dr Halari's conclusion that  the  appellant  is  suffering
    from PTSD.

16. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR, she found that the appellant  was
    not able to meet the requirements of the Rules.  In  particular,  there
    was no evidence that there would be very significant obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Albania, and his Article  8  claim  otherwise  had  no
    merit.

The grounds and submissions

17. The grounds can be summarised as follows.  It is argued  that  the  FtJ
    failed to have regard to the evidence of Dr  Halari  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's intellectual ability, being that he is in the  low  average
    range and that he is likely to  experience  some  difficulties  in  his
    general understanding of situations.  His processing  speed  is  within
    the "extremely low range" and the results of the  cognitive  assessment
    show that he is functioning within the low average range.  His  profile
    suggested that  he  would  have  significant  difficulty  understanding
    information and his difficulties are likely to affect  his  ability  to
    process, understand and retain information.  This Dr Halari said, would
    have a significant impact on  his  ability  to  understand  and  answer
    questions both at interview and in an appeal hearing.

18. Notwithstanding that the FtJ said that she did not find his credibility
    undermined by inconsistencies during his interviews having regard to Dr
    Halari's evidence, she did not have  regard  to  Dr  Halari's  evidence
    otherwise in the assessment  of  credibility.   Thus,  the  credibility
    assessment had been undertaken with only partial regard to Dr  Halari's
    evidence.

19. In rejecting the appellant's claim that he started  a  relationship  at
    the age that he did, and that he would not have been careless enough to
    allow himself to be seen publicly with E, it is  argued  that  the  FtJ
    failed to take into account the appellant's (first)  witness  statement
    at [12] which stated that they began seeing each other in  secret,  and
    would take the cattle to the farm land  together  so  that  they  would
    spend time there together.  They were spotted outside  the  village  by
    E's cousin.  Thus, the appellant's evidence was that this  was  not  an
    open display of affection but rather  something  that  happened  whilst
    they were away from the village by themselves.

20. Furthermore, although the FtJ had made an adverse  credibility  finding
    in terms of there being no evidence as to what had happened to  E,  the
    appellant was not actually asked about what  happened  to  her  at  the
    hearing, and indeed his evidence was that he has not  had  any  contact
    with his family since he came to the UK.

21. As regards blood feuds, it is argued that  the  FtJ  misunderstood  the
    background evidence because part of that background evidence quoted  by
    the FtJ at [30] was that  current  blood  feud  killings  sometimes  no
    longer followed the traditional pattern established by the Kanun rules.
     Furthermore, the background evidence reports cases  where  even  women
    and  children  are  killed.   The  FtJ's  conclusions  rule  out  those
    possibilities and thus reject the appellant's claim.

22. Although the FtJ had concluded that the diagnosis of PTSD relied on the
    appellant's account which was found not to be credible, that conclusion
    failed to take into  account  Dr  Halari's  assessment  which  included
    consideration  of  documentary  evidence  and  the  administration   of
    psychological tests.  Furthermore, the rejection of  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD was inconsistent with the acceptance of Dr Halari's conclusions in
    terms of the appellant's cognitive functioning.

23. As to Article 8, the grounds  point  out  that  the  appellant  has  an
    outstanding Article 8 application for leave  to  remain  and  therefore
    Article 8 did not need to be determined in the appeal.  In  any  event,
    the Article 8 conclusions are flawed given that they fail to take  into
    account the appellant's vulnerable mental state, both in terms  of  his
    cognitive function and PTSD.

24. In submissions Mr Gilbert relied on the grounds which he  amplified  in
    argument.  I was referred in detail to aspects  of  the  report  of  Dr
    Halari, including that he found that the appellant's symptoms could not
    have been feigned, and also his rejection of  other  possibilities  for
    the appellant's PTSD.  He further concluded that the appellant was  not
    'malingering'.  It was not the case therefore, that  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD was simply arrived at on the basis of the appellant's account.

25. In relation to Article 8, the skeleton argument that was before the FtJ
    suggested that the removal decision was not in accordance with the  law
    as  the  appellant  had   an   outstanding   Article   8   application.
    Furthermore, the prognosis of a worsening of the appellant's  condition
    had not been considered by the FtJ.

26. Mr Melvin relied on the 'rule 24' response, which  was  to  the  effect
    that the FtJ was entitled to make the findings  that  she  did.   Those
    findings are neither perverse nor irrational.  The FtJ  had  considered
    the medical evidence.

27. She had rejected what could be described as the  'nit-picking'  by  the
    respondent in  the  refusal  letter  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    credibility in  terms  of  inconsistencies.   She  had  considered  the
    medical evidence as well as the background material.

28. The psychological report  was  in  fact  one  that  was  written  by  a
    psychologist, not a psychiatrist and accordingly the conclusions in  it
    in terms of PTSD would not have been accepted by  the  respondent.   At
    [27] the FtJ had plainly made allowances for the appellant's  cognitive
    difficulties.

29. She was entitled to conclude that  on  his  own  evidence  it  was  not
    credible that he  and  E  would  be  allowed  to  enter  that  type  of
    relationship  or  would  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  discovered.
    Likewise the FtJ's findings in terms of  there  being  no  evidence  of
    anything that had happened to E, or to her father.

30. Overall, it was submitted that the appellant's grounds  are  simply  an
    attempt to reargue the appeal.

31. As regards Article 8, the appellant was unable to meet  the  Rules  and
    there were no compelling circumstances.





Conclusions

32. A significant aspect of the FtJ's adverse credibility findings  relates
    to the fact of the appellant having started  a  relationship  with  his
    neighbour's  daughter,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  they   were
    discovered together.

33. I have summarised  those  aspects  of  the  grounds  in  terms  of  the
    psychological report which are relied on in this respect.   Whilst  the
    FtJ did resolve in the appellant's favour the issue of  inconsistencies
    with reference to Dr  Halari's  report,  relatively  early  on  in  her
    findings at [27], I cannot see in the FtJ's decision an appreciation of
    the  extent  to  which  the  appellant's   cognitive   and   processing
    difficulties could have had an effect on  his  decision-making  at  the
    time when the events he described are said to have taken place.

34. Whilst the FtJ very properly considered the appellant's account against
    the background of the circumstances in which he said he lived, and  his
    upbringing, I do consider that further  consideration  needed  to  have
    been given to that aspect of the appellant's functional ability in  the
    assessment of his credibility.  Such consideration is in  my  judgement
    lacking.

35. I do not consider that the other matter raised in the grounds in  terms
    of what the appellant said in  his  original  witness  statement  about
    seeing each other in  secret  and  their  having  been  found  together
    outside the village, is a matter that undermines the  FtJ's  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility.  It is apparent from the FtJ's decision
    that she was aware of the contents of the appellant's witness statement
    and took it into account.  Likewise, in terms of the lack  of  evidence
    from the appellant as to what had happened to E.

36. However, I do consider that there is merit in the complaint made  about
    the FtJ's assessment of the appellant's claim  with  reference  to  the
    background material in relation to blood feuds.  The FtJ said  at  [35]
    that the appellant had not provided evidence that any  blood  had  been
    shed, which according to  the  background  evidence  was  an  important
    ingredient of a blood feud.  Further, in that paragraph she  said  that
    the background evidence also showed that children are never part  of  a
    blood feud, which further undermined his claim.  However, at  5.1.2  of
    the  COI,  quoted  at  [30]  of  her  decision,  the  FtJ  referred  to
    information from the Special Rapporteur to  the  effect  that  killings
    sometimes no longer follow the traditional pattern established  by  the
    Kanun rules,  and  that  there  are  cases  where  a  person  may  feel
    vindicated in killing any member  of  a  family,  including  women  and
    children.  An example is cited in that report.  The FtJ  on  the  other
    hand, rejected the appellant's account effectively on the basis that it
    was wholly inconsistent with the background evidence.

37. I have taken into account that in EH, the existence of a 'modern' blood
    feud was found not to be established.  However, it appears from [9]  of
    that decision that that newer variant of the blood feud  was  suggested
    as being a situation in which  the  aggressor  family  undertakes  pre-
    emptive killings of a number of male members of the victim's family  or
    even women or children, rather than waiting to see whether the victim's
    family would retaliate in the traditional way for the  original  death.
    I do not see the guidance in EH as  ruling  out  the  proposition  that
    women or children may be the victims of a blood feud.

38. Whilst the FtJ quite properly considered what needed to be  established
    with reference to EH in terms of whether  there  was  an  active  blood
    feud, I do not in any event consider that even if  there  is  no  blood
    feud properly defined in this case, that that answers the  question  of
    whether the appellant has established a real risk of  persecution.   He
    may nevertheless be able to establish a real risk of  persecution  even
    if there is no blood feud, with reference to his account  of  what  had
    happened previously and what he says was an attempt to harm him.

39. I also do consider that the FtJ appears to have rejected the assessment
    of the appellant's suffering from PTSD because  she  had  rejected  the
    credibility of his account.  At [45] she referred to the assessment  of
    Dr Halari that the appellant suffered from PTSD.  She referred  to  his
    having said that he was reliant on the appellant's account and that the
    alleged incidents were the likely precipitating causes.  She noted that
    he had rejected other possibilities.  However,  she  then  went  on  to
    state that:

    "As I find that the appellant has not been truthful and honest  and  it
         is on that false account Dr  Halari  bases  his  findings,  I  will
         attach no weight to Dr Halari's  findings  that  the  appellant  is
         suffering from PTSD".

40. It seems to me that in this distinct respect the FtJ had  rejected  the
    assessment of PTSD because she  concluded  that  his  account  was  not
    credible, rather than assessing the diagnosis of PTSD in the context of
    the evidence  overall.   In  addition,  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant suffers  from  PTSD  seems  to  me  to  be  integral  to  the
    assessment of whether the past events that he describes and his fear of
    return are credible.  The FtJ did not consider that  medical  diagnosis
    in that context.

41. I do not accept the proposition advanced on behalf of the respondent by
    Mr Melvin to the effect that because Dr Halari is  a  psychologist  and
    not a psychiatrist, his report should not be accepted.  Dr Halari is  a
    consultant  clinical  (neuro)   psychologist.    His   experience   and
    qualifications detailed in his report make it plain  that  he  is  very
    well qualified to have made the assessments that he  did  not  only  in
    terms of the appellant's cognitive ability but also  in  terms  of  his
    suffering from PTSD.

42. To summarise, in terms of the FtJ's assessment  of  credibility,  I  am
    satisfied that she erred in law  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
    aspects of Dr Halari's report to which I have referred, in terms of his
    cognitive ability.  I am similarly satisfied that she erred in  law  in
    relation to her conclusions regarding the diagnosis of PTSD,  again  as
    explained above.  Although of less significance, I  am  also  satisfied
    that her conclusions in terms of whether or not there is a  blood  feud
    failed to have regard to the background material to which  she  herself
    referred in her decision.

43. Those errors of law are such as to require the FtJ's decision to be set
    aside.  In considering whether the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper Tribunal for  a  re-making
    of the decision, I bear in mind that the hearing before the FtJ was the
    second time that the appeal has been heard before the FtT,  a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn at a hearing on 13 April 2015 having
    been set aside by the Upper Tribunal.  Nevertheless,  in  circumstances
    where  there  must  be  a  complete  reappraisal  of  the   appellant's
    credibility, I consider that the appropriate course is for  the  appeal
    to be remitted again to the FtT.  No findings of fact can be preserved.

Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the  appeal  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing with  no  findings  of
    fact preserved, to be heard by a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Garro or Quinn.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/08/17
