
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01651/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2019                 |On 29th October 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Kafayat [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  23rd  April  1985.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on  a  visitor's  visa  in  September  2013,
    thereafter overstayed.  A number of  applications  made  for  leave  to
    remain were refused.  She has a partner who is said to be the father of
    her three children.

2.   The claimant seeks leave to remain on the basis of family  and  private
    life, which leave was refused by a decision of the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department dated 6th February 2019.  It is  said  in  that
    decision that neither she nor her children, nor her partner  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, nor are  there  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would prevent her removal to Nigeria.

3.   The claimant sought to appeal against that refusal.   The  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE for  hearing  on  2nd  May
    2019.

4.   Although  the  Judge  found  the  claimant  to  be  altogether  lacking
    credibility as to the immigration history, he nevertheless went  on  to
    find that there were circumstances under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  which
    would make her removal disproportionate.

5.   The Secretary of State sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision  and
    permission to do so was granted on 10th July 2019 in these terms:

         "I am satisfied that there are  arguable  errors  of  law  in  this
         decision.  The Judge's findings are based on the  evidence  of  the
         appellant, who he found not to be credible in her asylum claim  and
         that of her partner.  There is an absence of documentary  evidence,
         but particularly in relation to children, as a result of which  the
         Judge speculates.  There is no proper consideration of  the  public
         interest and no proper consideration of exceptionality.   There  is
         no consideration to the cost to the NHS bearing in mind the medical
         difficulties the family faces.  Further,  in  relation  to  Section
         117B the Judge finds that the appellant and her  partner  can  work
         (paragraph 52) but gives no reasons as to how, given  his  previous
         findings.  The Judge fails to address the burden of  care  for  the
         family in the United Kingdom.  Further  the  Judge's  findings  are
         insufficiently  reasoned  and  at  times  inconsistent,  given  the
         evidence that was before him."

6.   It was the claim  of  the  claimant  that  she  had  been  forced  into
    prostitution in Nigeria and that she had been sexually exploited by her
    stepmother for financial gain for sexual services.   She  claimed  that
    she managed to escape in December 2012.  The Judge  did  not  find  the
    claimant to be credible in any respect as to the circumstances of  that
    claim and dismissed her appeal in respect of  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

7.   Whilst in the United Kingdom the claimant  had  given  birth  to  three
    children, namely twins who were at the time of the hearing aged 4 years
    old and a son who was but a few weeks old.  She said that  her  partner
    Mr Adebayo suffered from ill-health and particularly poor sight.

8.   The medical evidence noted that the claimant had  chronic  Hepatitis  B
    infection.  The children did not test for that condition but have  been
    receiving injections to safeguard against it.

9.   The  Judge  came  to  the  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  claim  for
    prostitution and sexual exploitation that the case was fabricated.

10.  Although there was no medical evidence, the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    claimant's partner was blind in one eye and severely restricted in  the
    other.

11.  The Judge made a number of findings.  The first finding was that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the family's return to  Nigeria.   The
    reasons for this finding are set out briefly in  paragraph  49  of  the
    determination, namely that neither the claimant nor  her  husband  were
    able to work or support  the  family;  they  had  no  accommodation  or
    employment to return to, nor any family network to give support.

12.  Although two children were free of Hepatitis the  third  was  requiring
    ongoing care for at least twelve months.  It was found  the  claimant's
    partner suffered from glaucoma.

13.  In the detailed decision of 6th February 2019 the  Secretary  of  State
    looked both at the merits of the claim and of the situation facing  the
    claimant and her family upon return.

14.  It was noted that the claimant was a Nigerian national  who  had  lived
    in Nigeria the majority of her life.  She  spoke  English  and  Yoruba.
    She had been educated to college level in Nigeria and had the education
    to find employment in Nigeria and that education would be available  to
    her children in Nigeria.   The  children  they  were  young  enough  to
    establish new  relationships  in  Nigeria,  and  to  benefit  from  the
    education regime and any health considerations.  There were  in  effect
    no particularly vulnerable aspects of life that fell  to  be  addressed
    could be dealt with in Nigeria.

15.  In paragraph 49 of the determination the  Judge  concludes  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to return for the reasons that have  been
    advanced.  The Secretary of State contends that  no  adequate  analysis
    was given by the Judge as to why that situation  should  indeed  exist.
    There was for example no analysis as to  the  support  which  would  be
    available to the appellant's family in Nigeria and no consideration  of
    any country guidance or any indication as to what  basis  the  hardship
    was found to be established.

16.  The fact that the partner had difficulties with his eyes  and  suffered
    from glaucoma there was not, it was submitted, a reason to find that he
    could not return to Nigeria.  There were plenty of hospitals  and  care
    that could be available to assist him in that  respect.   Although  the
    Judge found him to be vulnerable the  Judge  did  not  specify  in  any
    detail or at all or where and how that vulnerability would arise.

17.  The fact that  the  claimant  and  partner  have  no  accommodation  or
    employment did not necessarily mean they would be unable to  find  such
    were they to arrive in Nigeria.   There  is  no  consideration  of  any
    country guidance case to highlight  any  potential  difficulties  which
    might arise in practice.  That the claimant and husband may indeed face
    difficulties  is  fairly  obvious,  whether  such  are   insurmountable
    obstacles need, as I so find, more careful analysis  and  justification
    upon the facts.

18.  The Judge highlighted that circumstances would impact harshly upon  the
    children but does not clarify with any degree of precision  what  those
    might be.

19.  The Judge indicated that the children will become destitute  without  a
    safety net in Nigeria.  No reference is made to  any  country  guidance
    that may indicate that that applies.  The youngest child is  undergoing
    injections in order to make sure that he is safe from Hepatitis B.   It
    is difficult to understand what would  be  the  complication  for  such
    treatment  in  Nigeria.  That  there  may  be   serious   complications
    developing with the youngest  child  is  as  a  matter  of  speculation
    without any tangible medical evidence in support.

20.  As has been argued on behalf of the Secretary of State, this is  not  a
    challenge as to the merits of the decision for that  would  be  outside
    the scope of this appeal, but rather a challenge to the reasons or lack
    of reasons which are given to be justified.

21.  The claimant's partner, who attended the  hearing,  indicated  that  he
    cannot see from one eye and has limited vision in the  others  and  has
    undergone a number of operations particularly in May and  September  of
    this year.  It is said that there was undue pressure put  on  the  eyes
    and he has been put on tablets to reduce the blood pressure.  There  is
    no sight in the left eye and low  vision  in  the  right  one.   He  is
    undergoing another operation on 17  October.   Medical  documents  were
    presented to show the ongoing  injections  for  the  younger  child  in
    relation to Hepatitis B and the protection therefrom.

22.  It is argued on behalf of the Secretary of State  that,  although  this
    is a case that has a number of compassionate features about it, it does
    not reach the level of exceptionality.  Given the findings  adverse  to
    the credibility of the claimant and indeed the findings of fabrication,
    it was submitted that in those circumstances the Judge  ought  to  have
    been engaged in the task of weighing up very much  more  carefully  the
    public interest in the removal of the claimant and family.

23.  Having looked at  all  matters  and  bearing  in  mind  of  course  the
    importance to distinguish what is an argument  as  to  merit  from  one
    pointing to an error of law, I do find that the decision as a whole  is
    inadequately reasoned and that there is a lack of justification clearly
    expressed as to why exceptionality is engaged in this particular case.

24.  In those circumstances the decision shall be set aside to be remade.  I
    note the Senior President's Practice Direction. As credibility lies  at
    the heart of such matters will be a rehearing particularly  focused  as
    to Article 8 and return.

25.  Given that there was no challenge to the findings as  to  the  lack  of
    asylum or humanitarian protection it may be that such matters should be
    preserved but I do not exclude  argument  to  the  contrary  if  placed
    before the Tribunal Judge for that Judge to determine that issue.   Any
    further directions will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  succeeds.   The
decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside  and  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 28 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

