
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01281/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                             |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                    [e r]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on [ ] 1990.  He arrived
    in the UK on 16 February 2007 as a child visitor in the company of  his
    mother, with leave valid until 28 June 2007.

 2. His appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal following a  hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard ("the FtJ")  whereby  the  appellant's
    appeal against his asylum and human rights claim was dismissed  on  all
    grounds.  The FtJ who granted permission to appeal concluded  that  the
    findings made by Judge Howard in relation to asylum and  Article  3  of
    the ECHR were open to him  on  the  facts  and  evidence.   He  granted
    permission however, in relation to the judge's consideration of Article
    8 of the ECHR.  Although the permission judge did not  expressly  state
    that permission was refused on grounds other  than  Article  8,  it  is
    clear that that is the import of his decision.  He concluded that there
    was an arguable error of law in relation to Article 8  only,  which  is
    the basis upon which the appeal is before me.

 3. At the hearing before me neither the appellant nor his representatives,
    Edward Alam and Associates, appeared.  I am  satisfied  that  both  the
    appellant and his solicitors had notice of the hearing,  notice  having
    been sent to the appellant's solicitors,  and  the  appellant  via  his
    solicitors, on 8 March 2016.  Efforts by Tribunal staff to contact  the
    appellant's  representatives  on  the   day   of   the   hearing   were
    unsuccessful.  There was nothing to indicate that either the  appellant
    or his representatives had wanted to attend but were, for some  reason,
    unable to.  There was no application for an adjournment.   Accordingly,
    I decided to proceed to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant
    and his representatives pursuant to rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. The appellant's grounds, upon which permission was granted in  relation
    to Article 8, are to the  effect  that  the  FtJ  had  failed  to  make
    adequate findings with reference to his time in the UK in the  previous
    eight years, with his parents and siblings.  Nothing else of  substance
    is said in those grounds.

 5. Aside from rejecting  the  appellant's  credibility  in  terms  of  the
    claimed risk on return by reason of the appellant's political  activity
    with the Bangladeshi National Party ("BNP"), in relation to  Article  8
    the FtJ stated at [30] as follows:

         "Mr Coleman in his submissions made reference  to  the  appellant's
         private and family life.  On the evidence before me, limited  to  a
         statement from his father asserting he is present  in  the  UK  and
         seeking asylum, I do not find there is made out  the  need  for  an
         assessment outside the rules, see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387."

 6. Mr Melvin relied on the written submissions prepared  for  the  hearing
    before me and on the 'rule 24' response.  The written submissions refer
    to a previous Article 8 application having been refused with, it seems,
    an  appeal  having  been  dismissed,  and  appeal  rights  having  been
    exhausted on  20  July  2012.   The  respondent's  written  submissions
    continue to the effect that the evidence before the FtJ  was  that  the
    appellant's family members were still pursuing claims to remain and  as
    such were not settled in the UK.  There  was  no  evidence  from  other
    family members or other evidence relating to the appellant's  residence
    in the UK.

 7. Furthermore, it had not been  contended  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    before  the  FtJ  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in terms of Article 8.  The appellant had arrived  on
    a visit visa in 2007 accompanied by his mother, with leave  only  until
    28 June 2007.  Since that time he has not been granted any leave in the
    UK.

 8. In the light of those facts, the appellant had no prospect  of  success
    in any Article 8 claim, and accordingly, there is no material error  in
    the FtJ failing to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

 9. In the event that it is found that there is a material error of law  in
    relation to Article 8, requiring the decision to be set  aside,  regard
    should be had to section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

10. Supplementing those written submissions, Mr Melvin contended that it is
    difficult to see how any Article 8 case could  have  succeeded  on  the
    basis of the evidence before the FtJ.  It is also to be borne  in  mind
    that the appellant's status in  the  UK  has  always  been  precarious.
    Reliance was  placed  on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  10
    September 2015.

    My Conclusions

11. I am satisfied that the FtJ did err in  law  in  his  consideration  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The very short paragraph which I have quoted is
    the extent of the FtJ's Article 8 assessment.  There is no reference to
    the Article 8 Immigration Rules and no rehearsal  of  what  submissions
    were made to the FtJ in relation to the appellant's private and  family
    life.  Furthermore, it is apparent that Article 8  was  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  Whilst  the  FtJ
    would have been entitled in appropriate circumstances to deal with  the
    Article 8 ground concisely, his very cursory treatment of the Article 8
    ground is legally unsustainable in my judgement.

12. Notwithstanding the submissions made on behalf  of  the  respondent  in
    terms of materiality, it is necessary to set aside the  FtJ's  decision
    in relation to Article 8 and to re-make the decision.

13. In re-making the decision I take into account  the  grounds  of  appeal
    before the FtT.  Although it is  suggested  in  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant has  his  parents  and  siblings  in  the  UK  and  has  thus
    established family life, it  is  not  said  in  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant is able to meet the requirements of the Article 8 Immigration
    Rules.  No reference is made to those Rules in  the  grounds.   In  his
    witness statement the appellant refers to the length  of  time  he  has
    been in the UK, referring to his parents, siblings, extended  relatives
    and friends being settled here.  He refers to having  gained  expertise
    and experience working as a chef and has considerable knowledge of  the
    English language.  He refers to having adopted the British way of  life
    and its culture.

14. In his father's witness statement it states that  he,  the  appellant's
    father, has his wife and children in the UK awaiting  consideration  of
    his wife's application "under  the  7  years  Immigration  Rules".   He
    refers to his being  part  of  that  application  and  to  one  of  his
    daughters having married a  British  citizen  and  being  an  expectant
    mother.  That statement is dated 3 December 2015.

15. It appears that the appellant's father did not  give  evidence  at  the
    appeal before the FtT however.

16. So far as the Immigration Rules are concerned,  the  appellant  is  not
    able to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii),  given  that
    he has not lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years.  He  has
    lived in the UK since 2007, a period of nine  years.   He  is  aged  25
    years and so  has  not  lived  at  least  half  his  life  in  the  UK.
    Accordingly, he is not able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v).

17. So far  as  subparagraph  (vi)  is  concerned,  the  appellant  has  to
    establish that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Bangladesh.  The respondent's  decision  letter  notes
    that the appellant speaks Bengali and has spent  the  majority  of  his
    life in that country, including his formative years.

18. I also note that in the grounds of appeal to the FtT, it is  stated  on
    behalf of the appellant that he "has some close family members, friends
    or relatives in his country of origin but he could  not  rely  on  them
    [to] support him financially and emotionally."

19. If the grounds of appeal mean what they say, and there is no reason  to
    believe otherwise, the appellant has relatives and  family  members  in
    Bangladesh.  In any event, the evidence before me,  and  indeed  before
    the FtT, in relation to  the  'very  significant  obstacles'  point  is
    sparse in the extreme.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established  that  there  are  very  significant   obstacles   to   his
    integration into Bangladesh.  The evidence simply does not support that
    contention.

20. As to whether there is any need for further consideration of Article 8,
    outside the Rules, there is nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances are such as to warrant consideration outside  the  Rules.
    The evidence does not support the contention that he has family life in
    the UK, he being an adult, even if he does live with his  parents,  and
    even if he does have siblings here.  There  is  no  evidence  that  his
    relationship with any of  those  individuals  extends  beyond  ordinary
    emotional ties.

21. Similarly, as I have already indicated, the evidence of the appellant's
    private life in the UK is  sparse.   There  is  no  evidence  from  any
    friends, or even acquaintances.  There is little to reveal  the  extent
    of his private life in  the  UK.   So,  even  if  there  was  to  be  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, regard would have  to  be
    had to the considerations in s.117B of the 2002 Act.  The appellant can
    claim no positive benefit from being  able  to  speak  English,  having
    regard to the decision in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).  There  is
    no indication one way or the other as  to  whether  he  is  financially
    independent.  More importantly, under s.117B(4) little weight is to  be
    given to a private life established by a person at a time when he is in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully,  as  this  appellant  is.   Furthermore,
    under s.117B(5) little  weight  is  to  be  given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at  a  time  when  his  immigration  status  is
    precarious,  as  this  appellant's  is.   Lastly,  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.

22. In all the circumstances, no Article 8 case, either within  or  without
    the Article 8 Rules, has been established.

23. Accordingly, the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR is  dismissed.   As
    already indicated, the asylum and human  rights  appeal  otherwise  was
    properly dismissed by the FtT and  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    dismissal of his appeal on those grounds has been refused.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision in relation to Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    only is set aside, and I re-make the decision,  dismissing  the  appeal
    under Article 8.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            11/05/16


