
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/01539/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons and regulated   |
|On 21 June 2021                    |On 29 June 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                    HCTD

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Ms C Johnrose, instructed by Broudie  Jackson  Canter
                    Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Vietnam with date of birth  given  as
   20.2.92, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 20.10.20 (Judge  Curtis),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 29.1.20, to refuse her claim for  international
   protection made on 23.5.17.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  25.11.20.
   However, when the application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
   22.1.21 Upper Tribunal Judge Keith granted permission on grounds 1, 4 and
   5 only, refusing permission on grounds 2 and 3.

3. In granting permission, Judge Keith considered as follows:

     a) With reference to ground 1, "that the First-tier  Tribunal  imposed
        an  impermissibly  high  test  in  relation  to  historic   adverse
        interest, in particular noting assaults on the appellant's  husband
        (twice) including with swords and attempts to  drag  the  appellant
        into a car (paragraph 33)  but  concluding  that  neither  suffered
        serious harm, which was a reliable indicator of future  risk.  This
        ground is arguable."

     b) With regard to ground 4, "the (First-tier Tribunal) arguably  erred
        in the conclusion at paragraph 51 of internal relocation would  not
        be unduly harsh, in circumstances where at paragraph 30, the (First-
        tier Tribunal) had also found  that  the  appellant's  husband  had
        internally relocated but his assailants had  attacked  him  with  a
        sword in the alternative location. This ground is arguable."

     c) With regard to ground 5, "the (First-tier Tribunal) arguably  erred
        at paragraph  34  in  noting  that  evidence  (a  letter  from  the
        appellant's husband's father) which must have post-dated  May  2019
        but had been (before the) decision-maker on 29 January 2020,  meant
        that less weight should be attached to it  because  it  could  have
        been produced to the decision  maker.  That  arguably  ignores  the
        possibility that the evidence might have post-dated or  might  have
        been received after the refusal decision. This ground is arguable."

4. By letter dated 22.2.21, the appellant's representatives  indicated  that
   "the appellant intends to apply for a reconsideration of the decision  to
   permit permission to appeal on limited grounds. The appellant does so  in
   line with Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  Section  22(4)
   (b) and (5)." As drafted, the letter was a notice of intention to  apply,
   not the application itself and  none  such  has  been  received,  as  Mrs
   Johnrose accepted before me. In any event, such an application  may  only
   be made where the circumstances set  out  at  paragraph  22(3)  apply.  A
   decision of the Upper Tribunal to grant permission on limited grounds  is
   not within the specified circumstances under 22(3).

5. However, at the outset of the hearing,  it  transpired  that  whilst  Mrs
   Johnrose did not rely on the  22.2.21  letter,  she  wished  to  make  an
   entirely different application, entirely without any advance notice.  She
   asserted that  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  refusing
   permission on grounds 2 and 3 failed to comply with Rule 45  (4)  &  (5).
   These provide that the Upper Tribunal may give permission  to  appeal  on
   limited grounds, "but must comply with paragraph (4) in relation  to  any
   grounds on which it has refused  permission."  Paragraph  45(4)  provides
   that:

      "(4)  If  the  Upper  Tribunal  refuses  permission   to   appeal   it
      must [provide]1 with the record of its decision-

           (a) a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and

           (b) notification of the right to  make  an  application  to  the
           relevant appellate court for permission to appeal and  the  time
           within which, and the method by which, such application must  be
           made."

6. Mrs Johnrose submitted, without adducing  any  evidence  to  justify  her
   assertion, that  the  notice  of  decision  of  Judge  Keith's  grant  of
   permission on limited grounds did not include the statement outlining the
   right of appeal etc. against the refusal referred  to  in  Rule  45.  Her
   argument appeared to be that the grant of permission on  limited  grounds
   was defective and, as there had been no valid decision,  the  application
   for permission to appeal could be reargued in person. After hearing  from
   Mrs Johnrose, I declined to reopen  the  application  for  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I am satisfied that the only way  in  which
   that  decision  could  be  challenged  is  by  a  Cart  Judicial   Review
   application, which, evidently, had not been made, within time, or at all.
   If the decision granting permission to  appeal  on  limited  grounds  was
   defective,  as  claimed,  one  might  have   expected   the   appellant's
   representatives to point that out immediately, which was not done.

7. It follows that the Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  entertain  an
   application to reconsider the grant of permission on limited grounds  and
   the only grounds which the Upper Tribunal can  consider  are  those  upon
   which permission has been granted, namely grounds 1, 4 and 5.

8. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions and the grounds upon which  the  application
   for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

9. It is important to note that at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing,
   Mrs Johnrose  conceded  that  the  appeal  did  not  engage  the  Refugee
   Convention. The claim  was  framed  entirely  in  terms  of  humanitarian
   protection, in which the burden was on the appellant  to  demonstrate  to
   the lower standard of proof  that  there  were  substantial  grounds  for
   believing that if returned to Vietnam she  would  face  a  real  risk  of
   suffering serious harm and is unable or, owing to the risk, unwilling  to
   avail herself of the protection of that country, as  acknowledge  by  the
   judge at [4] and again at [28] of the decision. In that regard, the judge
   recorded at [28] the appellant's claim that the Vietnamese authorities do
   not offer sufficient  protection  from  such  a  risk  and  that  if  she
   relocated, she would be found by the moneylenders. However, at  [39]  and
   [49] the judge concluded from the objective evidence that the  Vietnamese
   authorities are able and willing to provide effective protection from the
   risk that the appellant claimed to fear, and noted at [50] that  she  had
   never sought such protection and was unwilling to do so  because  of  her
   subjective perception that the police would not  investigate  matters  on
   her behalf. The judge went on to find at [51] that she  could  reasonably
   be expected to relocate and at [47] that it would be  unlikely  that  she
   would encounter her traffickers in Vietnam and at [48] that there was  no
   real risk that she would be re-trafficked. At [53] the judge  noted  that
   Mrs  Johnrose  did  not  ask  the  judge  to  consider  the  respondent's
   discretionary policy for victims of modern slavery.

10. I must point out that Judge Keith  specifically  refused  permission  on
   the two grounds challenging the  judge's  conclusion  that  there  was  a
   sufficiency of protection for the appellant on return to Vietnam  against
   the risks she claimed to fear. As Mr Tan pointed out, given that finding,
   the materiality of any error of law in respect  of  other  parts  of  the
   decision on the remaining grounds in  respect  of  which  permission  was
   granted is doubtful.

11. I am concerned that much of the substance of the grounds in  respect  of
   which permission has been granted, and  Mrs  Johnrose's  submissions,  is
   little more than a disagreement with the weight given to the evidence  by
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the conclusions reached. I must bear in
   mind that the higher courts have repeatedly cautioned  against  appellate
   courts interfering with the reasoned decisions of first instance  judges,
   see Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ  5 at
   [114]. Further, in MR (permission to appeal: Tribunal's approach)  Brazil
   [2015]  UKUT  00029  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that,  "A   judge
   considering an application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   must avoid granting permission on what, properly  analysed,  is  no  more
   than a simple quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal judge's assessment  of
   the evidence." Similarly, in Herrera v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  412,  the
   Court of Appeal said that it is necessary to guard against the temptation
   to characterise as  errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
   disagreements  about  the  weight  to  be  given  to  different  factors,
   particularly if the judge who decided the appeal  had  the  advantage  of
   hearing oral evidence. Whilst  Mrs  Johnrose  submitted  that  the  judge
   failed to give adequate weight to various elements of the evidence, it is
   well-established law that the weight to be given to any particular factor
   in an appeal is a matter for the judge and will rarely give  rise  to  an
   error of law, see Green (Article 8 -new rules) [2013] UKUT 254.

12. In relation to the first ground, I am not satisfied that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge imposed  "an  impermissibly  high  test"  in  relation  to
   historic adverse interest and future risk of serious harm.  At  [29]  the
   judge set out the definition of serious  harm,  as  to  which  definition
   there has been no challenge. In assessing  the  future  risk  of  serious
   harm, the judge took careful note of the past incidents  of  assault  and
   kidnapping, accepted by the respondent so that the essential  facts  were
   not in dispute, but was entitled to conclude and take into account in the
   assessment that no serious harm occurred as a  result  of  any  of  these
   previous incidents. As the judge stated at  [30]  of  the  decision,  the
   extent of any past harm was "one indicator" of future risk. It  is  clear
   from the decision that the judge  also  considered  as  relevant  to  the
   alleged  risk  the  extent  of  protection  afforded  by  the  Vietnamese
   authorities, a finding which cannot  now  be  challenged.  I  reject  Mrs
   Johnrose's interpretation that the judge was imposing  a  requirement  of
   past serious harm. Considering the decision as a whole,  I  am  satisfied
   that the judge made a careful and reasoned  assessment  of  the  risk  of
   serious harm and that no error of law has been demonstrated.

13. In relation to  the  fourth  ground  and  the  Judge's  assessment  that
   internal relocation would not be unduly harsh, Mrs Johnrose  argued  that
   what appears at [51] of the decision is inadequately  reasoned  and  that
   the judge failed to engage with the facts that  internal  relocation  had
   been attempted but the appellant and her partner had been  found  by  the
   moneylenders, and that money is still owed which the appellant's  husband
   remains unable to pay, by which reasoning  there  remains  real  risk  of
   serious harm.

14. It is clear that at [30] of the decision the judge took account  of  the
   claim that the husband had attempted to flee yet had been  discovered  by
   the moneylenders and attacked by a group of 8-10 men with swords, but had
   managed to evade them. The judge also took account at [43] that both  the
   appellant and her husband were independently victims of  trafficking  but
   made the distinction that this trafficking did not  relate  to  the  non-
   repayment of the loan. After  considering  the  evidence,  including  the
   objective  country  evidence,  at  [47]  the  judge  concluded  that  the
   appellant would be unlikely to come across her traffickers on  return  to
   Vietnam, relying on the CPIN evidence that it was unlikely that a  person
   would be re-trafficked once returned to Vietnam.

15. In any event, as stated above,  the  judge  concluded  for  the  reasons
   carefully set out in the decision that there would be  a  sufficiency  of
   protection against both moneylenders and those to whom she may still  owe
   a debt for her trafficking to the UK. It cannot be said that the findings
   and conclusions therefrom  were  irrational  or  perverse.  As  suggested
   above, this ground is little more than a disagreement with  the  decision
   and an attempt to reargue the appeal. In any event, given the finding  of
   sufficiency of protection, any failure to specifically  address  elements
   of the evidence relied on by Mrs  Johnrose  in  her  submissions  is  not
   material.

16. In relation to the fifth ground and the judge's observations  about  the
   undated letter at [34] and [35] of the decision, for the reasons set  out
   below, I am again not satisfied that there is any material error of law.

17. The undated letter in question refers to a number of alleged  incidents,
   the last of which is dated in May 2019 when loan sharks are said to  have
   attended at the appellant's partner's father's  home.  In  evidence,  the
   partner suggested that this letter was received in 2020. The judge  noted
   that this letter did not appear to have been before the respondent at the
   time the refusal decision was made, as it was not  mentioned.  The  judge
   considered that as the asylum claim was made in May 2017 and the  refusal
   decision is dated 29.1.20, there was "sufficient time for such  a  letter
   to have been provided prior to the decision."

18. At [58] of the refusal decision the respondent noted that  although  the
   appellant stated in interview in 2017 that she had spoken with her family
   in Vietnam once or twice a year since leaving, they had not  advised  her
   of any problems with gang members since she left. At [35] the judge noted
   that the appellant's witness statement in rebuttal of paragraph  [58]  of
   the refusal decision states that she was never asked in interview whether
   her family had received threats from these individuals but referenced her
   legal  representative's  interview  amendment  letter  of  4.8.17,  which
   asserted that family members from both sides had been found and  targeted
   by the loan sharks.

19. As I now understand it in the light of Mrs Johnrose's  submissions,  the
   complaint made  is  that  the  judge  treated  the  undated  letter  with
   circumspection, the grounds stating, "It  is  illogical  for  the  IJ  to
   expect the appellant's representatives to refer to paragraph  58  of  the
   refusal letter in their letter dated 04.08.2017 when the  decision  post-
   dates the (representatives') letter by  over  2  years."  It  is  further
   submitted that there is no evidence that the undated letter was  received
   before the refusal decision was made on 29.1.20 so  that  it  could  have
   been provided. However,  as  Mr  Tan  pointed  out,  the  judge  was  not
   suggesting that this letter could have been provided, but that such "such
   a letter" could have been provided. In other words, that there  was  time
   for information about the alleged May 2019 incident to have been provided
   to the respondent.

20. Whilst I agree that the interview  amendment  letter  4.8.17  could  not
   have referred to paragraph [58] of a refusal decision made over two years
   later, and, therefore, I accept the judge made a factual error at [35] of
   the decision, the essential point being made by the  judge  at  [34]  was
   that there was ample time after events said to have taken  place  in  May
   2019 for  that  important  information  to  have  been  provided  to  the
   respondent prior to the making of the decision on  29.1.20,  particularly
   when the appellant stated that she was in contact with her family once or
   twice a year. It must reasonably follow that whenever the undated  letter
   was received, she and her partner would have spoken with their respective
   families after the alleged May  2019  incident  and  before  the  refusal
   decision was made. In the circumstances, it would be astonishing  if  she
   had not been made aware of the alleged incident in May 2019  at  a  stage
   prior to the issue of the refusal decision. That the interview  amendment
   letter of 4.8.17 referred both families having been found and targeted by
   loan sharks is beside the point being made by the judge. In summary, I am
   satisfied that the complaint whilst factually  accurate  is  of  marginal
   significance in the overall assessment of a real risk of serious harm, as
   at [35] the judge  noted  the  claim  that  loan  sharks  had  found  the
   appellant's husband's family. The letter adds little if anything  to  the
   claim.

21. Even if this fifth ground  does  amounts  to  an  error  of  law,  I  am
   satisfied that, in light of the findings that there is a  sufficiency  of
   protection and that internal relocation within Vietnam  is  open  to  the
   appellant and her family, it is not material.

22. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 June 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

     "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
     is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
     indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
     applies to, amongst others, both the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
     Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
     proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 June 2021
