

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01123/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|on 22 November 2018                           |on 28 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    M J A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal against a decision by FtT  Judge
    Kempton, promulgated on 26 March 2018, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of protection.

 2. The grounds are these:

      i) At [25] and [33] the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  account
         started to fall down  by  reference  to  "closed  gates";  but  the
         appellant had not mentioned any closed gates in evidence.

     ii) At [28] the judge thought that as there had been a search in  2011,
         the appellant's uncle would be "a prime  suspect  for  the  illegal
         alcohol  trade",  and  so  it  was  "very  perplexing"   that   the
         authorities waited so long; but the appellant's evidence  was  that
         in 2011, no illegal goods were found.

    iii) At  [31]  the  judge  appeared  to  find  it  surprising  that  the
         authorities had not considered looking for the  appellant  when  he
         was "so close and with another family member", his uncle;  but  the
         appellant's evidence was that he was "taken to his uncle's friend's
         house to hide".

 3. Ground (i), by reference both to the typed record kept by  Ms  Cosgrove
    and by reference to the judge's  handwritten  record,  is  well  taken.
    There was no evidence of "closed gates".

 4. Ground (ii) is also sound.  There was no evidence to support  the  view
    that the appellant's uncle must have been a prime suspect, or that  the
    practice of the authorities would have been to carry out searches under
    such circumstances at regular intervals, shorter than several years.

 5. Ground (iii) has lesser force.  The judge thought that the  authorities
    would have been likely to search in the uncle's area.  Her point is not
    lessened by the hiding place being in another house.  However, although
    it is not quite the issue raised by the ground,  there  appears  to  be
    considerable speculation in finding that the evidence, if true,  showed
    that searching would have followed at houses of  all  relatives  within
    the radius of 20 minutes driving.

 6. In some cases, such points might have been no more than minor  quibbles
    on the facts.  However, Mr Govan was unable to show that the  reasoning
    remaining in this  decision,  after  excision  of  error,  is  of  such
    strength that it may safely stand as a resolution of the case.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 8. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature of  this  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The
    member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Kempton.

 9. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The reason is not  apparent,  but
    as the matter was not addressed in  the  UT,  anonymity  is  maintained
    herein.

            [pic]
            22 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
