
                                    [pic]

ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01848/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2017                    |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    M J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Russell Wilcox, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mayall ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 26 September 2016, in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
    his asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.


 2. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Background

 3. The appellant is a Kurd and citizen of Iraq. He had  sought  asylum  on
    the grounds of his sexuality, claiming to be a gay man.  The respondent
    accepted the appellant's identity, nationality, and that he  came  from
    Diyala, a contested area in Iraq where there is  a  state  of  internal
    armed conflict.  The respondent did not accept his  claimed  sexuality.
    The respondent, in refusing his asylum claim,  accepted  the  appellant
    could not return to his home area of Khanaqin within the governorate of
    Diyala due to the security situation  there.  However,  the  respondent
    considered the appellant had not provided any reason why he  could  not
    relocate to the IKR; it was noted  he  spoke  Kurdish  Sorani  and  had
    previously worked in Iraq.


 4. The FTTJ did not find the appellant to be a credible or honest witness:
    [50] of the decision and reasons refers. His claim to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or harm based upon his sexuality  was  rejected.  The  FTTJ
    noted the appellant's home area was within Diyala but found  "there  is
    nothing to suggest that it would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  for
    [the appellant] to relocate to Baghdad  City  or  those  parts  of  the
    Baghdad belts that do not fall within  the  15(c)  territories."  [63].
    The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  but
    this  was  refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He   renewed   that
    application in this Tribunal and permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 25 November  2016  in  the  following
    brief terms"

           "There are a number of factors to be considered in relocation to
           Baghdad - see headnote [15] of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]
           UKUT 00544 (IAC). It is  arguable  that  the  judge  misdirected
           himself in stating at [63] 'the only factor that might  make  it
           unreasonable is whether or not he has had a CSID or will be able
           to obtain one'. The grounds are arguable."

 6. No challenge is made by the appellant to the findings of the FTTJ  with
    regard to his credibility. The sole ground of challenge is the  alleged
    failure of the FTTJ to address appropriately the issue of  whether  the
    appellant could relocate within Iraq to avoid the risk of serious  harm
    in his home are in the governorate of Diyala.


Submissions

 7. For the appellant, Mr Wilcox submitted, both orally and in his skeleton
    argument, that the FTTJ's findings in  respect  of  reasonableness  and
    feasibility of return were each challenged.  It was submitted that  the
    FTTJ had made internally inconsistent findings in the decision: on  the
    one hand the FTTJ did not accept the account of the appellant  that  he
    was without identity documents in relation to his right of residence or
    nationality. On the other hand, the FTTJ sought to use the  appellant's
    lack of such documentation to establish it was  not  feasible  for  the
    appellant to be returned. Even if the FTTJ had not  made  contradictory
    findings  on  this  issue,  his  later  findings  with  regard  to  the
    feasibility of return were not sustainable in the light of AA (Iraq).


 8. In the alternative, Mr Wilcox submitted the FTTJ would  not  have  been
    "entitled to sustain his later findings in relation to the  Appellant's
    feasibility of return  to  Iraq.   Rather,  since  the  threat  to  the
    Appellant  arises  from  a  source   independent   of   his   lack   of
    documentation, the FTTJ was obligated to determine  the  reasonableness
    in this case of the Appellant relocating to Baghdad. This ... the  FTTJ
    failed to do."  He cited inter  alia  paragraphs  169  and  207  of  AA
    (Iraq).  It was also submitted that the FTTJ had  failed  to  recognise
    the risk of serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  as  a
    distinct basis of claim. The risk was not born out of the documentation
    issue but rather out of the level of indiscriminate violence.  The FTTJ
    failed to recognise the difference between the documentation  issue  in
    relation to the feasibility of return, which hypothetically would place
    a person in a place of safety allowing him/her  to  live  a  reasonable
    life and, secondly, the documentation issue relevant to the  assessment
    of the reasonableness of internal relocation.  Mr Wilcox submitted that
    the appellant's case merited the latter consideration and that it was a
    material  error  of  law  for  the  FTTJ  to   foreclose   a   complete
    consideration of the reasonableness  of  internal  relocation.  It  was
    acknowledged that the FTTJ had, in part, recognised  the  relevance  of
    the lack of relevant ID to the question of reasonableness of relocation
    to Baghdad whilst failing explicitly to address it [63].  However,  the
    FTTJ had misunderstood the guidance in AA (Iraq) applicable when  there
    was an absence of ID. The presence or  absence  of  ID  was  a  gateway
    question incapable of being considered in isolation when  dealing  with
    the overall issue of the reasonableness of internal relocation.  It was
    submitted the FTTJ had failed to consider the range  of  factors  going
    beyond the question of ID documentation, as set  out  in  [15]  of  the
    headnote to AA (Iraq).  It was submitted  that  the  issue  of  support
    should have been the subject of fact finding. Furthermore, the FTTJ had
    failed to take into account the expert  evidence  which  post-dated  AA
    (Iraq) and required anxious scrutiny. That evidence supported the  view
    that the mere absence of a  CSID  was  insufficient  to  determine  the
    viability of relocation to Baghdad.  These errors, individually and  in
    combination, rendered the decision unsustainable.  Mr Wilcox made clear
    that he was not suggesting the findings of fact made by the  FTTJ  were
    not open to him (save that they should not be  contradictory).  It  was
    the failure of the FTTJ to consider the  reasonableness  of  relocation
    which  rendered  the  errors  material.   Had   the   FTTJ   considered
    appropriately the appellant's ethnicity, lack of Arabic language skills
    and other issues including the availability of support, the outcome  on
    relocation might have been different. He submitted the FTTJ had  failed
    to consider appropriately  the  expert  evidence  which  post-dated  AA
    (Iraq).


 9. For the respondent, Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant  had  failed
    to demonstrate there were errors of law in the determination.  He noted
    that the judgment in AA (Iraq) was  being  appealed  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal. He adopted the arguments which were to  be  addressed  in  that
    appeal. He noted that whilst the appellant had adduced expert evidence,
    the FTTJ had been bound by the country guidance in AA  (Iraq)  and  had
    properly applied it. Given the credibility finding was not  challenged,
    the FTTJ's remaining findings were sustainable: the FTTJ did not accept
    the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  the  reasons  he   did   not   have
    documentation.  Furthermore, the FTTJ had looked at the matter  in  the
    alternative: if the documentation were not  produced,  return  was  not
    feasible without it.  Mr Melvin submitted that, given  the  credibility
    findings, it was not incumbent  on  the  FTTJ  to  assess  the  factors
    identified at [15] of the headnote in AA (Iraq). The FTTJ had  directed
    himself properly to  the  country  guidance  and  had  made  sufficient
    findings for his decision to be sustainable on the particular facts.

Discussion

10. I am unable to find the FTTJ has not addressed the issue of whether the
    appellant would be at risk of serious harm in his home  area,  pursuant
    to Article 15(c), as a discrete issue. It is clear from [62]  that  the
    FTTJ accepted this and  indeed  it  was  not  in  dispute  between  the
    parties. This was the FTTJ's starting point for the assessment of  risk
    on return, having dismissed the appellant's asylum claim on the grounds
    of his sexuality.


11. The FTTJ found the appellant an unreliable and dishonest witness  [50].
    He stated at [57]:


           "In all the circumstances I regret that I cannot rely  upon  the
           evidence of this appellant in any material particular. I  simply
           do not accept his story. The standard of proof ie that of a real
           risk, may be low but it is a standard that still has to be  met.
           It has ot been met in this case."


    The words "in any material particular" are  relevant  to  this  appeal.
    They make clear that the FTTJ did not accept  the  appellant's  account
    insofar as it related  to  any  material  aspect  of  his  claim.  That
    includes his  ability  to  relocate  within  Iraq.  In  particular,  it
    includes (as is subsequently made clear at [61] his claim "to have lost
    or had stolen his passport (unexpired), and CSID". The FTTJ  could  not
    rely on that evidence.  He found the appellant had "not established, to
    any relevant standard, that he does not have or could  not  obtain  his
    passport or CSID."  These findings are clear  and  sustainable  on  the
    evidence.  I do not consider the FTTJ was required to make  a  positive
    finding that the appellant had such documents or that he  could  obtain
    them. This is a clear inference from the FTTJ's findings.

12. It is alleged before me that the FTTJ failed to take into  account  and
    apply the range of factors listed at [15] of the headnote to AA (Iraq).
     In that regard it is relevant to note the findings of the FTTJ to  the
    effect that


         . "There is no credible  evidence  before  me  to  show  what  his
           circumstances in Iraq were" [61].


         . "I cannot rely upon his evidence that he would have  no  support
           in Baghdad, whether from friends or relatives  living  there  or
           support in the shape of financial support from his family in his
           home area" [61].

    Thus, quite apart from the issue of the availability  of  a  CSID,  the
    FTTJ considered the issue of the appellant's circumstances might be  on
    return.  He could not rely on the appellant's evidence  that  he  would
    have no support  in  Baghdad.   The  FTTJ  had  noted  the  appellant's
    inability to return to his  home  area  due  to  the  general  security
    situation there.  It was submitted for the appellant that the FTTJ  had
    failed to take into account the appellant's ethnicity, his inability to
    speak Arabic and various  other  factors  identified  at  [15]  of  the
    headnote to AA  (Iraq).  However,  even  if  this  were  the  case  the
    appellant's  screening  interview  record  refers  to  the  appellant's
    declaration that he spoke Arabic.  I am unable to accept the submission
    that the FTTJ failed to take into account  the  appellant's  ethnicity.
    This permeates the decision, not least because  there  was  no  dispute
    between the parties as to the appellant's ethnicity: for  example,  the
    respondent noted in submissions before  the  FTTJ  that  the  appellant
    could relocate to the IKR. Given the FTTJ's findings,  his  failure  to
    address the appellant's  alleged  inability  to  speak  Arabic  and  to
    reiterate his Kurdish ethnicity would not have impacted on the  outcome
    with regard to the reasonableness of return to "Baghdad City  or  those
    parts  of  the  Baghdad  belts  that  do  not  fall  within  the  15(c)
    territories". Whilst it was an error for the FTTJ  to  state  that  the
    "only factor that might make it unreasonable is whether or not he has a
    CSID or will be able to obtain one" because this  is  contrary  to  the
    guidance in AA (Iraq), this statement is not a material misdirection of
    the law for the reasons I have set out above. The  outcome  would  have
    been no  different,  given  the  evidence  before  the  FTTJ.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt and for the reasons I have set out  above,  this  is
    not a case where, as was submitted by Mr Wilcox, the appellant would be
    at real risk of persecution or serious harm irrespective of a  lack  of
    documentation (paragraph 169 of AA (Iraq) refers).


13. The claimed inconsistencies in  the  FTTJ's  findings  as  regards  the
    reasonableness and feasibility of return do not exist.  The  FTTJ  made
    it clear in the decision that he did not find the appellant a  credible
    or honest witness [50]. That finding is not challenged before  me.   It
    was open to the FTTJ to make a finding  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account that he had no Iraqi  identity  documents.   Having
    made that finding he went on to make an alternative additional  finding
    at [65] that, the appellant having produced no such documents, he would
    not be returned in any event. I am unable to accept the submission that
    the failure of  "the  FTTJ  to  make  clear  and  uncontradicted  [sic]
    findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's   relevant   documentation
    situation before it is possible for him  to  go  on  to  make  a  sound
    finding on the feasibility  of  the  Appellant's  return"  renders  the
    decision unsound in law.


14. I turn to the issue of whether the FTTJ failed to address appropriately
    the appellant's expert evidence. This was in the form of  a  report  by
    Sheri Laizer and is entitled "Expert Report on risks on return to  Iraq
    subsequent to AA (article 15c Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)."  It  is
    dated 8 April 2016.  It is submitted that AA (Iraq) requires  the  FTTJ
    to take into account this expert opinion on the issue of reasonableness
    of relocation.  The FTTJ noted the appellant's counsel's submissions at
    the FTT hearing which referred specifically to the report of Ms Laizer;
    he summarised the submission made on the  basis  of  that  report.   Ms
    Laizer makes no reference in her report to having read the  appellant's
    witness statement or interview records. She refers only  to  background
    material she has read  including  AA  (Iraq)  for  preparation  of  her
    report.  Her report appears to have been provided to those  instructing
    her for use in relation  to  various  individuals  (see,  for  example,
    paragraph 2 on page 43 where the author refers to being  instructed  in
    connection with various "clients").   She  addresses  the  respondent's
    proposition as regards the risk on return  for  Kurdish  failed  asylum
    seekers originally from  Iraqi  government  controlled  areas  who  are
    returned to Baghdad airport (Section 1, paragraph  3  of  her  report).
    Much of her report is generic  in  nature.  It  does  not  specifically
    address the appellant's situation on return. Ms Laizer is also asked to
    give  an  opinion  (Section  2,  paragraph  1)  on  the  "pre-clearance
    procedures" for a  Kurdish  failed  asylum  seeker  without  ID  to  be
    accepted back into the KRG from the UK. Ms Laizer was unable to give  a
    conclusion on the issue thus her  evidence  on  this  had  no  material
    impact on the outcome of the appeal.  Ms  Laizer  only  refers  in  her
    opinion to situations where returnees have  lost  contact  with  family
    members (paragraph 2 of her report on page 43) but the FTTJ was  unable
    to accept that was the case for this appellant. Similarly, Ms  Laizer's
    opinions on the ability of failed asylum seekers to trace  lost  family
    members in Iraq, to apply for formal recognition of their identity  and
    to live without family or other  support  network  on  return  are  not
    relevant, given the FTTJ's inability to accept the appellant's evidence
    on these issues.  Whilst the FTTJ made no specific findings with regard
    to the opinion of Ms Laizer, his failure to do so was  not  a  material
    error of law given the content of that report: it was not sufficient to
    allow the FTTJ to deviate from the guidance in AA (Iraq).

15. The FTTJ went on to make a discrete finding that the current  situation
    at the date of hearing was that there were  no  ID  documents  to  hand
    (albeit he did not accept the appellant's account  that  his  unexpired
    passport was lost or stolen).   The FTTJ relied on the guidance at  [7]
    of the headnote to AA (Iraq) and cited it  at  [64]  of  his  decision.
    Quite properly he found  the  appellant's  return  was  "not  currently
    feasible given what is known about  the  state  of  his  documentation"
    [64]. The FTTJ went on to state "At present he  has  not  produced  any
    current or expired passport or a laissez-passer. In the absence of such
    documents the Iraqi authorities will not  allow  him  to  enter  Iraq".
    This is not a contradictory finding: the appellant had not produced any
    such documentation and, given his evidence (albeit not found  credible)
    that it was lost or stolen, he could be expected not to produce  it  to
    facilitate   his   return.    The   FTTJ   was   entitled    therefore,
    notwithstanding  his  earlier  finding  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's unexpired passport and CSID had been lost or stolen [61] to
    find that no such documentation had been or would be  produced  by  the
    appellant.  His finding on the feasibility of return is sustainable  on
    the evidence and consistent with his earlier  findings.  The  FTTJ  was
    entitled to conclude that, in the absence of a positive finding  as  to
    the documents held by  the  appellant,  until  the  appellant  supplied
    sufficient documentation to the Iraqi Embassy in London to enable it to
    provide him with a passport or a laissez passer,  his  return  was  not
    currently feasible. This finding is not incongruent with  the  guidance
    in AA (Iraq) on the feasibility of return.

16. For these reasons the decision of the FTTJ contains no  material  error
    of law.  I do not set it aside.

Decision

17. This appeal is dismissed.


18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law. It is not set aside.


A M Black

Signed      Date 13 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black

Signed      Date 13 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

