
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01947/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                           |On 13 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Joseph, Counsel instructed by NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the decision promulgated on 6 October 2017  in  which  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal  came  before
    me to be remade.


  2. I will continue to refer to HH as the Appellant, and to  the  Secretary
     of State as the Respondent, reflecting their  positions  as  they  were
     before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. The anonymity direction is continued.


The hearing


 4. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant.   She  was  assisted  by  the
    interpreter, Ms Farzina Hussain, who confirmed before  proceeding  that
    they both fully understood each other.  The language spoken  was  Urdu.
    Both representatives made oral submissions.


  5. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle  and
     the Appellant's bundle (115 pages).  The Appellant  adopted  a  further
     witness statement at the hearing dated 23 January 2018.


  6. It was agreed at the hearing by Mr. Joseph and Mr.  Richards  that  the
     issue before me was the Appellant's return  to  Pakistan  as  a  single
     woman  with  four  daughters.   The  Appellant  is  no  longer   in   a
     relationship with her husband.


Findings and Decision


  7. As stated above, it was accepted by Mr.  Richards  that  the  Appellant
     would be a lone female, and she was not cross-examined on the  position
     in relation to her husband.  He accepted that it was more difficult for
     a  single  woman  with  children   to   relocate   in   Pakistan   but,
     notwithstanding the difficulties she would face returning to  her  home
     area, she would be able to safely relocate elsewhere in  Pakistan.   He
     submitted that she had experience of teaching and had been educated  to
     a high level in Pakistan.  She would be  far  better  placed  than  the
     majority of women in Pakistan to find employment to enable her to  find
     accommodation for herself and her children, and to financially  support
     them.  It would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to  expect  her  to
     relocate.


  8. I have carefully considered the evidence in relation to the Appellant's
     education, and her teaching  experience  in  Pakistan.   I  accept  the
     evidence of the Appellant, and find that she did not  complete  her  BA
     course in Pakistan.  I find that she only did the first  two  years  of
     her course and that she does not have a degree.   I find that  she  did
     not complete her studies in the United Kingdom  either  as  she  became
     pregnant.  I find that the Appellant worked in two schools in Pakistan,
     but I find that she did not work as a teacher, but as a  volunteer.   I
     find that the first school belonged to a paternal cousin.  I find  that
     she was not a qualified teacher, and does not have  the  qualifications
     which would enable her to find work as a teacher.  I find  that,  while
     she has some education,  she  does  not  have  a  sufficient  level  of
     education or work experience to enable her to find a  job  which  would
     support her and her four daughters.

  9. I find that the Appellant has four daughters who live  with  her.   The
     eldest is 10 years old, and the youngest are twins aged 5.  I find that
     the twins were born in the United  Kingdom.   I  find  that  the  older
     daughters have been in the United Kingdom for almost  seven  years.   I
     find that the Appellant  would  be  returning  to  Pakistan  with  four
     daughters, two of whom have never been to Pakistan,  and  two  of  whom
     have spent the vast majority of their lives in the United Kingdom.


 10. It was accepted by Mr. Richards that the Appellant could not return  to
     her home area.  I find that the Appellant would not  have  any  support
     from any family  members  in  Pakistan.   I  find  that  she  has  been
     ostracised by her family as she has left her  husband.   I  accept  the
     Appellant's evidence as set out in her witness statement that there  is
     no hope of reconciliation with her family [8].


 11. I find that the Appellant does not have any male member of  the  family
     who will act as protector for her and her daughters.  I find  that  she
     has no social network in Pakistan, having left there almost seven years
     ago, and having been ostracised by her family.


 12. I have considered the  country  guidance  case  of  SM  (lone  women  -
     ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC).  Paragraphs (2) to  (6)
     of the headnote state:

    (2)  Where a risk of persecution or serious harm  exists  in  her  home
         area for a single woman or a female head of household, there may be
         an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's  larger  cities,
         depending on the family, social and educational  situation  of  the
         woman in question.

    (3)  It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a  single  woman
         or female head of household to relocate internally within  Pakistan
         if she can access support from family members or a male guardian in
         the place of relocation.

    (4)  It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,  or
         older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps  if  a
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-paid  employment
         and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.

    (5)   Where a single woman, with or without children, is ostracised  by
         family members and other sources of possible social support because
         she is in an irregular situation, internal relocation will be  more
         difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a question of fact
         in each case.

    (6)  A single woman or  female  head  of  household  who  has  no  male
         protector or social network may be able to use the  state  domestic
         violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of such  shelters
         is on reconciling people with their family networks, and places are
         in short supply and time limited. Privately  run  shelters  may  be
         more flexible,  providing  longer  term  support  while  the  woman
         regularises her social situation, but again, places are limited.


 13. As accepted, the Appellant cannot return to her home  area.   She  does
     not have any support from family members, and she does not have a  male
     guardian.  She is not well off.  She has some education, but it is  not
     sufficient for her to obtain well-paid employment such that she will be
     able to pay for accommodation and childcare for four daughters.


 14. In relation to the use of shelters by the Appellant and her  daughters,
     this is not a long-term option as made clear  by  (6)  above.   I  have
     nevertheless  considered  the  Respondent's  Country  Information   and
     Guidance  -  Pakistan:  Women  fearing  gender-based   harm/   violence
     (February 2016) (the "CIG") in relation to the  use  of  shelters.   At
     11.2 the report states:

         "The Aurat Foundation in its annual  report  for  2013  noted  that
         'There are very few shelter  homes  against  the  number  of  women
         seeking refuge. Going to a shelter home is still  considered  taboo
         and perceived as the last resort of women who have been turned away
         by respectable society'."


 15. The report goes on to detail that the shelters  offer  only  short-term
     accommodation, and that the government-run shelters were "too few", and
     "overcrowded with  poor  facilities  and  inadequately  trained  staff"
     [11.2.5].  It also states that "Some shelters, both state and  NGO-run,
     tried to reconcile women with their families, due to  the  difficulties
     of single women living alone in Pakistan society", which would  not  be
     appropriate or possible for the Appellant and her family.


 16. I find that a shelter  is  not  a  viable  long  term  option  for  the
     Appellant and her four daughters, and indeed it was  not  suggested  as
     such by Mr. Richards.


 17. In relation to the general position of women, bearing in mind both  the
     Appellant and her four daughters, at 2.3 of the CIG it states:


     "Pakistan is ranked as the third most dangerous place in the world  for
     women,  and  one  of  the  most  unequal.  Violence  against  women  is
     widespread, be it domestic violence, sexual abuse and harassment,  acid
     attacks, forced marriages, forced conversion and honour killings."


 18. I find that the Appellant and her  daughters  would  be  vulnerable  to
     abuse and attack.


 19. At 7.5.1 it states:

         "According to a representative from the Human Rights Commission  of
         Pakistan (HRCP) it was "next to impossible" for a single  woman  to
         live alone in Pakistan due to prejudices against women and economic
         dependence.  According to a Metropolitan State  College  of  Denver
         Assistant Professor, most women in rural  areas  lived  with  their
         families and it was generally not socially acceptable for women  to
         live  alone.  In  some  big  cities  such  as  Karachi,  Lahore  or
         Islamabad, (but not for example Peshawar or Quetta), if a woman  is
         educated, higher class and working it was reported to be easier  to
         live alone, although  this  was  still  quite  a  rare  occurrence.
         Sources consulted by  the  Research  Directorate  of  the  Canadian
         Immigration and Refugee  Board  (IRB)  described  difficulties  for
         single women renting  property  in  urban  areas,  citing  security
         concerns and social constraints. Divorcees faced stigmatization and
         social rejection."


 20. At 7.5.2 it states:

         "A study carried out by the International Labour Organization (ILO)
         concluded 'In a patriarchal society  like  Pakistan,  stereotypical
         societal norms are, in general, not  favorable  towards  women  who
         work and live alone in another city. House owners in  general,  are
         hesitant to rent out their property to women tenants who  work  and
         live independently and parents/families are reluctant to send their
         daughters  to  another  city  especially  when  decent  and  secure
         residential facilities are hard to find.' The ILO also  noted  'The
         Government has set up a few working women's hostels but the  demand
         for these far exceeds their supply.  Anecdotal  evidence  indicates
         that workingwomen prefer the secure  residential  facility  of  the
         government and avoid approaching the  private  renters  who  charge
         exorbitant rents and are often unwilling to offer their  facilities
         to women especially those who are single.'"


 21. I find that the Appellant does not have any funds to buy accommodation,
     and the evidence from the Respondent indicates that, even if  she  were
     able to afford it, it would be difficult for her to rent  accommodation
     as a single female.  The Appellant's evidence in her witness  statement
     is consistent with this [11].


 22. I find that the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  provide  for  her
     daughters.  I find that they would be destitute, as  I  find  that  she
     would not be  able  to  find  employment  which  would  enable  her  to
     accommodate and care for her daughters.  I find  that  without  a  male
     guardian there is a real risk that  the  Appellant  and  her  daughters
     would be vulnerable to attacks and abuse.


 23. I have also considered the best interests of the Appellant's daughters.
      I find that it is in their best interests to stay with  their  mother.
     I find it is not in their best interests to go to Pakistan where  their
     mother would not be able to support them, where they  would  likely  be
     homeless, and where they would have no male guardian to  protect  them.
     I find it is in their best interests to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
     where they have spent the majority or, in the case of  the  twins,  the
     whole of their lives thus far.  It is not in their  best  interests  to
     return to a country where they have not spent any amount  of  time,  in
     circumstances where they would only have the support  of  their  mother
     who, as a lone female, would struggle to care for them.


 24. Taking into account all of the above, and in  accordance  with  of  the
     case of SM, in particular paragraph (5) of the headnote, I find that it
     would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate.  I find that
     the Appellant has demonstrated that there is a real risk that she  will
     suffer persecution on return to Pakistan, and so her claim succeeds  on
     asylum grounds.  As I have allowed her claim on asylum  grounds,  I  do
     not need to consider her claim to humanitarian  protection.   Following
     my finding in relation to her asylum claim, I find that she would  also
     be at risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  such
     as to put the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations.  The  appeal
     is therefore also allowed on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


 25. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


 26. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, Articles 2 and 3.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
