
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01486/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     miw
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  13  July  1985.   She
    appeals the decision of a First-tier Judge following a  hearing  on  18
    March 2019 to dismiss her protection and human rights  claim  from  the
    decision of the respondent dated 23 January 2019.

2.   The First-tier Judge helpfully summarised the background to  this  case
    in the following extract from her determination:

         "3.  The historical background to this appeal is as  follows.   The
             appellant arrived in the UK on 31 March 2012 as the  dependent
             partner of her first husband who had a  Tier  4  student  visa
             expiring on 20 April 2014.  She claimed  asylum  on  17  April
             2014.  This was refused on 8 August 2014.  An  appeal  against
             the decision was dismissed on 15 October 2014  and  permission
             to appeal was refused.

         4.   The basis of the appellant's asylum claim  was  that  she  was
             wanted by the authorities for allegedly renting  her  property
             to LTTE supporters, and feared serious mistreatment is she was
             to return.

         5.   The appellant made further submissions to the respondent on 28
             October 2015 which were refused.  She applied  for  assistance
             to voluntarily depart in April 2016 but eventually did not co-
             operate over a departure.   Further  submissions  were  lodged
             again on 3 December 2018 and the respondent treated these as a
             fresh claim which they refused on 23 January 2019".

3.   The judge noted  that  while  the  respondent  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was from Sri Lanka it was  not  accepted  that  she  had  had
    issues with the authorities there, nor that she would  be  at  risk  on
    return in the light of GJ (post-civil war -  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The respondent  had  not  accepted  that  the
    fresh documentary evidence was genuine.   She  could  not  establish  a
    protection claim or a claim on human rights grounds.   In  relation  to
    the documentary evidence the judge reminded herself of the authority of
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.  Counsel for the appellant (Ms Popal)
    referred her to PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1011 while the Presenting Officer (Mr Bassi) relied on VT  (Article  22
    Procedures Directive - confidentiality) [2017  UKUT  00368.  The  judge
    also referred  to  MJ  (Singh  v  Belgium:  Tanveer  Ahmed  unaffected)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00253 (IAC).

4.   The judge records that both parties  relied  on  the  country  guidance
    case of GJ and she was referred by Mr Bassi to the Home Office response
    to an Information Request Report on Sri Lanka dated 26  September  2018
    which suggested that document fraud remains prevalent in Sri Lanka, and
    to the reference in PJ to a letter from the British High Commission  in
    Colombo dated 14 September 2010, and also to letters from  the  British
    High Commission cited in the case of VT "which suggest that attempts to
    verify documents provided in support of asylum  applications,  such  as
    police or court documents or letters of  verification  from  attorneys,
    have been shown to be not genuine in a very high proportion of cases".

5.   The judge accepted that the appellant was of  Sinhalese  ethnicity  and
    that she had never been involved with the LTTE or a supporter of  Tamil
    insurgency.  The judge outlined the appellant's claim as follows:

         "25. The appellant sets out the basis of her claim in  her  witness
             statement dated  15  March  2019.   She  started  working  for
             Ceylinco Travels and Tourist Ltd in 2006 in Colombo.  She  had
             a  colleague  called  SR  who  is  of  Tamil  ethnicity.   The
             appellant permitted SR  to  use  her  residence  as  a  postal
             address.  Their friendship continued even after the  appellant
             changed jobs.  The appellant was also friendly with SR's  wife
             who lived in India, and on one occasion she travelled to  stay
             with her there.  The appellant stated that she had the  mobile
             number of SR's wife at the time although she no longer has it.

         26.  The appellant married her first husband on 6 January 2011 in a
             Catholic  ceremony.   Her  father  was  not  happy  about  her
             marrying a Catholic and she said that their  relationship  was
             never the same again.

         27.  The appellant says that her father bought her  a  property  in
             Pandadura as part of  her  dowry.   She  wanted  to  join  her
             husband who was studying  in  the  UK.   She  rented  out  the
             property to SR who paid  three  year's  rent  up  front.   The
             appellant then travelled to the UK  to  join  her  husband  in
             March 2012.

         28.  The marriage did not last.  In April 2013, Mr  AL  moved  into
             the shared house she was living  in,  and  their  relationship
             commenced.

         29.  On 10 March 2013 the appellant received a telephone call  from
             her father informing  her  that  the  Sri  Lankan  police  had
             visited their family home asking about her.  He was told  that
             a known LTTE terrorist had been arrested at her property.  The
             police alleged that  the  appellant  was  assisting  the  LTTE
             diaspora internationally.  SR had  also  been  arrested.   The
             police also visited her ex-husband's house.

         30.  The appellant asserted that in December 2013  the  police  had
             visited her family home again with some documents in her  name
             which her father had refused to accept.  Her father  was  then
             required to report to the police station every month.

         31.  On 1 February 2014 the appellant travelled  to  Sri  Lanka  in
             order to 'clear her name'.  She was stopped at the airport and
             questioned by an immigration officer, but  allowed  to  leave.
             When her father picked her up, he was concerned for her safety
             and arranged for her to stay with one  of  his  friends.   The
             next day a female CID officer visited her father's  house  but
             went away when she was told that the appellant would return in
             one week.

         32.  The appellant's evidence  was  that  her  father  consulted  a
             lawyer  who  advised  that  she   should   leave   Sri   Lanka
             immediately.  Her father paid 500,000 rupees to an immigration
             officer to get her through the airport.  The appellant had  to
             wait until 23 March 2014 as this person was on leave.  She was
             therefore in Sri Lanka for several weeks.  She returned to the
             UK and claimed asylum on 17 April 2014.

         33.  The appellant says that she considered returning to Sri  Lanka
             in April 2016 but her father advised her not to do so  as  the
             CID were still looking for her and secondly he did not approve
             her relationship with a Muslim man.  The appellant states that
             her father and mother are now not speaking to her.

         34.  The appellant has not made any efforts to contact SR's wife or
             take other steps to find out what has happened  to  him  since
             the first appeal date.

         35.  The appellant was divorced from her first husband in  November
             2015.  She underwent an Islamic wedding ceremony with Mr  A.L.
             on 4 September 2018.

         36.  Mr A.L. arrived in the UK as a student in 2009  and  his  visa
             expired in 2013.  He confirmed to me that he has not taken any
             steps to regularise his stay in the  UK.   He  borrowed  money
             from his brother who has threatened to kill him because he has
             not been repaid.  He says his brother is a sergeant  with  the
             police.  His mother  disapproves  of  the  fact  that  he  has
             married a woman who is a Buddhist and divorced.  He says  that
             he cannot live in Sri Lanka as he does not speak the  language
             and because of an increase in anti-muslim violence.

         37.  The appellant asserts that if she has to return to  Sri  Lanka
             she would not be able to take her husband with her  as  he  is
             Muslim.  She would not be able  to  obtain  support  from  her
             family and would be a single female head of  household,  which
             would place her at particular risk".

    The judge notes that at the previous hearing  in  2014  the  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant had been working in  the  tourism  industry
    and that she had provided a consistent account of the  police  visiting
    her family home in March 2013.   However,  the  judge  also  had  found
    inconsistencies between the  appellant's  statement  and  that  of  her
    father as to who owned the property where a known  LTTE  supporter  had
    been arrested.  The evidence did not show that the appellant owned  the
    property or where it was.

6.   The judge found it clear that the  previous  judge  had  had  sight  of
    alleged court documents and had placed little weight on them  and  that
    it was highly surprising that  the  appellant  would  have  decided  to
    travel to Sri Lanka in February 2014 if she was aware that  the  police
    had alleged that she was involved in  LTTE  activities.   It  was  also
    found to be surprising that if an arrest warrant  had  been  issued  in
    December 2013 that the appellant had not been arrested when detained at
    the airport on her arrival and nor had the authorities made efforts  to
    find her during the weeks she had been in Sri Lanka.

7.   Having reminded herself of  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  the  judge
    turned to consider the new material  and  records  that  she  had  some
    difficulty in establishing which documents in  the  appellant's  bundle
    were new and which had been in front  of  the  former  Tribunal.   When
    asked this specific question Counsel referred the judge to pages 72  to
    107 in the appellant's bundle.  The judge itemises these  documents  in
    paragraph 47 of her decision and found it was clear that  the  majority
    had been before the Tribunal Judge  at  the  first  appeal.   The  only
    attorney letter which had postdated the  first  appeal  hearing  was  a
    letter from Mr R Raguraajah dated  19  June  2018  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors confirming that he had attended the  Magistrates'  Court  in
    Panadura and had spoken with the chief registrar who was able to  check
    the court records and confirmed that the case record was genuine.   The
    letter had failed to deal with a request to verify the  status  of  the
    previous attorney Mr P Wijesinghe whose evidence had been considered by
    the first Tribunal.  The judge concluded there was very little  in  the
    way of new evidence save for the letter from Mr Raguraajah.  The  judge
    then considered what weight should be given to the letter as follows:

         "51. Mr Bassi refers me to paragraph 73 of  VT  which  reads:  'the
             fact that evidence was obtained  through  'lawyer  to  lawyer'
             correspondence does  not  mean  that  it  should  be  accepted
             without question.  The fact that the process of obtaining  the
             evidence is more apparent is a matter that lends  more  weight
             to  the  evidence,  but  the  overall   reliability   of   the
             information provided by an attorney in Sri Lanka must still be
             subject to scrutiny'.  The letter goes on to say that evidence
             from the British High Commission  in  Colombo  'shows  that  a
             number of similar letters purporting to  be  from  Sri  Lankan
             attorneys have been shown to be unreliable'.

         52.  Ms Popal points out and I accept that VT  was  concerned  with
             Article 22 and the process of verification that was being used
             by the respondent.  She urges me  to  place  weight  upon  the
             attorney letter and suggests that if the  respondent  disputed
             that it was genuine, it  should  have  sought  to  verify  the
             letter himself.  Mr Bassi stated that the  respondent  is  not
             currently carrying out verification of documents in Sri  Lanka
             due lack of resources.

         53.  In PJ the Court of Appeal considered when the respondent might
             be expected to verify documents.  It is accepted that this may
             be necessary in some cases but added (paragraph 29)  that  'it
             is important to stress however that this step will  frequently
             not be feasible or it may be unjustified or disproportionate'.
              The paragraph  finishes:  'As  the  court  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
             observed, documents should not be viewed in isolation and  the
             evidence needs to be considered in its entirety'.

         54.  Taking this guidance into account, I am not able to  view  the
             production of the letter from Mr  Raguraajah  as  a  piece  of
             evidence that substantially adds to the  documentary  evidence
             supplied previously.  Ms Popal urges me to take  the  position
             that this  letter  is  'at  the  centre  of  the  request  for
             protection' (PH).  I do not accept that in the context of this
             case.  The attorney letter is one document  out  of  a  number
             presented by the appellant.  The judge  at  the  first  appeal
             hearing identified significant issues both in relation to  the
             documents relating to the property  and  in  relation  to  the
             arrest warrant.  He was troubled by  the  fact  that  none  of
             these referred to the actual address where the LTTE  activists
             were allegedly operating from.  He was not satisfied that  the
             documents demonstrated that the appellant owned the  property.
             He concluded that little  weight  could  be  placed  upon  the
             documents.

         55.  Ms Popal argued that the  judge's  conclusions  regarding  the
             property deeds were incorrect.  I did not have copies of these
             deeds in my bundle, but  the  appellant  had  brought  English
             translations to court and I was shown them.  Ms Popal accepted
             that the purported deed of transfer to the appellant  did  not
             show a property address as such.  She stated that although she
             was not seeking to make submissions about Sri Lankan  property
             law, that the deed and its reference to  a  plot  of  land  as
             opposed to an  address  were  the  standard  format  for  land
             documentation in the country.  She urged  me  not  to  take  a
             'westernised' viewpoint of the format of the documents  simply
             because they were dissimilar to the type of property  deed  we
             are used to seeing in the UK.  I am not able  to  accept  this
             submission.  In the absence of any expert or other evidence as
             to the interpretation of the deed produced,  I  am  unable  to
             interfere with the finding of fact made by the  judge  at  the
             first appeal that the appellant had not  demonstrated  to  the
             required standard that she owned  a  property  at  which  LTTE
             activists had been arrested.

         56.  Taking all the evidence produced into account, I am  not  able
             to accept that the attorney  letter  dated  June  2018  is  so
             significant as to cause me to take an entirely different  view
             of the evidence than the first judge".

8.   The judge then went on to consider various evidential issues raised  in
    the first appeal which had not  been  addressed  satisfactorily  before
    her.  Like the previous judge she had found it hard to  understand  why
    the appellant should decide to visit Sri Lanka in February  2014  given
    the circumstances.  She continued:

         "59. Second, it is the appellant's case that  a  number  of  arrest
             warrants were issued against her in late 2013 and early  2014.
             Despite that, although stopped and questioned at  immigration,
             she  was  released.   Given  the   sophistication   of   state
             intelligence identified in GJ, it seems highly likely that she
             would be on a 'stop' list if the arrest warrants were genuine.
              In fact, she managed to enter  Sri  Lanka  and  she  remained
             there for over six  weeks,  avoiding  being  detained  by  the
             police.

         60.  There is  no  recent  evidence  about  the  case  against  the
             appellant.  I am surprised that she has not made  any  efforts
             to find out about the case of SR, whom she has described as  a
             colleague and a friend.  At the very least the appellant could
             have tried to contact his wife to see  what  had  happened  to
             him.  Over four years has passed since the  first  appeal  but
             the appellant has not produced any evidence to show  that  the
             authorities have a continuing interest in her.

         61.  Although the appellant says that she  became  aware  that  the
             authorities were looking for her in March 2013,  she  has  not
             provided a satisfactory explanation as  to  why  she  did  not
             claim asylum until 17 April 2014, over three weeks  after  she
             returned to the UK and just  three  days  before  her  Tier  4
             dependent visa expired.

         62.  Against the background of all these issues I am  not  able  to
             give significant weight to  the  evidence  from  the  attorney
             dated June 2018 for a number of reasons.  First,  although  Mr
             Raguraajah states that his Bar ID card is  enclosed,  no  copy
             has been included in the bundle.  Second, he does not reply to
             the question asking him to verify the status of Mr Wijesinghe.
              Third, his letter is  not  direct  evidence  of  the  genuine
             nature of the case record at  the  Magistrate's  court  but  a
             second-hand report.  Finally I take account of the warnings in
             VT about potential  issues  with  attorney  letters  from  Sri
             Lanka.  When  I  consider  this  letter  alongside  the  other
             documentary evidence produced in support of the asylum  claim,
             I conclude that  substantial  concerns  around  the  documents
             remain and do not assist the appellant in her  assertion  that
             she is wanted by the authorities.

         63.  In summary  I  find  that  there  are  not  good  grounds  for
             revisiting the decision that Judge  Henderson  made  following
             the hearing on 30 September 2014.  I therefore find  that  the
             appellant has not demonstrated to the required  standard  that
             she is wanted in Sri Lanka and would be at risk upon a return.
              She has not established that there is a real  risk  that  she
             falls within one of the  categories  of  persons  entitled  to
             protection in the case of GJ".

9.   The judge did not accept the claim that she would be at risk on  return
    as a single female head of household nor that she would not have family
    support on her return. She did not accept that the appellant had become
    completely estranged from her family and could in any event  return  to
    Sri Lanka with her husband.  For reasons  set  out  in  detail  in  the
    decision the judge rejected the claim on all grounds.

10.  In the grounds of appeal from the decision it was argued  in  ground  1
    that the judge had erred in considering the letter from  Mr  Raguraajah
    in isolation and had failed to follow the authority of  Tanveer  Ahmed.
    She had failed to understand the  relevance  of  a  second  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer being instructed at a different moment of  time  coming  to  the
    same conclusion as a lawyer previously.  Reference was then made to  PJ
    (Sri  Lanka).   Ground  3  also  relies  on  PJ  and  argues  that  the
    consideration of the authority by the judge had been flawed in that  it
    would not have been particularly onerous for the respondent to make the
    necessary  enquiries  about  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a
    document.

11.  In ground 4 it was pointed out that the  judge  had  erred  in  finding
    that the Bar ID card for Mr Raguraajah had not been included.  This had
    been in the respondent's bundle.  In ground 5 it  was  argued  that  Mr
    Raguraajah had not replied to the question asking  him  to  verify  the
    status of  Mr  Wijesinghe  but  this  had  never  been  raised  by  the
    respondent in cross-examination or in submissions.  The issue  was  one
    of fairness.  The first time the point was raised was by the  judge  in
    her written determination.

12.  In ground 6 the judge was criticised for finding that the  report  from
    Mr Raguraajah was a second-hand report and he had  attended  the  court
    personally.  It was also argued that as the appellant would be returned
    on an ETD she would be taken into questioning  and  would  be  at  risk
    under Articles 2 and 3.

13.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds on 7 May  2019  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

14.  Ms Jegarajah argued that the material identified by Mr  Raguraajah  was
    completely different from the previous material and was  based  on  the
    original court documents, they  were  copies  of  the  original  sealed
    material.  Translations of the documents appeared from  page  79.   The
    documents  revealed  the  entire  sequence  of  events  affecting   the
    appellant.  The appellant had  failed  to  attend  court  and  an  open
    warrant had been issued.  The appellant's case had been  treated  as  a
    fresh claim on the basis of the  material.   The  judge  had  erred  in
    finding that production of the material had not substantially added  to
    the documentary evidence supplied previously in paragraph 54.  It would
    be a simple matter for the Home Office to make enquiries.

15.  Mr Whitwell submitted that it was difficult to relate the points  being
    made to the grounds on which permission had  been  granted.   He  noted
    that in ground 1 at paragraph 4 reference had been made  to  paragraphs
    47 and 48 of the First-tier decision but the reference in paragraph  48
    should  have  been  a  reference  to  paragraph  49.   While   it   was
    acknowledged that the Bar ID card had been enclosed in the respondent's
    bundle although not it appears in the appellant's bundle, the judge had
    correctly found that Mr Raguraajah had been asked to verify the  status
    of Mr Wijesinghe.  It was submitted that the  new  evidence  should  be
    treated with caution and that any error in paragraph 62 was immaterial.
     The documentary evidence should not be considered in isolation.  There
    were not sufficient resources in the Home Office to make enquiries.

16.  In reply, Ms Jegarajah  submitted  that  matters  happening  since  the
    previous decision could be considered in the light of the  points  made
    in Devaseelan.  The decision of the First-tier Judge  in  the  previous
    decision had not made findings in relation  to  the  lawyers'  letters.
    The same documents had been, as it were,  re-packaged.   Mr  Raguraajah
    had spoken to the chief registrar at the court.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

18.  I have carefully considered all  the  material  before  me.   I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was flawed in law.

19.  Before considering the main issues I should mention two of the  grounds
    on which there was no dispute at the hearing.  In ground  4  the  judge
    had said that the lawyer's Bar ID card had not  been  included  in  the
    bundle.  The judge had referred in paragraph 46 of her decision to  the
    difficulty in establishing which documents in  the  appellant's  bundle
    were new and had been referred to pages 72 to 107 in the bundle.  It is
    correct that in those pages the Bar  ID  did  not  appear  but  it  did
    feature in the Home Office bundle.  The  oversight  was  understandable
    given the papers she had been expressly asked to consider.  In relation
    to ground 5 it is quite clear from the letters  of  instruction  to  Mr
    Raguraajah dated 13 April 2018 that he was indeed asked to confirm  the
    status of Mr Wijesinghe.  There is no merit at all in  this  challenge.
    It should not have been advanced.  The point was available to the judge
    on the face of the material to which  her  attention  had  specifically
    been directed.

20.  The main argument advanced at the hearing before  me  by  Ms  Jegarajah
    (who submitted that the error in ground 5 was irrelevant) was based  on
    the fact that the  position  had  indeed  changed  since  the  previous
    hearing in that Mr Raguraajah had taken  copies  of  all  the  original
    court documents at the court. In relation  to  this  point  it  is  not
    without relevance to note what the judge said in paragraph  48  of  her
    decision (summarised in paragraph 7 above) that  Mr  R  Raguraajah  had
    written to the appellant's solicitors confirming" that he attended  the
    Magistrates' Court in Panadura and spoke with the Chief  Registrar  who
    was able to check the court records and confirmed that the case  record
    was genuine."  I am not satisfied that she was unduly dismissive  about
    the new documentary  evidence  or  materially  misdirected  herself  in
    relation to it.

21.  The judge had a number of reasons for concluding as she did.   She  had
    had the benefit of hearing oral evidence. She clearly had in  mind  the
    guidance in the case of PJ.  However the appeal before her was  a  case
    in which findings had previously been made in relation to the  material
    and the case of Devaseelan is of relevance.  It  had  been  found,  for
    example, by the previous judge that the evidence could not be relied on
    to show there was an extant court order or arrest warrant.  The  points
    made by the judge in paragraphs 58 to 61 remain good ones.  She  noted,
    correctly, in paragraph 62 that the status of the previous attorney had
    not been verified.  She  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  substantial
    concerns about the documentary evidence remained,  notwithstanding  the
    new  material.   She  properly  addressed  herself  on  the  issue   of
    documentary verification  and  what  was  said  in  PJ  (including  the
    reference by the Court of Appeal to Tanveer Ahmed and the need  not  to
    view documents in isolation.)  She was  entitled  to  take  account  of
    potential issues with attorney letters as identified in VT. In all  the
    circumstances it was open to her not to give significant weight to  the
    material provided by Mr Raguraajah. I agree with Mr Whitwell  that  the
    approach of the judge was not materially flawed  in  law  and  that  it
    would not be proportionate for the respondent to make enquiries in  the
    light of the guidance in PJ at paragraph 29  to  which  the  judge  had
    alluded in paragraph 53 of her decision. In relation  to  ground  seven
    The judge properly addressed the risks on return in paragraphs  63  and
    64 in the light of the country guidance.

22.  This appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    shall stand.

23.   The  First-tier  Judge  made  an  anonymity  direction  which  it   is
    appropriate should continue.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed   Date: 10 June 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

