
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01468/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 11 May 2017                      |On 26 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     A k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkins, Counsel, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  15
    February 2001 who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 18 December 2015 to refuse to  grant
    the appellant asylum (the appellant being granted  discretionary  leave
    until 18 March 2018 as an unaccompanied  minor).   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 9 January 2017, following a hearing on 22 August
    2016, Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  A  Lewis  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal  with  permission,  from  a
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge, on the grounds: ground 1 that the decision
    is fundamentally undermined due to the delay between  the  hearing  and
    promulgation  of  four  months;  ground  2  that  the   assessment   of
    credibility was flawed.

Error of Law Discussion

Ground 1

 3. I am not satisfied that this ground is made out.  The appellant in  the
    grounds and Mr Hawkins before me relied on RK (Algeria) v  SSHD  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 868 and in particular Mr Hawkins  drew  my  attention  to  the
    findings of the Court of Appeal that  discussed  that  there  would  be
    particular circumstances where a delay that exceeds three months  might
    undermine confidence in the decision.

 4. However at paragraph 23 of RK (Algeria), the submission that a delay of
    six months rendered a decision unsafe, was  specifically  rejected  and
    the Court of Appeal confirmed that there needed to be a  nexus  between
    the delay and the safety of the decision. Nothing I was taken  to  went
    to such a nexus.

 5. Mr Hawkins also relied on Sambasivan v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR as cited in RK (Algeria).  I  have  considered
    that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Arusha  and  Demushi  (deprivation   of
    citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered
    all of the relevant jurisprudence and confirmed that "in order to  show
    that the delay has led to an error of law it has to be shown  that  the
    judgment was not safe and therefore unlawful".  I cannot agree with  Mr
    Hawkins' submission that  the  Upper  Tribunal  put  a  "gloss"  on  RK
    (Algeria).

 6. Although I accept that in this case credibility was at issue I  am  not
    satisfied that any nexus has been shown between the  unfortunate  delay
    of over four months and the alleged unlawfulness of the  decision.   It
    is not the case that the decision is unlawful prima  facie  because  of
    the delay.  The judge was alive to the delay and reminded  himself,  at
    [14], that a significant period of time had passed between the date  of
    the hearing and the finalisation of the decision and that "in preparing
    this decision I have had the  benefit  of  my  detailed  notes  of  the
    proceedings.  I am satisfied that the passage of time has not  impacted
    upon my ability to recall the evidence and issues herein."

 7. I accept Mr Hawkins' submission that it was not for the judge to decide
    whether there is an error of  law  but  rather  it  is  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Nonetheless the judge specifically highlighted his awareness
    of the issue and it is important to note that he himself was  satisfied
    that he had adequate detailed notes.  I am not satisfied that  a  nexus
    has been established between the delay and any of the  criticisms  made
    of the judge's decision in ground 2 or by Mr Hawkins (and  Mr  Hawkins'
    attempted to raise a new ground  at  the  hearing  in  relation  to  an
    alleged error by the judge in her consideration of the expert  evidence
    of Dr Giustozzi.  I indicated at the hearing that I was not  minded  to
    take this into consideration.  I am not satisfied that it was  Robinson
    obvious or that there are any  exceptional  reasons  why  the  Tribunal
    should consider this new ground.  Even if I am wrong I can see no error
    in the judge's very careful consideration of  the  expert  evidence  in
    relation  to  forced  recruitment.   Although  Mr  Hawkins  sought   to
    criticise the respondent's interpretation of that  evidence  the  judge
    also noted that Dr Giustozzi does not expressly  address  the  apparent
    discrepancy between the appellant's claim that his father was  forcibly
    recruited and Dr Giustozzi's own knowledge that forced  recruitment  is
    not in practice exercised currently by the Taliban save in  "very  rare
    circumstances."  None  of  these  circumstances  were  related  to  the
    circumstances of either  the  appellant  or  his  brother.   No  error,
    material or otherwise, has been identified.)

 8. In relation to the remaining ground, this amounts to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  The judge found at  [28]  that
    he did not accept that the appellant had lost contact with  his  family
    and fully explored with great care the evidence of  the  appellant  and
    that of his uncle in relation to when the appellant's father died.  The
    judge found that the appellant's evidence was at odds with his  uncle's
    evidence in that the appellant's uncle estimated the  event  had  taken
    place in two to two and a half years  prior  to  the  date  of  hearing
    (which would  be  approximately  March  to  August  2014)  whereas  the
    appellant estimated it to have been March 2015.  However that  was  not
    the only information that was taken into consideration.  The judge also
    noted that the appellant's account  was  discrepant  with  his  account
    given in his initial witness statement.  The judge further  found  that
    the appellant had arrived in the UK in possession of a telephone number
    of a cousin who then came to the airport but that  this  cousin  denied
    any knowledge of the appellant's arrival in which  the  judge  did  not
    accept as credible.  The judge went on to take into consideration  that
    the appellant had suggested that his cousin would be able to  get  hold
    of supporting documents which suggested that the  appellant  understood
    his cousin to be in contact with  persons  in  Afghanistan,  which  the
    judge again undermined the  appellant's  claim  not  to  have  been  in
    contact with family members.

 9. It is not the case therefore that the judge found  that  the  appellant
    had lost contact solely because of the discrepant dates.  Even if  that
    was the case the judge had in mind that  the  dates  were  approximate.
    The judge specifically records at 28(2)(ii) that in his oral  testimony
    the appellant's uncle stated that the last time he had had contact  was
    "about two to two and a half years previously" which is  self-evidently
    an approximate and imprecise date.  The  further  submission  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to the  findings
    of  Dr  Cohen  which  included  that   the   appellant's   memory   and
    concentration are "fair" but his recall of dates is "poor"  is  without
    merit.

10. The judge properly directed himself including at 16 in relation to  the
    appellant's age and reminded  himself  of  the  context  of  the  UNHCR
    Handbook and Guidelines and Procedures  and  Criteria  for  Determining
    Refugee Status and of the Presidential Guidance  on  Child,  Vulnerable
    Adults, and Sensitive Appellants.  The judge properly took into account
    that the appellant has been diagnosed as suffering from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and the possible implication  that  this  may  have  in
    respect of the facility to recall matters accurately and his ability to
    give a coherent narrative account [18].  The judge noted  that  it  was
    not suggested in any way that the appellant might be in any  way  unfit
    to participate in the asylum or appeal process.

11. The judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account,  in  the  round,  the
    considerable  difference  in  the  dates  provided  by  the   witnesses
    notwithstanding the approximate nature of the  uncle's  dates  and  the
    appellant's recorded difficulties with dates.

12. The appellant also submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    consideration  the  unchallenged  witness  statement  evidence  of  the
    appellant's cousin Mr QK who in his statement  confirmed  that  he  had
    witnessed the appellant's father  working  for  the  Taliban.   It  was
    submitted that this witness was  a  recognised  refugee  who  had  been
    accepted as credible by the Tribunal and that it was not  open  to  the
    judge to assert that there was  no  other  evidence  before  the  court
    supporting the appellant's father's role in the Taliban.

13.  The  judge  found  at  [34]  that  there  was  no  other  "independent
    corroboration of the appellant's father's involvement with the  Taliban
    or otherwise of the appellant's father's fate."  The judge at  [15]  of
    the decision and reasons confirmed that he had taken into consideration
    all of the evidence and had reminded himself that it was not  necessary
    to set out his approach  in  every  point  and  that  the  omission  of
    reference to any particular document or  aspect  of  evidence  was  not
    indicative of a lack of consideration of that document or aspect of the
    evidence.  In this context the judge at [13] specifically set out  that
    he had taken into consideration the  evidence  of  Mr  QK  who  was  in
    attendance and his witness statement was in the bundle at pages  22  to
    25 but  that  he  was  not  a  witness  to  the  particular  events  in
    Afghanistan upon which the appellant relied having himself come to  the
    UK in 2010 and in all the circumstances he was not called as a witness.
     The judge went on to state that he considered the contents of Mr  QK's
    witness statement as essentially providing contextual  material  albeit
    not addressing directly those events upon which the appellant bases the
    core of his claim.  In these circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the decision he did that there was no  "independent"  cooperation
    of the appellant's father's involvement with the Taliban.

14. The judge at [27(ii)] had not accepted the  respondent's  reasoning  at
    paragraphs 26 of the refusal  letter  as  undermining  the  appellant's
    account of his father's involvement and did not find  the  respondent's
    reasoning to be sustainable but reminded himself that this did not mean
    inevitably that he must accept the appellant's claim but that it was  a
    matter  for  consideration  in   the   round.    Upon   that   detailed
    consideration the judge made the findings he did at [33]  that  he  did
    not accept the appellant's account of his father's involvement with the
    Taliban including as the appellant's general  credibility  was  damaged
    for the reasons carefully set out by the judge.

15. The grounds of appeal also complain that it was not open to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to find the appellant's troubles  were  as  a  result  of
    being a child in a war zone  given  the  expert  report.   However  the
    judge, including at [36], gave cogent  reasons,  having  considered  Dr
    Cohen's report, but that in  all  the  circumstances  and  taking  into
    account  those  areas  of  difficulty  identified  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's  account,  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    psychological and mental health difficulties arose  by  reason  of  the
    proximity as a child to a war zone.  It was noted  in  particular  that
    paragraphs 4 and 5 of Dr  Cohen's  report  referred  to  the  appellant
    recounting matters unrelated to those matters that were  then  advanced
    subsequently as part of his asylum claim.

16. It was a matter for the judge what  weight  he  gave  to  the  evidence
    before him and the judge properly considered Dr Cohen's  expert  report
    including that  Dr  Cohen  identified  some  of  the  injuries  may  be
    attributable to being in the proximity of explosions and  it  was  also
    open to the judge to make the ultimate finding that he did that he  did
    not "find the medical evidence so compelling by  way  of  corroboration
    that it outweighs those other aspects of the appellant's account that I
    find fabricated, incredible or  unreliable."   There  was  no  properly
    arguable challenge to those findings, either on a stand alone basis, or
    on the basis put forward by Mr Hawkins that a  lower  standard  applied
    given the delay.

17. For the reasons already given I am not satisfied that there was  either
    any nexus established between the delay and any alleged deficiencies in
    the judge's decision, or that  there  has  been  established  that  any
    material error has otherwise been disclosed.

Conclusion

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as I indicated at the hearing,
    does not disclose an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated:  24 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is applicable or is made.

Signed                                  Dated:  24 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
