
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01183/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th October 2018                     |On 29th November 2018             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  REEM [Y]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:  Ms X Vengoechea, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Mulholland dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a member of the Berti tribe.  She claims she was
      targeted by the Sudanese authorities because when she and her husband
      were living in Qatar they raised charitable donations to send to poor
      families in Sudan.  She maintains also that her children are at risk
      of being subjected to FGM in Sudan.  This was inflicted on her as a
      child.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an adverse credibility
      finding on the appellant's evidence.  The judge did not accept that
      the appellant had come to the adverse attention of the authorities in
      Sudan or that she had been detained there as she claimed.  The judge
      did not believe the appellant's evidence that her husband had been
      detained and was missing, or that her brother was missing.  The judge
      did not accept that the appellant's children were at risk of FGM being
      carried out against the wishes of the appellant and her husband.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on two main grounds.  The first of
      these was that the judge had arguably not given adequate reasons for
      departing from the country guideline decisions on the risk to non-Arab
      Darfuris, such as the appellant, in Sudan.  The second was that the
      judge had arguably not given adequate reasons for finding that the
      appellant and her husband would be able to resist family pressure to
      subject their daughters to FGM, particularly as the eldest was nearing
      the age of seven and FGM was widely practised in Sudan on girls
      between the ages of 6 and 12.

Submissions
   5. Mr Govan argued strongly for the respondent that the First-tier
      Tribunal's decision should be allowed to stand.  The Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal was entitled to depart from the country guideline
      cases provided adequate reasons for this were given.  Even if in so
      doing the judge had neglected to consider an expert's report obtained
      on behalf of the appellant, it was unlikely her decision would have
      been different.  The situation in Sudan had altered since the country
      guideline decisions were made and this was reflected in the background
      evidence and in Home Office policy.  This was based on a variety of
      sources including international organisations.  Non-Arab Darfuris were
      not generally at risk of persecution in Khartoum.  The appellant had
      lived in Qatar and in connection with her application had given an
      address in Omdurman, which was adjacent to Khartoum.  There was a
      sizeable population of up to one million Darfuris in Khartoum.  Many
      of those who had gone there as IDPs were no longer recognised as such.

   6. Mr Govan referred also to the credibility issues in the appeal.  The
      judge rejected evidence contained in a letter from the appellant's
      mother stating she did not know the whereabouts of the appellant's
      husband.  On the risk of FGM the judge had given sound reasons at
      paragraphs 54-58 of the decision.  The appellant and her husband were
      opposed to FGM.

   7. Ms Vengoechea referred me to Practice Direction 12 on the authority of
      country guideline decisions and the circumstances in which a tribunal
      may depart from these.  The reasons given by the judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal for departing from the county guideline decisions of AA
      (Non-Arab Darfuris: relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM
      (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 are given in no more than two
      paragraphs, numbered 22 and 23.  At paragraph 22 the judge refers to
      the Home office CPIN Note of August 2017 entitled "Sudan: Non-Arab
      Darfuris" and very briefly mentions some of its sources and
      conclusions.  She points out that this note is more recent than the
      2009 decision in AA, which was based at least in part on a Home Office
      Note of that year.

Discussion
   8. At paragraph 23 the judge refers to the more recent country guideline
      decision of MM, relied upon by the appellant, and comments that the
      appellant has not sought to challenge the information in the August
      2017 CPIN.  It should be pointed out, however, that it is for the
      party challenging the county guideline decision to provide evidence
      and reasons showing why it should not be followed.  The judge
      nevertheless concludes at paragraph 23 that the August 2017 CPIN Note
      is based on credible and reliable sources and contains the most up-to-
      date and reliable information.  It shows that there has been a
      material change of circumstances since the country guideline cases of
      AA and MM were decided and that the appellant and her children were no
      longer at risk solely on account of their ethnicity.

   9. To say the judge's reasoning for departing from the country guideline
      cases is inadequate might be regarded as something of an
      understatement.  Part of the purpose of having a system of country
      guidance in reported decisions of the Upper Tribunal is to maintain
      consistency in the numerous tribunal decisions which are made about
      conditions in a particular country so that individual judges will not
      adopt divergent views.  The importance of treating like cases in a
      like manner is stated in Practice Direction 12.

  10. The passage of time since a country guideline decision was made may
      mean that the decision should no longer be followed because
      circumstances have changed.  This is not, however, a conclusion to be
      reached lightly and without detailed analysis and assessment.  As was
      observed in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940, strong grounds supported by
      cogent evidence are required to justify departure from a country
      guideline decision.  Evidence from some sources may point to a
      material change of circumstances but there may be other sources
      suggesting a less pronounced change or referring to different factors
      which may affect the assessment of risk.

  11. On the issue of sources, in considering whether the country guideline
      cases should be followed the judge did not have any regard to the view
      of the expert report provided for the appellant by Dr Bekalo.  Mr
      Govan suggested that the terms of this report, so far as it addressed
      the position of Darfuris in the Khartoum area, would have been
      unlikely to have affected the judge's position.  If the judge was
      carrying out a review of the country guideline decisions with the
      requisite thoroughness, however, this evidence should have been taken
      into account.  For example, while at paragraph 2.5 Dr Bekalo describes
      the appellant as a member of a rare well-to-do Berti family, at
      paragraph 4.4 he refers to continuing problems in Khartoum.  While Dr
      Bekalo's report may be less comprehensive and rely on fewer sources
      than the Home Office CPIN, it is still of some significance.

  12. I am not satisfied that the judge of the First-tier Tribunal gave
      adequate reasons for not following the country guideline decisions on
      the risk to non-Arab Darfuris.  This amounts to an error of law
      because of which the decision should be set aside.

  13. The second aspect of the appellant's case was the risk of FGM being
      inflicted on her daughters.  It seems to me that if the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal had followed the country guideline decisions on
      the risk of persecution, she might well have reached a different
      conclusion on the ability of the children's parents to protect them
      from FGM.  At paragraph 57 of her decision the judge indicated there
      was not enough evidence to satisfy her that FGM would "inevitably" be
      carried out against the parents' wishes.  Mr Govan suggested that the
      word "inevitably" was first used in paragraph 56 in relation to the
      opinion expressed by Dr Bekalo.  Ms Vengoechea pointed out in turn
      that Dr Bekalo did not use the word "inevitably" in his report.  It
      was the judge who introduced this word into her decision.

  14. The question of whether FGM would "inevitably" be carried out against
      the parents' wishes bears no relation to the low standard of proof
      when assessing risk in a protection appeal.  The use of the term
      indicates that the judge erred in law by applying too high standard of
      proof.  This is a further reason for setting aside the decision.

  15. In re-making the decision I have followed the country guideline
      decisions, particularly the more recent decision of MM from 2015.  I
      am aware of Mr Govan's reliance on the 2017 CPIN as tending to show a
      materially lower risk to Darfuris living around Khartoum than was
      previously accepted.  Mr Govan indicated that a further country
      guideline case would be heard around February 2019.  I recognise that
      this will provide an appropriate occasion for all the relevant country
      information to be scrutinised and assessed.  Meanwhile the present
      appeal should be decided on the basis of the appellant's particular
      circumstances in accordance with the existing country guidance.

  16. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings adverse
      to the appellant.  These primary findings upon the evidence still
      stand although the judge's inferences and conclusions do not.
      Crucially it is accepted that the appellant belongs to a non-Arab
      Darfuri tribe.

  17. Ms Vengoechea suggested that even if the appellant was not at risk by
      reason of her ethnicity, there was also the issue of FGM.  In Sudan
      there would be pressure for her daughters, particularly the oldest, to
      be subjected to FGM.  The judge considered that the parents would be
      able to resist this pressure.  This finding appeared to be based to a
      significant extent on the assumption that the appellant and her
      partner would be able to support one another.  The judge specifically
      disbelieved written evidence from the appellant's mother stating that
      she did not know where the appellant's husband was.  There was,
      however, no positive finding as to where the appellant's husband was
      or what his current circumstances might be.  The appellant has come
      the UK without her husband.  The couple have been living apart since
      she came here and it ought not to be assumed they will resume living
      together if the appellant returns to Sudan.

  18. The position is therefore that the appellant would be returning to
      Sudan as a non-Arab Darfuri woman on her own apart from her three
      young daughters.  There would be a real risk of persecution or serious
      harm to the appellant and to her daughters both by way of persecution
      on grounds of ethnicity and by way of FGM being inflicted on her
      daughters.  The appeal will succeed on protection grounds.

Conclusions
  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  20. The decision is set aside.

  21. The decision is re-made allowing the appeal.


Anonymity
The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction but I have
not been asked to continue this and I see no reason of substance for doing
so.


Fee award                (N.B. this is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.




M E Deans
                                 31st October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

