
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01253/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2016                           |On 20th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                    MR SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Turkey  whose  appeal  to  require
    international protection was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aziz in a decision promulgated on 18th August 2016.   The  judge  noted
    (paragraph 67) that even if there  had  been  past  incidents  of  ill-
    treatment the Appellant was not at real risk of persecution upon return
    to Turkey.  He then went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

 2. The grounds of application are succinct.  It is said the judge made  an
    error in law and fact by giving  insufficient  weight  to  the  medical
    report of Dr Hajioff.  Contrary to the submissions  made  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer to the judge Dr Hajioff  had  concluded  that
    the injuries were applied in a deliberate manner and he had gone on  to
    consider that it was very unlikely that it was self-inflicted or  self-
    inflicted by proxy.  The judge had stated in paragraph 62 that while he
    noted the findings of Dr Hajioff that the various  injuries  and  scars
    were either highly consistent or consistent with the  account  provided
    by the Appellant he was not persuaded that the injuries  were  obtained
    in the manner described.  It was said that the judge failed  to  attach
    the appropriate weight  to  the  conclusions  in  Dr  Hajioff's  report
    relating to  the  Appellant's  scars  and  did  not  address  his  post
    traumatic stress disorder.

 3. The grounds were found to be arguable  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.  A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the  Respondent  stating  that
    the judge "properly took into  account  the  medical  report  and  made
    adequate findings of fact."  The judge found at paragraph 66 that  "the
    Appellant does not have a profile that would put him at risk on  return
    to Turkey."

 4. Thus the matter came before me on  the  above  date.   Given  that  the
    grounds of application were particularly  clear  and  narrow  in  their
    approach I invited Mr Jarvis for the Home Office to address  me  first.
    He submitted that the decision was sound and reflected what was said in
    IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.   He  also
    referred me to the approach taken to the writing of medical reports  as
    set out in JL (Medical Reports - Credibility) China [2013]  UKUT  00145
    (IAC).  In particular he referred me to paragraph 30 that set  out  the
    guidance given in the Istanbul Protocol.  In this case it  was  notable
    that Dr Hajioff had only found that the  findings  were  consistent  or
    highly consistent.  Had he really been looking at other matters of  how
    the scars came about, and had properly considered those issues then his
    findings would have been likely to have been at the higher end  of  the
    Protocol scale.  In all the circumstances it was said that there was no
    error in law and the decision should stand.

 5. For the Appellant Mrs Mughal relied on  the  grounds.   The  judge  had
    misread the terms of the medical report which was a material  error  in
    law.  The matter would have to be heard again  at  First-tier  Tribunal
    level.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Reasons

 7. I agree with what is said in the grounds of application  that the judge
    did not make proper findings on the medical report  and  did  not  give
    adequate reasons (in paragraph 62) why he was not  persuaded  that  the
    injuries were obtained in the manner described.  This was an  important
    and central issue before the judge and  full  reasoning  was  required.
    The terms of the medical report  were  very  much  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  Dr Hajioff pointed out that he had  seen  many  self-inflicted
    cuts on arms but had never  seen  as  much  damage  on  a  forearm  and
    believed that it was very unlikely that it was self-inflicted or  self-
    inflicted by proxy.  He judged the scars on  the  left  arm  as  highly
    consistent with the Appellant's description of how they were caused and
    the scars on the back of the hands were  also  highly  consistent  with
    deliberately inflicted cigarette burns.  The scar on the right knee was
    consistent with an injury caused by a blow and the scar and  thickening
    of his right ring finger were consistent with  its  having  received  a
    heavy blow.  For reasons given he went on (paragraph  49)  to  conclude
    that the Appellant was suffering from chronic PTSD and has evidence  of
    injury consistent with his account.  The judge does not  deal  with  Dr
    Hajioff's opinion  and  the  reasons  for  it  but  says  he  was  "not
    persuaded" that the injuries were  obtained  in  the  manner  described
    (again paragraph 62).  Against that  background  I  conclude  that  the
    judge failed to attach the appropriate weight to the conclusions in  Dr
    Hajioff's report.  He was wrong to say that  there  was  a  significant
    failing in the report in that the expert did not address the issues  of
    whether the injuries could have been caused another way  -  Dr  Hajioff
    did.  While  noting  that  Dr  Hajioff  notes  that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering from chronic PTSD the judge makes no findings in that regard.



 8. As stated the issue of whether or not the Appellant was  seriously  ill
    treated was central to the outcome of the appeal and the judge has  not
    given  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  medical  evidence   that
    supported his claim which clearly amounts  to  an  error  in  law.   It
    therefore seems to me that the judge's decision is not safe and  cannot
    stand.  In my view further fact-finding is required and the matter will
    have to be heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the Tribunal are  to  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the  nature
    and extent of the judicial fact-finding necessary for the  decision  to
    be re-made is such that it is appropriate to  remit  the  case  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.  I  shall  maintain  the   anonymity   direction.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald        20th October 2016
