
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01715/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Sherwan [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, WTB Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge A J Parker of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent  on
    13 April 2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 24 January 2018.

2.   The appellant's grounds first  take  issue  with  two  aspects  of  the
    judge's treatment of s. 8 AI (TCs) Act 2004, it being said  he  wrongly
    raised it of his own volition and  wrongly  concluded  that  s.  8  was
    engaged by the appellant's late claim for asylum.  The principal thrust
    of the remainder of the grounds is the complaint that the judge wrongly
    discounted the appellant's supporting evidence as being speculative and
    not first-hand.

3.   I heard useful submissions from Mr Pratt and Mr Diwnycz,  the  latter's
    very short.

4.   Before I proceed further, it is important to note that the  appellant's
    claim for asylum made on 26 January 2017 was based on events  that  had
    happened in Iraq in 2016-2017, several years after he had  entered  the
    UK as a student (in 2011).  As such it was  a  sur  place  claim.   Its
    essence was (as stated by him in his answer to questions in the  asylum
    interview) that he would be at risk because his brother-in-law Azad was
    a member of the Borzani clan and was involved in drug smuggling and was
    a member of the PDK who had been arrested by the Iraqi  authorities  in
    Baghdad and they blamed him and his sister.

5.   I consider the appellant's first ground is made out.  I  see  no  legal
    error in the judge raising the s. 8 issue of his own motion - it is  an
    obligation imposed on all decision-makers.  However, if a judge  raises
    it of his own motion the appellant must be afforded the opportunity  to
    respond.  In this case not only did the respondent not raise it but  no
    questions had been asked  of  him  by  the  respondent  at  his  asylum
    interview demonstrating that he had engaged with  any  conduct  falling
    within the material scope of s. 8.  There is nothing  to  indicate  the
    matter was raised with the appellant by the  judge.  Furthermore,  even
    the appellant's student visa expired on 30 January 2017 he had  applied
    for asylum  before  that  date.   If  his  account  was  considered  as
    credible, then there was no question of  him  delaying  his  claim.   I
    agree with Mr Pratt  that  there  was  a  circularity  in  the  judge's
    reasoning in that he appears to have reasoned that as the appellant was
    not credible as regards the substance of his asylum claim  he  must  be
    treated as having delayed his asylum claim, whereas s. 8  went  to  the
    issue, if at all, of whether he was credible as to the substance of his
    asylum claim in the first place.  Mr  Diwnycz  said  he  accepted  that
    there was no discernible basis for  the  judge  considering  s.  8  was
    engaged and I agree.

6.   Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge's reliance on s.  8  considerations
    at paragraphs 44 and 45 was not a  material  error  because  the  other
    reasons given by the judge for finding the appellant not credible  were
    sufficient in themselves.  I reject that submission.  I would accept at
    a general level that s. 8  findings  made  by  a  judge  may  often  be
    auxiliary and have no potential effect on the outcome of the  decision,
    but in this particular case I consider there are  valid  concerns  that
    the  s.  8  consideration  may  have  influenced  the  judge's  overall
    assessment.  One particular concern I have is that the judge says  more
    than once that it was not credible to think that the brother-in-law and
    kin would "blame" the appellant  for  his  arrest  given  that  he  was
    "hundreds of miles away in a foreign country" (paragraphs 40  and  43).
    That may or may not be a proper response to the appellant's claim  that
    his brother-in-law overheard a telephone call between the appellant and
    a family member in Iraq, but  it  leaves  unaddressed  the  appellant's
    claim  that  the  brother-in-law's  family  attached   blame   to   the
    appellant's family and that already there had been a reprisal attack on
    his brother and an attack on his family home.   In  my  judgement,  the
    judge's failure to appreciate that the appellant's claim was  based  on
    fear of harm directed at him as a member of his  sister's  family  also
    had an impact on his approach to the  appellant's  supporting  evidence
    which was necessarily indirect, as he was not present in Iraq.

Notice of Decision

7.   For the above reasons I set aside the decision of  the  FtT  judge  for
    material error of law and see no alternative to it  being  remitted  to
    the FtT.

8.   To conclude:

     The decision of FtT judge is set aside for material error of law;

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge A J Parker).

     No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

