
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01657/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 November 2016                   |On 3 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     S B
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel, Mansfield Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka  born  on  22  July  1985.
         Details of his background and immigration history are contained  in
         the respondent's decision letter.


      2. The applicant was granted permission to appeal in  respect  of  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson promulgated on 27
         August 2016 dismissing his  appeal  both  against  the  refusal  of
         asylum and the refusal of a residence card as the  extended  family
         member of an EEA national.


      3. The challenge to the EEA limb of the determination  was  no  longer
         pursued at the hearing before me on 2 November  2016  in  light  of
         recent case law but submissions were made in respect of the judge's
         approach to, and findings on, the claim for protection.

      4. Ms Jegarajah made submissions on  the  failing  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge to record much of the oral evidence  called  and  of
         the submissions  made  by  Counsel  at  the  initial  hearing.  She
         referred to the fairness principles set out in  Wagner  (advocates'
         conduct  -  fair  hearing)  and   relied   on   a   statement   and
         contemporaneous record of proceedings prepared  by  Mr  Paramjorthy
         who represented the appellant at that hearing  and  which  set  out
         substantial omissions in the evidence recorded by the judge in  his
         determination. She pointed out that the judge failed to follow  the
         rationale in KV (scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 as to
         whether there were presenting features in the appellant's  case  of
         self-inflicted or third party inflicted injuries and submitted that
         these suspicions were not put to the appellant at  the  hearing  as
         they should have been.  It followed that the judge's assessment  of
         the medical evidence was flawed and he was not legally entitled  to
         reach the finding contained out at paragraph 68.

      5. Ms Ahmad responded briefly. She very  properly  conceded  that  she
         would struggle to argue against the submission that the  judge  did
         not  put  his  concerns  about  self-inflicted  injuries   to   the
         appellant. In the circumstances, I did not  need  to  hear  further
         from Ms Jegarajah and indicated that I would be setting  aside  the
         decision of Judge Monson.


      Conclusions


      6. It is plain that Judge Monson did not follow  the  guidance  of  KV
         when assessing the medical evidence and the appellant's account  of
         torture. I accept Ms Jegarajah's submission that the appellant  was
         asked closed questions at  interview  about  the  ill-treatment  he
         suffered and that his failure to mention cigarette  burns  was  not
         determinative. I also accept that the judge did not conduct himself
         with the principles of fairness in failing to put to the  appellant
         his concerns about what he found to be self-inflicted injuries. The
         appellant should have been given an opportunity to respond to  that
         allegation, which had not been raised  by  the  respondent.   As  a
         result, I am unable to uphold the decision on asylum and I  set  it
         aside.


      7. Ms Jegarajah submitted that if I were to find for the appellant  on
         this point, there would be no need to delve further into the  other
         issues of procedural unfairness that had been  raised.  Whilst  her
         grounds on that matter do appear to have merit, it  is  enough  for
         the appellant's purposes that the decision on the protection  claim
         is set aside for the reasons I have already given.

      8. There being no issue now taken with  the  findings  under  the  EEA
         Regulations, that part of the appeal is upheld.

    Decision

      9. The decision in so far as it relates to the  claim  for  protection
         contains material errors of law and is set aside. The matter  shall
         be transferred back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  consideration
         afresh by a different judge and for a fresh decision to be made  on
         the issue of protection.


    Directions


     10. No later than 7 working days prior to the hearing, the appellant is
         to serve upon the Tribunal and the respondent a paginated bundle of
         all the documentary  evidence  to  be  relied  on  including  those
         documents already submitted.


         Signed





                   Judge of the Upper Tribunal

             Date: 2 November 2016


