

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/01474/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 12 December 2017                    |         On 19 December 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     hh
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 29 March 1986.  She claims to be a citizen of
    Eritrea, but in a decision and reasons statement,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Lodge decided she had not shown that she is Eritrean.

 2. The appellant claims to have a complex upbringing.  She  says  she  was
    born in Eritrea but before she was one year's old, her parents took her
    to Ethiopia.  She lived  there  until  2000,  when  she  says  she  was
    deported to Eritrea.  She remained in Eritrea until 12  December  2002,
    when she fled aged 16 and went to live in Sudan.  In 2010, she moved to
    Turkey, where she stayed until 2015.  Then  she  moved  across  Europe,
    passing through Greece, Hungary, Austria and  France,  before  reaching
    the UK on 14 October 2015.

 3. Although the appellant was legally represented at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Lodge, she was not  legally  represented  when  she  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Her initial application as
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale, but  her  application
    direct to the Upper Tribunal succeed.  Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 20 September 2017.

 4. Mr Martin  relied  on  the  grounds,  which  although  settled  by  the
    appellant  have  the  appearance  of  being  drafted  by  someone  with
    knowledge of this area of law.  The grounds  are  summarised  by  Judge
    Plimmer in her grant of permission.  "It is arguable  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to  take  into  account  the  appellant's  claimed
    chronology that she was born in Eritrea but went to Ethiopia at a young
    age before being returned to Eritrea, and the impact this might have on
    her linguistic abilities."

 5. Mr Martin argued that Judge Lodge failed to  consider  the  appellant's
    background in sufficient depth  to  make  his  findings  reliable.   He
    argued that Judge Lodge failed to  engage  with  the  entirety  of  the
    appellant's account, and how it might explain her  fluency  in  Amharic
    and her limited ability in Tigrinya.  He  submitted  it  was  plausible
    that the appellant would have been able to continue using Amharic  when
    in Eritrea between 2000 and 2002 because of the number of  people  like
    her who were deported from Ethiopia.

 6. Mr Mills responded by reminding me that Judge Lodge was fully aware  of
    the appellant's personal history, as recorded from paragraph 9  of  the
    decision and reasons statement.  The issue identified  by  Judge  Lodge
    was not that the appellant was not exposed  to  the  Tigrinya  language
    because of her absence  from  Eritrea.   Judge  Lodge  found  that  the
    appellant's account was not reliable  because  she  although  said  her
    father and mother spoke Tigrinya as their first language, and  although
    her father supported Eritrean independence, she could not  explain  why
    her parents had not ensured she learned  the  national  language.   Her
    rudimentary ability in Tigrinya was evidence that her account  was  not
    reliable.

 7. Mr Mills also  said  it  was  open  to  Judge  Lodge  to  consider  the
    background information about compulsory education in  Eritrea  and  the
    appellant's inability to give a plausible account of why she did not go
    to school.  Mr Mills also reminded me that Judge Lodge  had  found  the
    appellant's two witnesses to be unreliable, and those findings are  not
    challenged.

 8. As I indicated at the end of the hearing, I  find  no  legal  error  in
    Judge Lodge's decision and  reasoning.   I  am  satisfied  Judge  Lodge
    properly assessed the evidence presented.  He was  very  aware  of  the
    appellant's background and focused on what she  has  stated  about  her
    father.   As  Judge  Lodge   identified,   there   is   a   fundamental
    contradiction between  what  the  appellant  said  about  her  father's
    language skills and involvement in Eritrean independence, and  her  own
    poor ability in Tigrinya.  The contradiction undermines the entirety of
    her claim.  That finding was properly made by Judge Lodge and does  not
    contain any legal error.

 9. There was no need for Judge Lodge to set out in detail  every  part  of
    the appellant's chronology.  The fact he focused on the issues on which
    he based his decision does not mean he ignored parts of the appellant's
    account.  It is trite law that a judge does not have to  recount  every
    piece of evidence or make findings on periphery matters.

10. In reaching this conclusion I am  aware  that  Judge  Lodge  had  other
    reasons for rejecting the truthfulness of the appellant's account.  Her
    witnesses failed her, suggesting that her account was not truthful.



Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of  Judge  Lodge  and  I
uphold his decision.
The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"HH".



Signed                                       Date         12 December 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

