
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01372/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 February 2018                      |On 15 March 2018                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                             MR IMAM UDDIN RABBY
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           In person
For the Respondent:          Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1994.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 27 January 2017 to  refuse
    his claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim was that he had been an  active  member  of  the
    student wing of the Bangladesh National Party and that were he returned
    he would be at risk from the Awami League.

 3. The respondent did not believe his account.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 24 July 2017, Judge of the First-
    Tier Herbert OBE dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

 6. For the reasons he gave at paragraphs 29 to 40 of his decision  he  did
    not find the account credible on any material matter and concluded that
    he would not be at risk of persecution or serious harm were  he  to  be
    returned.   He  concluded,  further,  that   the   appellant's   'prior
    motivation is to prolong his stay in the  United  Kingdom  when  it  is
    clear that his original student leave had been curtailed'.

 7. As well as dismissing the appeal on refugee and Articles 2 and 3 (ECHR)
    grounds the judge also dismissed it under Article 8.

    Error of law hearing

 8. He sought permission to appeal.

 9. The challenges to the decision on asylum and Articles 2 and  3  grounds
    were found to  be  without  merit.   However,  the  judge  in  granting
    permission stated:

         "3.      ... However, it is apparent from the  decision  the  Judge
         did not consider Article 8 and that this is an  arguable  error  of
         law."


10. The matter came before me at the error of law hearing  on  21  December
    2017.  On that date the appellant was represented by Mr Khan of Counsel
    and the respondent by Mr Wilding.

11. Mr Wilding accepted that there had been no consideration of  Article  8
    but submitted that it was not  a  material  error.   In  light  of  his
    history, personal circumstances, and scant information on Article 8 the
    claim could not succeed.

12. I agreed, however, with Mr Khan that the complete failure  to  consider
    Article 8 amounted to a material error and set aside the  decision  but
    only to the extent that the appeal in respect of Article 8 be  reheard.
    As indicated, the decision of the First tier  tribunal  dismissing  the
    appeal on asylum grounds stands.

13. I indicated that I considered it  appropriate  that  the  case  proceed
    immediately to rehearing.

14. Mr Khan  sought  an  adjournment  for  time  to  prepare.   I  refused,
    considering that the Directions issued on 23 November 2017  gave  clear
    notice (at [4]) that in the event of the decision being set aside there
    was a presumption that the remaking of the decision would take place at
    the same hearing.  I noted that his client was present, that the issues
    were uncomplicated and that there had been adequate time to ensure  the
    preparation of the case.

15. I, nonetheless, offered to put back the case to later  in  the  day  to
    allow Mr Khan time with the appellant.  He declined.

16. Mr Khan said he wished to lead evidence  from  the  appellant  which  I
    permitted.

17. It  quickly  became  apparent  that  the  appellant  was  difficult  to
    understand.  Mr Khan said he needed an interpreter. There had  been  no
    request for an interpreter in advance.

18. Efforts were made to see if one could be got that  afternoon.   It  was
    not possible.

19. In the circumstance I found no option but to adjourn the hearing.

    Resumed hearing

20. When the case  resumed  on  6  February  2018  the  appellant  appeared
    unrepresented although he stated his solicitors were still  on  record.
    No bundle had been lodged by him or on his behalf.

21. I invited him to say anything he wished about his time in  the  UK  and
    why  he  did  not  think  it  appropriate  he  should  be  returned  to
    Bangladesh.

22. I declined to hear his claim that he would be at risk  because  of  his
    political views, reminding him that his asylum appeal was closed.

23. He said his student visa had been curtailed because  he  had  not  been
    doing any study.  He continued to stay  with  an  aunt  and  uncle  who
    support him.  He does voluntary work in a charity shop.

24. Asked about his circumstances in Bangladesh he said his mother, father,
    and a sister are there, but not in Dhaka, they  live  in  a  relative's
    house.

25. He said he would not be able to get work, there are no jobs.   He  said
    he was depressed but is not on medication.

26. There were no other witnesses.

27. In brief submissions Mr Nath said that the case came  nowhere  near  to
    satisfying Article 8.  There was no reason why as a fit and healthy man
    he could not get work in Bangladesh.  His family would support  him  if
    necessary.

28. The appellant had nothing further to add.

    Consideration

29. There is no issue of family life in this case.  The appellant does  not
    claim to have a wife, partner or children.

30. In considering this matter the  starting  point  for  consideration  of
    Article 8 is paragraph 276ADE 'Requirements to be met by  an  applicant
    for leave to remain on the grounds of private life'.

31. Paragraph 276ADE(1) states the requirements to be met by  an  applicant
    for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that
    at the date of application, the applicant:

         '...


         (vi)     is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
         UK for less than 20 years, ... but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.'


32. The evidence in this case about the appellant's private life is sparse.

33. The appellant has been in the UK a relatively  short  time,  some  five
    years.  He arrived on a student visa  in  2013  valid  until  2016,  he
    stopped studying resulting in his leave being curtailed in 2014.

34. His activities since then, according to his oral  evidence,  amount  to
    nothing more than living with an aunt and uncle  who  support  him  and
    doing some voluntary work in a charity shop.  On  these  matters  there
    was no supporting evidence, evidence which one would have thought would
    have been easily available and I am not inclined to believe it. I  note
    that no relatives or any other witnesses attended to give evidence  nor
    were there any statements.

35. Comments in the original grounds  of  appeal  that  he  has  acquainted
    himself with the British way of life and 'managed to establish a decent
    life here' add nothing.  Nor does a  claim  in  his  witness  statement
    (17.7.17) that he has  'embraced  the  culture,  social  life  and  the
    democratic value of this country'.  A claim that he has  'engaged  with
    various community activities' and attended regularly 'at  the  Cultural
    Centres' and that 'as an active part of the community (he has) a strong
    bond with the various societies in the  UK'  are  similarly  vague  and
    unsupported by easily available evidence. There is simply no  evidence,
    apart from his assertion, of ties or connections that he has  built  up
    in the UK. Again, I do not believe it.

36. On the very limited evidence I find that the appellant  has  not  shown
    that he has established  a  private  life  here  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8 (1).

37. However, if I am wrong in that finding and  his  removal  would  be  an
    interference with the exercise of his right to respect for his  private
    life and to have consequences of such gravity as potentially to  engage
    Article 8, such interference is in accordance with the law and is for a
    legitimate aim, and thus the question of proportionality  needs  to  be
    considered.

38. I agree with Mr Nath that the appellant does not come close to  showing
    that  he  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  if   returned   to
    Bangladesh.  He has been found not to  have  been  truthful  about  his
    claim to be at risk for his political views.  He would be returning  as
    a young man to the country where he has spent the vast majority of  his
    life.  There are  no  language  difficulties.   There  are  no  medical
    problems. There is no reason why he would not be able to  get  work  to
    support himself.  He has close family there who would no doubt be  able
    to accommodate him and give support as necessary.

39. He cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi).

40. Under section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    I  give  little  weight  to  any  private  life  established  when  his
    immigration status was precarious and when it was illegal.  He  is  not
    able to speak  English  (section  117B  (2))  and  is  not  financially
    independent (section 117B (3)).

41. I see no exceptional circumstances, that is to  say,  circumstances  in
    which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
    appellant such that refusal would  not  be  proportionate.  The  appeal
    cannot succeed under Article 8 outside the rules.

42. In summary, having considered the balancing  exercise  and  giving  due
    weight to the public interest in removal I  find  that  the  Article  8
    claim is nowhere near sufficiently strong to outweigh it.

43. The Article 8 appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal in respect of Article 8  ECHR  shows
material error of law.

That decision is set aside and remade as follows:-

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

The decision dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds stands.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Dated: 12 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
