
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA013952015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 14 June 2016                          |On : 15 June 2016              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Fielden, instructed by Syed Shaheen Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
("SSHD") against a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zahed  allowing
AR's appeal, under the immigration rules, against the respondent's  decision
to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and AR as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh  born  on  30  December  2000.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 20  October  2010  on  a  six  month  child
accompanied visa, aged 9 years, together with his  mother  and  sister.  His
mother left him in the UK with his uncle and returned to Bangladesh.  On  15
June 2011 he made a human rights claim (Articles 3 and 8) which was  refused
on 16 September 2011 and then reconsidered and again refused on  7  February
2014.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford  on  26  September  2014.  In  a  decision
promulgated on 26 November 2014, Judge Telford dismissed the appeal.  In  so
doing, he rejected the  appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Bangladesh due to a family dispute over inheritance, finding that there  was
no Article 3 risk. He also rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  lost
contact with his family in Bangladesh and found that since his close  family
remained in that country his removal would not be in breach of Article 8.


The appellant then made an asylum claim, on 10 April  2015.  His  claim  was
refused on 11 September 2015. He appealed  against  that  decision  and  his
appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  on  22  January  2016  and  was
dismissed in a decision promulgated on 18 April 2016.

In dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zahed
endorsed  Judge  Telford's  decision  in  respect  to  risk  on  return   to
Bangladesh and dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal. However  he  allowed
the appeal under the Immigration Rules, on the basis that the appellant  met
the requirements of paragraph 352ZC as an unaccompanied child.

Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on the  grounds  that  the
judge had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal on the ground that he did,  as
that was no longer a ground of appeal under the amended section  84  of  the
Nationality, Immigration  Asylum  Act  2002;  and  that,  in  light  of  the
previous findings made by Judge  Telford,  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
reasons for his finding that there were no adequate  reception  arrangements
for the appellant in Bangladesh.

Permission to appeal was granted on 10 May 2016.

At the hearing the parties were in agreement that Judge  Zahed  had  made  a
material error of law by allowing the appeal on the basis that  he  did,  as
he had no jurisdiction to do so under the amended provisions of section  84.
I therefore set aside his decision.


Ms Fielden submitted that the appellant would  be  pursuing  his  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds.  Whilst  Judge  Zahed  had  recorded  at  [12]  that  the
appellant's claim was not being  advanced  before  him  on  that  basis,  Mr
Wilding accepted that it would be  wrong,  given  the  appellant's  age,  to
prevent him from having an opportunity to put forward his Article  8  claim.
He considered that the appropriate course would be for the appellant's  case
to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing,  since  no
proper findings of fact had been made. As the parties were  in  agreement  I
therefore decided to remit the matter.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside  from  Judge  Telford  and
Judge Zahed.

     Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I uphold  that  order,
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269).








                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                               Date 15th June 2016
