


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/01559/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2017                  |On 2 October 2017             |
|Prepared on 22 August 2017         |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  and  first
           claimed asylum on 24 March 2010. That application  was  refused,
           and the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was  heard  and
           dismissed by decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dickson
           promulgated on 14 July 2010.
        2. The Appellant was not removed following  the  dismissal  of  his
           appeal. Instead he  made  further  representations  asserting  a
           protection claim. On 24 September 2015 the Respondent considered
           the representations made to  date  and  refused  his  protection
           claim. The Appellant's appeal against that most recent  decision
           was heard by First tier Tribunal Judge Hussain and dismissed  by
           way of decision promulgated on 11 January 2017.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal on 17 May 2017 by
           Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the  basis  it  was  arguable  the
           Judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the  credibility  of  the
           evidence supporting the claim that the Appellant had undergone a
           genuine conversion to the Mormon faith.
        4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice in response to that  grant
           of permission on 2 June 2017 in which she argued the  Judge  had
           made no error, and had given full reasons for his findings  upon
           the disputed issues of fact. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        5. When the appeal was called on for hearing before the First  tier
           Tribunal it was confirmed to Judge Hussain by his solicitor upon
           his behalf that the Appellant had abandoned all  of  the  claims
           made to, and dismissed as untrue by, Judge Dickson  [2].  As  Ms
           Brakaj ultimately accepted, there was no error on  the  part  of
           Judge Hussain in his taking that stance as his starting point in
           his assessment of the evidence. The Appellant had been found  by
           Judge Dickson after the application of the relevant low standard
           of proof in 2010 to have pursued a dishonest claim to asylum  to
           an appeal, and that was a necessary part of the context in which
           Judge Hussain had to assess the evidence relating to  his  claim
           to have undertaken a genuine conversion to the Mormon  faith  in
           2015.  It  necessarily  meant  that  the   Appellant's   general
           credibility as a witness of truth was damaged, and there was  no
           error in the Judge acknowledging and identifying that.  To  find
           otherwise (notwithstanding the terms of the grant of  permission
           to appeal) would lead to an absurd result.  The  Judge  did  not
           fall into the error that this automatically meant the  claim  to
           have converted was also untrue. When the decision is read  as  a
           whole it is plain that the Judge did no more than remind himself
           that the Appellant had been prepared to lie in the past.
        6. It is also plain from the decision that the  Judge  applied  the
           correct burden and standard of  proof  to  the  evidence  placed
           before him. That disposes of the complaints raised in  paragraph
           4 of the grounds.
        7. I note that the Judge did consider the absence from the  hearing
           of  the  three  Iranian  individuals  who  were  said  to   have
           introduced him to the Mormon faith, and accompanied him  at  his
           baptism and to Church services. His conclusion was that  in  the
           light of the evidence as a whole he could attach  little  or  no
           weight to  the  letters  of  support  they  were  said  to  have
           submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf.  The  grounds  raise  no
           challenge in relation to this, and Ms Brakaj accepted that  this
           was an assessment of weight that was open to the Judge.
        8. I also note that the Judge considered the Appellant's  interview
           in January 2016, and the very limited knowledge that he was then
           able to display in relation to his new faith notwithstanding his
           decision to abandon his original faith in favour of it, and  the
           amount of time spent at classes pre-baptism and in attending the
           Church post-baptism. It was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
           the interview records  a  sparsity  of  knowledge,  particularly
           given his claim to have held an interest in this new faith since
           February 2015. Again the grounds raise no challenge in  relation
           to this, and Ms Brakaj accepted that this was an  assessment  of
           weight that was open to the Judge.
        9. I also note that the Judge  did  take  into  account  the  posts
           relied upon the Appellant's facebook page which were relied upon
           as evidence of  his  conversion.  Again  the  grounds  raise  no
           suggestion that the Judge overlooked this.
       10. Ms Brakaj (their  author)  accepted  that  paragraph  5  of  the
           grounds added nothing to the complaints set out in  paragraph  6
           of the grounds. She accepted that the grounds made no  complaint
           to the effect that  the  Judge  had  incorrectly,  or  unfairly,
           summarised the oral evidence given to him  by  Bishop  Broadbent
           during the course of the appeal [17]. Nor was there a  complaint
           that  the  Judge  had  overlooked  Bishop  Broadbent's   written
           evidence in the form of the two letters of 6.11.6 and 9.8.15.
       11. In my judgment the Judge was perfectly entitled to find the oral
           evidence  of  Bishop  Broadbent  significant.  Bishop  Broadbent
           confirmed that the  Appellant  had  been  accepted  for  baptism
           without any interview, or other procedure to assess whether  his
           adoption of the Mormon faith was genuine. Moreover he  was  told
           that Bishop Broadbent had not attended the hearing of the appeal
           to give evidence  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  whether  his
           adoption of the faith  was  genuine,  but  simply  to  give  the
           factual information that the Appellant had  been  baptised  into
           the faith, and that  he  had  attended  the  Mormon  Church  for
           eighteen months. Beyond  that  he  could  not  say  whether  the
           Appellant's conversion was genuine. The Mormon  Church  accepted
           all converts  at  face  value,  and  admission  to  the  Aaronic
           priesthood was dependent simply upon baptism into the faith, and
           was no indication of the level of knowledge of the  faith  held,
           or whether that faith was genuinely held.
       12. In the circumstances the Appellant's challenge to  the  decision
           identifies no arguable error of law,  and  is  no  more  than  a
           disagreement with  the  assessment  of  the  weight  that  could
           properly be given to the evidence relied upon. The Judge did not
           make any material error of law in his decision  to  dismiss  the
           appeal, and that decision must stand.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  11
      January 2017 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 August 2017
