
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/01418/2016
                                                PA/01419/2016, PA/01420/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                                     UB
                                     FB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr G Lee, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hendry)  allowing  an   appeal   by   the
    respondents against the decisions made on 29 January 2016 refusing  the
    applicant's claims for asylum and giving notice of their  liability  to
    removal.  In this decision I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Secretary  of  State  as   the
    respondent and the applicants as the appellants.

Background

2.   The first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5  September  1982
    ("the appellant").  The second appellant is her son born on 5 May  2011
    and the third her daughter  born  on  9  May  2013,  both  citizens  of
    Pakistan and dependent on the appellant's application.

3.   The appellant was born in Faisalabad in Pakistan on  5  September  1982
    and is a Sunni Muslim.  She lived with her parents and  three  brothers
    and two sisters.  On 9 February 2008 she married her  maternal  cousin.
    He had travelled to the UK in 2004 with a Tier 1 (General) visa due  to
    expire in July 2015.  He returned to Pakistan for the wedding and  then
    came back to the UK.  In February 2009 the appellant applied for a visa
    as the spouse of a settled person but this was refused.  On 23 December
    2010 she applied as a Tier 1 Dependant and a  visa  was  granted  valid
    until 24 January 2013, subsequently being extended  to  18  July  2015.
    She entered the UK on 1 June  2010  using  her  own  passport.   On  19
    November 2015 she applied for asylum.

4.   The basis of her claim can briefly be summarised as  follows.   When  a
    child she was engaged to her  paternal  cousin,  GA,  by  an  agreement
    reached between her father and his sister, GA's mother.  The family was
    conservative and girls and boys were not allowed to meet or form  their
    own relationships.  The appellant described GA as a  very  conservative
    and severe man who was not well-educated and his religious  views  were
    strict.  In 1997 she formed a friendship with MB, her maternal  cousin,
    finding him very different from GA.  Their relationship  became  closer
    but was kept secret from their family.  MB finished his degree and went
    to live in Lahore and they kept in touch by telephone.  By  this  stage
    the appellant could not contemplate marrying anyone else.  MB  went  to
    the UK to undertake further studies in 2004 but they kept in  touch  by
    telephone.

5.   There came a stage when her mother found  out  that  she  and  MB  were
    speaking on the phone and the appellant told her that she did not  like
    the man she was engaged to.  Her mother was unhappy to start  with  but
    she was insistent and persuaded her mother to support her.  Her  mother
    was scared of her father and her sons but consulted her eldest son  who
    was angry and upset at first but, when she was adamant she  would  only
    marry MB, he agreed to the  marriage  reluctantly.   MB  spoke  to  his
    parents and it was agreed that they should marry.  His family was happy
    about the marriage, supported her  and  arranged  it  but  neither  the
    appellant's father nor her other two brothers were aware  that  it  was
    taking place.  MB returned from the UK for  the  marriage  in  February
    2008.

6.   The appellant continued living at home  after  the  wedding  for  about
    twelve to eighteen months and was able to join her husband in the UK on
    1 June 2010 after she obtained the appropriate visa.   She  had  misled
    her father and brothers by telling them that she was going to stay with
    her aunt but in fact she travelled to the UK.  Subsequently, her father
    starting asking questions about her and her mother had to explain  what
    had happened.  There was then trouble from her father who threatened to
    kill her because she had deceived him and her two younger brothers  and
    her father saw her as  having  brought  humiliation  on  them  and  the
    family.  Her cousin GA phoned and  threatened  to  kill  her.  He  also
    visited her family home  making  threats  directed  at  her.   Her  two
    brothers were unable to accept that she had  married  through  her  own
    choice.  Her mother died in October 2012.  The appellant described  her
    as her only real support in the actions  she  had  taken  and  that  it
    seemed likely that the trouble  caused  by  her  marrying  outside  the
    family choice for her had contributed to her mother's death.

7.   Before her father died in August 2015 the appellant had spoken  to  him
    on the phone and he had warned her not to return.  After his death  her
    brothers called her to say that she was to blame for what had  happened
    and if she returned to Pakistan they would kill her.  She had initially
    been supported by her eldest brother but he  was  upset  following  the
    death of their father and now she had no protection from him.   It  was
    her  case  that  honour  killings  were  common  in  Pakistan  and  the
    authorities had failed to take effective measures to end this practice.
     She has large extended family in  Pakistan  but  would  have  no  safe
    family home there and would be forced to live in hiding if returned and
    would be destitute.  Her husband had completed ten years in the  United
    Kingdom by 2014 and had applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  but
    because of a problem about payments to HMRC, his application  had  been
    refused and an appeal dismissed.

8.   The respondent accepted that the appellant's identity  and  nationality
    were as claimed but for the reasons set out in the decision  letter  of
    29 January 2016 she was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
    threatened as a result of marrying her husband.  In the alternative, it
    was the  respondent's  view  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection on return to Pakistan and if  there  was  any  risk  in  the
    appellant's home area, she could relocate internally and it  would  not
    be unduly harsh to expect her to do so.  The respondent also considered
    the application  under  article  8  but  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellants could meet the requirements of the rules or that there  were
    exceptional circumstances justifying a decision outside the rules.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

9.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  and  her
    husband gave oral evidence and submitted documentary evidence including
    news reports  about  recent  honour  crimes  in  Pakistan.   They  also
    submitted medical evidence about their  son  who  had  been  undergoing
    medical treatment after suffering a brain haemorrhage.

10.  The judge accepted that the centrepiece of the appellant's account  was
    credible and that she was afraid of returning to Pakistan  because  she
    feared persecution or potentially being killed her brothers or GA.  She
    also feared for the  safety  of  her  children.   The  judge  found  it
    significant that she had not, despite technically being able to do  so,
    attended the funeral of either parent and accepted that she was clearly
    distressed not having done so but had felt that she could not return to
    Pakistan and that she had been told by her father on several  occasions
    not to do so.

11.  The judge said he had to determine whether  the  appellant's  fear  was
    well-founded.  He described the background evidence  as  comprehensive.
    The  Home  Office's  own  Country  Information  and   Guidance   quoted
    extensively from reports  which  demonstrated  that  honour  crimes  in
    Pakistan were relatively common and  the  reported  incidents  did  not
    present a true picture of the problem.  The reports  also  demonstrated
    that the authorities were unlikely to support people subject to  honour
    crimes, arrests were not universal and  the  penalties,  if  any,  were
    likely to be light.  Such actions were more likely to  occur  in  rural
    areas but urban areas were also affected and  there  were  examples  of
    such crimes in  urban  areas  such  a  Lahore,  a  city  not  far  from
    Faisalabad [99].  On the issue of relocation the judge referred to  the
    guidance in KA and Others (Domestic Violence - Risk on Return) Pakistan
    CG [2010] UKUT 216 that each case had  to  be  considered  on  its  own
    facts, noting that that case related to domestic violence not  directly
    to honour killings.

12.  The judge found that the background evidence indicated  that  it  might
    be possible for a person to relocate where a fear of persecution was at
    the hands of non-state  actors.   The  appellant  considered  that  her
    brothers and GA would track her down even in another area of  Pakistan.
    The judge said there was no clear evidence to this effect  but  neither
    she nor her husband had other relatives elsewhere in Pakistan and their
    only family support was in the area around Faisalabad.   The  appellant
    feared that they would track  her  down  because  of  the  support  the
    authorities gave to men trying to find a woman in  her  position.   She
    and her husband had  no  financial  resources  and  some  vulnerability
    because of the second appellant's  medical  circumstances.   The  judge
    found, taking account of the standard of proof in such cases,  that  in
    all the circumstances the appellants were unable to relocate internally
    in Pakistan.  For these reasons the appeal was allowed on  both  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

13.  The respondent's grounds raise three issues.   Firstly,  it  is  argued
    that despite referring to the relevant passage  in  KA  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account headnote 4 that whether a woman  on  return
    faced a real risk of an honour killing would depend on  the  particular
    circumstances; however, in  general  such  a  risk  was  likely  to  be
    confined to tribal areas such as the Northwest  Frontier  Province  and
    was unlikely to impact on married women.  Secondly, it argued that  the
    judge erred in his consideration of sufficiency of protection as  there
    was a general sufficiency of protection in  Pakistan  according  to  AW
    (sufficiency of protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31.   It  was  not
    disputed that single women and victims of domestic violence may not  be
    able to obtain adequate protection from the authorities but  the  judge
    had not adequately explained why the appellant, married with  children,
    could not obtain protection.  Thirdly, the grounds argue that there was
    a lack of adequate reasons relating to the finding on internal  flight,
    the grounds  commenting  that  it  was  somewhat  surprising  that  the
    appellant and her husband could not relocate.  The test in relation  to
    internal relocation was whether it would be unduly harsh. It might well
    be the case that the family would struggle without family  support  and
    immediate employment but the appellant and her husband were resourceful
    and educated and could potentially receive  financial  assistance  from
    the husband's family.

14.  Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that adequate reasons had not been given  to
    explain why the appellant  and  her  family  which  would  include  her
    husband could not relocate and why the fact that neither the  appellant
    nor her husband had family  members  other  than  in  Faisalabad  would
    prevent them from building a life  elsewhere  when  they  were  clearly
    educated.  So far as the other grounds were concerned, it was  arguable
    that the judge had not provided adequate reasons why the appellant  was
    at risk or why, as a married woman, she  could  not  obtain  protection
    from the authorities.  It was also arguable that it was not clear which
    part of the background evidence led the judge to go behind the guidance
    in KA and that it was therefore just arguable that adequate reasons had
    not been given for the finding that the appellant would be the  subject
    of an honour killing and it was also not clear what the judge's reasons
    were for finding that  the  appellant  and  her  family  would  not  be
    afforded sufficiency of protection.

15.  Ms Ahmed adopted the grounds arguing that, when  considering  the  risk
    of an honour killing, the judge had failed to take  into  account  that
    the appellant was married and had a  male  protector  in  her  husband.
    Similarly, in respect of sufficiency  of  protection  she  had  a  male
    partner and it was difficult to see  how  the  judge  had  reached  his
    decision.  She submitted that  he  had  made  very  limited  and  vague
    findings of fact.  There had been no adequate evidence to show that her
    brothers could track her down.  The appellant had a male  guardian  and
    this was a significant consideration when considering whether she would
    be at risk.  So far as internal relocation was concerned, the judge had
    failed to give adequate reasons for his decision.

16.  Mr Lee submitted that the judge's decision  was  sustainable.   It  was
    clear that the decisions referred to were giving general guidance.   An
    assessment of risk was dependent on  the  particular  circumstances  of
    each applicant and the appellant's circumstances in this case  did  not
    fit directly with the position in either KA or AW.  The judge had found
    that the appellant was at risk from her brothers and her cousin GA.  He
    had posed the correct questions and reached answers  properly  open  to
    him.  His findings on the nature of the risk and the lack of protection
    could not be regarded as irrational.  When considering the question  of
    internal flight the judge had listed a number of  relevant  matters  in
    [101] and the clear inference was that he had found that relocation was
    not possible but the facts were such that it  would  in  any  event  be
    unduly harsh.

Assessment of the Issues

17.  I must assess whether the judge erred in law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  There  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    acceptance that the core or centrepiece of the appellant's evidence was
    credible or to the finding that the appellant was afraid  of  returning
    to Pakistan because she feared serious harm from and potentially  being
    killed by either her two younger brothers or GA.  The  first  challenge
    to the judge's decision is that he erred in his assessment  of  whether
    there was a real risk of an honour killing and reliance  is  placed  on
    the country guidance summarised in headnote (iv) in KA.  The judge  was
    clearly aware of that decision as he referred to it at [88] and in  his
    conclusions at [100].  Having found that there was subjective fear, the
    judge properly identified that he had to determine whether the fear was
    well-founded.

18.  At [99] he referred to the comprehensive background evidence  which  he
    had summarised at [75] - [86].  At [80] he referred to a Reuters Report
    of 17 February 2014 that around a 1,000 cases of  honour  killings  per
    year were tracked from media reports by the Aurat  Foundation  although
    the true figure was thought to be much higher.  It  was  also  reported
    that many killings were thought to be disguised  as  accidents  or  not
    reported at all.  At [81] the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights  in
    May 2014 said that 869 women were murdered in honour killings  in  2013
    but again the real figure was thought to be much higher and that it was
    unacceptable that perpetrators were rarely prosecuted.

19.  I am satisfied that in  the  light  of  that  evidence  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach a finding that in the particular circumstances of the
    appellant her fears were well-founded.  Paragraph (iv) of the  headnote
    in KA relied  in  the  grounds  itself  makes  clear  that  whether  an
    applicant faces a risk of honour killing will depend on the  particular
    circumstances and that "in general" such risk is likely to be  confined
    to tribal areas and is "unlikely" to  impact  on  married  women.   The
    guidance is necessarily a generalisation.  It  was  for  the  judge  to
    decide on  the  evidence  before  him  whether  the  appellant  in  her
    particular circumstances had such a well-founded fear.  Having cited in
    his decision the passage relied on by the respondent in the grounds,  I
    am satisfied that the judge had that guidance in mind when reaching his
    decision and that the finding on whether the appellant's fear was  well
    founded was properly open to him for the reasons he gave.

20.   The  second  argument  is  the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment   of
    sufficiency  of  protection  and  in  particular  by   not   adequately
    explaining why the appellant as a married woman with children could not
    obtain protection.  The judge dealt  with  this  issue  succinctly  but
    adequately  in  [99]  when  he  said  that   the   background   reports
    demonstrated that the  authorities  were  unlikely  to  support  people
    subject to honour crimes, that  arrests  were  not  universal  and  the
    penalties if any were likely to be light.  He also said that,  although
    such actions were more likely to occur in rural areas, urban areas were
    also affected and there were examples of crimes in urban areas such  as
    Lahore, a city not far from Faisalabad.  The judge's conclusion must be
    read in the context of the evidence as a whole and  in  particular  the
    background evidence.

21.  The respondent relies on AW but this is not  a  country  guidance  case
    and the italicised headnote sets out the general principles  which  are
    not in dispute but in the context of the  present  appeal  it  must  be
    noted that the documents relied on by that Tribunal cover the period 16
    April 1999 to 28 July 2009 whereas the judge in this appeal had  up-to-
    date background evidence before him. I am satisfied that it was open to
    him to find that so far as the appellant was concerned there would  not
    be a sufficiency of  protection.   In  [82]  he  referred  to  guidance
    addressing the issue of love marriages that arranged marriages were the
    traditional norm across Pakistan and love marriages which  transgressed
    family expectations could result in significant  pressure  and  violent
    reprisals which could affect men as well as women.   The  fact  that  a
    woman is married does not without more indicate that a husband is  able
    to protect his wife when the authorities are unable or unwilling to  do
    so.

22.  The third  ground  challenges  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    internal relocation making the point that there was no  clear  evidence
    that the appellant's brothers could track her down in  other  parts  of
    the country and that the test was one  of  undue  harshness.   Internal
    relocation raises two issues: firstly, whether there is an  area  where
    the appellants can relocate in safety and secondly, whether it would be
    unduly harsh to expect them to do so.   An  initial  reading  of  [101]
    might suggest that the judge has conflated these issues but  I  am  not
    satisfied that this is the case.

23.  The judge accepted that the appellant would be at real  risk  from  her
    brothers and GA and the appellant feared that she would spend her  life
    in hiding if returned to Pakistan and would be unable  to  live  openly
    with her children.  He said that there was no clear  evidence  to  this
    effect but on the other hand  neither  she  nor  her  husband  had  any
    relatives elsewhere in Pakistan and their only family  support  was  in
    the area around Faisalabad.  He also accepted that  the  appellant  and
    her husband had no financial resources and some  vulnerability  because
    of the second appellant's medical circumstances (referred  to  in  more
    detail at [32]).  I am satisfied that this is a case where the evidence
    was finely balanced on the issue of the safety of relocation  elsewhere
    in Pakistan but that the judge, particularly bearing in  mind  that  he
    was dealing with the safety not only of the appellant but of two  young
    children, rightly gave the appellants the benefit of the lower standard
    of proof and was entitled to find that they  were  unable  to  relocate
    internally and, in these circumstances, he did not need  to  go  on  to
    consider the issue of undue harshness.

24.  In summary, I am satisfied that when the decision is read  as  a  whole
    the judge reached findings and conclusions properly open to him on  the
    evidence.  The grounds do not satisfy me that the judge erred in law.



Decision

25.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed   H J E Latter  Dated: 12 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
