
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01714/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 August 2016                      |On 26 August 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                Enkelejda [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Hawkin, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely in March 2012 and claimed asylum the following  month  at
    Croydon.  During the period of time she was  illegally  in  the  United
    Kingdom she conceived a child by a British citizen and  the  child  was
    born on [ ] 2015.   The  appellant  not  only  pursued  her  claim  for
    international protection but also she relied on  Article  8  claims  in
    relation to her British citizen child.

 2. Her applications were refused by the respondent and she appealed and in
    a decision promulgated on 17 February  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Geraint Jones QC dismissed the appellant's appeals on  asylum,
    Humanitarian Protection and human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge but subsequently a  renewed  application
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 11
    July 2016.  The reasons he gave for so granting were:-

         "1.  I give permission on each ground.  It is  reasonably  arguable
             that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have proper  regard
             to the rights of the infant British citizen identified in  the
             papers."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.  It is helpful to set out some of
    the findings of the judge.  At paragraphs 19 to 25 of his  decision  he
    states:-

         "19. I do not believe the appellant's account, even bearing in mind
             the extremely modest standard of proof  applicable  in  asylum
             appeals.  As a witness she was wholly unconvincing,  at  times
             evasive (for example as to why  she  had  not  claimed  asylum
             earlier) and generally implausible.   Her  entire  case  about
             fearing her  family  in  Albania  is  based  upon  an  alleged
             subjective fear and is not based  upon  any  evidence  of  any
             alleged  threat  towards  her.   The  emphasis  of  her   case
             decisively shifted from a fear of her  ex-partner  during  the
             substantive interview to primarily a fear of her own family in
             her witness statement.

         20.  This is a case where section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
             (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 is plainly  relevant.   That
             provision does not exist in a vacuum and has to be  considered
             in the context of the whole of the relevant evidence.

         21.  I am in no doubt that this appellant is as manipulative as she
             is  dishonest.   I  do  not  believe  that  she  was  in   any
             relationship at the behest of her  religious  Muslim  parents,
             outside wedlock, whilst resident in Albania.  That is entirely
             implausible.  The appellant was unable to give any significant
             detail about alleged quasi domestic violence  save  to  allege
             that it occurred either once a week or once every  other  week
             over a period of six months.  If the appellant  had  genuinely
             been in need of international protection there  is  no  reason
             whatsoever why she could/should not  have  claimed  asylum  in
             Germany or France before taking the trouble and risk of making
             clandestine entry into the United Kingdom.  I find as  a  fact
             that she was intent upon coming to the United Kingdom.

         22.  I find that once the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  she
             quite deliberately kept  her  head  below  the  radar  of  the
             immigration authorities.  When the appellant says that she did
             not claim asylum at an earlier  juncture  because  her  sister
             (who apparently had herself claimed asylum) did not  have  any
             chance to advise her to do so, I reject  that  evidence  as  a
             blatant lie.  It is beyond  all  possible  credence  that  two
             sisters, one of whom has  previously  made  an  asylum  claim,
             would not discuss the appellant's lack of status in the United
             Kingdom and the manner in which she might go  about  obtaining
             status entitling her to remain  in  this  country.   They  had
             three  years  in  which  to  do  so.   I  reject  the   absurd
             proposition  that  during  a  period  of   three   years   the
             appellant's sister had no opportunity to discuss such  matters
             with her sister because she has a problem child.

         23.   I  find  as  a  fact  that  this  appellant  has  manipulated
             circumstances  with  a  view  to  turning  them  to  her   own
             advantage.  She has manipulated them  by  waiting  until  such
             time as she has found a person with British  citizenship  with
             whom to bear a child so that she can advance her case  on  the
             basis that she has a British citizen child  in  this  country.
             Indeed, this whole appeal was eventually argued on  the  basis
             that because the appellant has such a child she should not and
             cannot be required to depart.

         24.  I accept and find as a fact that the appellant has  a  British
             citizen child.  That proposition is supported by  the  results
             of the DNA testing that  took  place  -  pages  17/22  of  the
             appellant's bundle.

         25.   I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  is  in   a
             relationship with Mr [K], but I am satisfied that she  entered
             into that relationship with the cynical intention of having  a
             child by a British citizen, so as to enhance her prospects  of
             remaining in this country."

 5. At paragraph 28 the judge found:-

         "28. I find that the appellant left Albania of her own volition and
             chose to come  to  this  country  clandestinely  for  her  own
             social/economic purposes and chose to remain below  the  radar
             of the immigration authorities until such time as  she  had  a
             British citizen child who she now cynically seeks to deploy to
             better her immigration position."

 6. In his submissions to me Mr Hawkin particularly drew  my  attention  to
    paragraphs 36 and 38 of the judge's decision which state:-

         "36. Mr Nicholson makes the point that neither Kosovo  nor  Albania
             are in the EEC.  It is easy to be far too precious about being
             in the EEC.  It is true that the European Court has  suggested
             that care should be taken before a decision is made that would
             result in a EEC citizen having to reside in a country  outside
             the EEC, albeit that it has not given any  persuasive  reasons
             for that view.  There would be no basis for suggesting that it
             would be unreasonable to expect an infant child to reside with
             its parents in, let us say, Australia or Canada simply because
             each of those countries is outside the  EEC.   Equally,  there
             may well be circumstances in which it would be unreasonable to
             expect an infant child to reside with its parents in,  let  us
             say, Greece or Romania.  One size does not fit all.

         ...

         38.  In  my  judgement  there  would  be  nothing  unreasonable  in
             expecting an infant whose world revolves around its parents to
             depart the United Kingdom  to  reside  in  the  bosom  of  his
             family, even if such residence will be within a family unit in
             Albania or Kosovo.  There was no suggestion  in  the  evidence
             that Mr [K] would not accompany his partner and child  if  the
             appellant  has  to  depart.   No   particular   factors   were
             highlighted to me  as  rendering  it  unreasonable  that  that
             result should flow.  Instead, a much  broader  submission  was
             made to the effect that it is simply unreasonable to expect  a
             British citizen to reside in a country other than  the  United
             Kingdom or, at the very least, a country that  is  not  within
             the European Union.  In my judgement, that is far too broad  a
             proposition and means adopting a rather precious view  of  the
             virtues of life in the United Kingdom or E.U."

 7. In making his submissions Mr Hawkin specifically relied on the  renewed
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal acknowledging that  he  pursued
    the issue in relation to the British citizen child alone and the  error
    made by the judge in relation thereto.  He particularly emphasised  the
    failure of the respondent  to  follow  her  own  guidance  "Immigration
    Directorate Instruction Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section  1.0b
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year  Routes"
    where the respondent indicates that "absent criminality it would always
    be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave  the  United
    Kingdom if the child would have to go and live in a country  which  was
    not part of the European Union."

 8. It was argued that this issue was not confronted by the judge and  that
    on the proper application of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  of  Section
    117B(6) the appellant was entitled to succeed in her appeal.

 9. Somewhat unusually post the hearing Mr Hawkin wrote to  me  seeking  to
    clarify the appellant's position regarding whether or not there  should
    be a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal or a rehearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He states that the appellant's  primary  submission  is
    that her appeal should be allowed outright, as her case falls  squarely
    within the clear wording  of  paragraph  11.2.3  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy as referred to in the  grounds  of  appeal,  but  if  it
    considered that there needs to be further evidence and submissions then
    the appellant submits that there should be  a  full  rehearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This letter has been copied  to  the  respondent,
    but in light of the decision that I have come to regarding this  appeal
    there is no need  for  me  to  receive  further  submissions  from  the
    respondent.

10. Mr Kotas argued that the failure of the judge to make reference to this
    guidance is immaterial.  The issue is one of reasonableness.  The judge
    has properly reasoned his findings and has not erred.

11. The first thing to say is that  although  Mr  Hawkin  himself  did  not
    pursue the  ground  concerning  the  judge's  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the protection claim, I have nonetheless considered it  and
    find that he was entitled to come to the decision that he  did  on  the
    evidence that was before him and there is no flaw in those findings and
    they are not unsafe as is submitted.

12.  Whilst  the  judge  may  not  have  made  specific  reference  to  the
    abovementioned policy of the respondent it nonetheless was open to  him
    on the evidence to come to the conclusions that he did.  In so doing he
    has outlined his analysis of the position at paragraphs 36  and  38  of
    his decision.  He has also referred himself to the  relevant  case  law
    and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    He has come to a conclusion that was open to be made on the totality of
    the evidence and in  particular,  at  paragraph  34  of  his  decision,
    recognises the age of the child (1 year) and the fact that  his  "world
    is his parents".  It is clear that the focus of this  child's  life  is
    upon his family and as such the judge was entitled to conclude that any
    disruption is far less serious than were the child to  be  older.   The
    judge has fully explored the "reasonableness  test"  and  has  subsumed
    within his Article 8 analysis the position of  a  1  year  old  British
    citizen child.  The  respondent's  policy  referred  to  above  is  not
    determinative of the appeal.  The judge has  concluded  that  the  best
    interests of this child is a primary  consideration  which  has  to  be
    taken into account.  It is clear from the  decision  that  this  was  a
    highly relevant factor when the judge applied the reasonableness  test.
    The judge has focused on the child whilst embracing all aspects of  the
    public interest.  This includes the immigration history and conduct  of
    the appellant (the child's mother).

13. The judge has acknowledged that one of  the  child's  parents  has  the
    right to remain in the United Kingdom and it is that background against
    which he has carried out his assessment.  The nub  of  the  appeal  was
    whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant's child to follow her
    to her country of origin given she has no right to remain in the United
    Kingdom.

14. The judge has given cogent and sustainable  reasons  which  were  fully
    open to him on the evidence for coming to his conclusion in relation to
    the child.  There was ample justification for the  adverse  credibility
    findings referred to earlier in this decision  and  there  has  clearly
    been no  material  error  of  law.   Ultimately,  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal are no more than a disagreement with  the  judge's
    findings.

15. In the context of this particular appeal it is difficult to see how the
    judge could have come to any other decision than the one that he did.

16. There is here no arguable error of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


