
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01193/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2019                    |On 4 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                            Mohamed Daud Mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on 30  April  2019  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  of  24  January
    2019.  Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Welsh on  13
    June 2019, on the basis that there  were  no  arguable  errors  in  the
    credibility findings. However, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted
    permission on 5 July 2019 on the brief basis it is  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its  assessment  of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant  as  an  international  athlete  and,  in  its  approach   to
    credibility as averred.

 2. It is not in dispute in this  case  that  the  appellant  has  been  an
    international athlete from Mogadishu and a national of Somalia, with  a
    date of birth of 1 March 1996.  He came to the UK in  August  2017  and
    claimed asylum the following month.

 3. It is accepted that he was an athlete and flag-bearer as  part  of  the
    Somali Olympic team at the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.   His  case
    is that as a result of that involvement on return to Somalia in  August
    2016 he began to receive some threats from Al-Shabaab.  In  due  course
    he left Somalia to compete  in  the  World  Athletics  Championship  in
    London in August 2017, again representing Somalia.  His  case  is  that
    his family was attacked whilst he was in London as a result of his role
    and profile.

 4. There are two essential grounds of appeal.  The first  is  that  on  an
    assessment of the appellant's profile he ought, prima facie,  be  found
    to be a person at risk on return applying the guidance in the  decision
    of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC).
    The  second  ground  is  that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  the
    credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  first
    ground has more substance than the second ground and  for  the  reasons
    set out below I find that the first ground  is  made  out  and  in  the
    circumstances I do not need to address the second ground in any detail.



 5. I have already described the appellant's role in competing in athletics
    on the world stage for his country, Somalia.  Reliance is placed on MOJ
    by both sides and I have been referred to the second paragraph  of  the
    head note which says that  generally,  a  person  who  is  an  ordinary
    civilian, i.e. not associated with the security forces, any  aspect  of
    Government or official administration,  or  any  NGO  or  international
    organisation, on returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will
    face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as  to  require
    protection under Article  3  or  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  In particular, he will  not  be  at  real  risk  simply  on
    account of having lived in a European location for a period of time  of
    being viewed with suspicion either by the  authorities  as  a  possible
    supporter of Al-Shabaab or by  Al-Shabaab  itself  as  an  apostate  or
    someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised  by  living  in  a
    Western country.

 6. The respondent's case and the judge's findings were that the  appellant
    does not belong to any of the groups identified as being  at  risk  per
    se.  Clan membership is not an  issue  in  this  case.   The  issue  is
    whether, first and foremost, the appellant is a person at risk  because
    of his profile.  Reliance is placed in the grounds on an  extract  from
    the respondent's country guidance, Country Policy and Information Note:
    Somalia (South and Central): Fear of Al-Shabaab which states at 2.2.5:-

         "Al Shabaab has targeted persons and/or  institutions  representing
         (or perceived to be supporting) the international community and the
         Somalia government,  including  members  of  the  security  forces,
         parliamentarians and government officials, election monitors,  clan
         leaders who support  the  government,  state  employees  and  those
         believed to be spying  for  the  government  including  Al  Shabaab
         defectors. Such people are regarded as  legitimate  targets  by  Al
         Shabaab".

 7. There is no real dispute between  the  two  sides  that  the  "ordinary
    citizen" will not face generally a risk, and  of  course  all  that  is
    prefaced by the  word  "generally."   Mr  Lindsay  suggests  that  with
    reference to MOJ the categories of persons who are "ordinary  citizens"
    is a closed category.  That does not  appear  to  be  the  respondent's
    position in its Country Policy and Information Note which makes no such
    suggestion and Mr Lindsay did not say that the categories of person who
    might be at risk is a closed category. The  information  considered  in
    MOJ  and  even  the  current  information  in  the  CPIN  Security  and
    humanitarian situation, Version 4 issued in September of 2018, is  that
    Al-Shabaab continues to target specific groups.  It is  recorded  there
    that Al-Shabaab have increased these attacks and its activity  in  2017
    and again further in 2018, but  it  is  clear  that  they  regard  only
    certain persons  as  legitimate  targets,  so-called  specific  groups,
    persons  either  representing  or  perceived  to  be   supporting   the
    international community and the Somalia Government.

 8. I am satisfied that the appellant's role as  an  international  athlete
    representing his country on a number of occasions,  at  least  the  Rio
    Olympics in 2016 and  at  the  World  Athletics  Championships  at  the
    Olympic Park in August 2017 can properly be described as a  person  who
    would be perceived as supporting the Somalia Government. He represented
    his Government, he  was  called  to  the  team  on  both  occasions  to
    represent Somalia, and indeed he was carrying the Somalia flag.  I fail
    to see what clearer indication there could be of a  person  identifying
    himself with the Somalia Government than parading before the  world  in
    the 2016 Olympics waving the Somalia state flag,  and  despite  alleged
    threats made to him he continued to agree to  represent  Somalia  in  a
    similar way by coming to the UK  to  compete  in  the  World  Athletics
    Championship the following year, running for his country;  representing
    his country.

 9. I accept that he is not a member of the Government, he is not a  member
    of the security forces, he is  not  a  Parliamentarian  and  is  not  a
    Government official. However, I am satisfied that the groups of persons
    who are at risk is not a closed group Mr Lindsay  and  the  appellant's
    situation is something perhaps unique (but it cannot be unique  because
    there is at least one other person who has been granted refugee  status
    as an international sports person from Somalia).

10. I also have to bear in mind the lower standard of proof  that  applies:
    the real risk.  The appellant does not have to prove beyond  reasonable
    doubt that he would be at risk from Al-Shabaab on return, he  only  has
    to demonstrate a real risk of doing  so  and  I  am  satisfied  he  has
    demonstrated that there is such  a  risk  by  reason  of  his  profile,
    whether or not he was specifically threatened, and I am satisfied  that
    risk cannot be mitigated  by  a  sufficiency  of  protection,  even  in
    Mogadishu, or by relocation. It is  also  relevant  to  note  that  his
    family allegedly left Somalia, so on  return  he  would  not  have  any
    nuclear family to turn to for support in establishing himself, and even
    in MOJ the court indicated that  there  would  need  to  be  a  careful
    assessment of all of a person's personal circumstances on return.

11. The appellant's case was supported by his coach, Mr Dix and by a fellow
    athlete who had been granted refugee status from Somalia in the UK, and
    it seems unfair to me that the judge rejected the  letter  from  Zamzam
    Farah in a dismissive way, suggesting it had been written to order.  It
    may have limited utility, but it was relevant and  similarly  Mr  Dix's
    evidence indicating the appellant's credibility and genuine  commitment
    to athletics is also relevant.

12. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the making of the decision
    involved an error of law and I am satisfied that first of all  that  it
    was at the very least arguable  that  the  appellant,  because  of  his
    profile would be at risk  per  se,  whether  or  not  he  had  received
    threats, and on an assessment of the evidence and the  submissions  put
    to me today I am satisfied that the lower standard  of  proof  on  that
    issue.  The appellant has demonstrated, I am satisfied, that he faces a
    stand-alone risk because of  his  profile,  past  and  present,  as  an
    international athlete.

13. In the circumstances  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  address  the
    credibility findings generally.  I  have  already  indicated  that  the
    strength of those arguments and the various submissions in the grounds,
    going between C and H in paragraph 4 of the grounds are of more limited
    weight.  However, in passing it does seem to me that  the  judge  dealt
    rather  dismissively  with  the  evidence  supporting  the  appellant's
    credibility and, in particular, I am satisfied, having  looked  at  the
    interview record, that the judge was  in  error  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant answered "I don't know" throughout his  interview.   Even  Mr
    Lindsay does not pursue that, whilst pointing out that there  are  some
    answers saying "I  don't  know".   I  am  satisfied  that  on  an  fair
    assessment of that interview the  appellant  said  "I  don't  know"  in
    appropriate places and gave explanations when asked to do so.   In  the
    circumstances if I had to go as  far  as  looking  at  the  credibility
    findings I am satisfied that those also would be flawed.

14. In all the circumstances I reach  the  conclusion  that  this  decision
    cannot stand and must be remade by allowing the appeal on the basis  of
    the appellant's profile as an international  athlete  from  Somali  who
    would be at risk on return because of that profile, which, in my  view,
    is akin to being a government supporter or official.

Decision

15. For the reasons set out above I find the making of the decision in  the
    First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on  a  point  of
    law, such that the decision should be set aside.

                    I set aside that decision and remake  that  decision  in
                    the  appeal  by  allowing  it  on  the  basis  that  the
                    appellant  is  by  reason   of   his   profile   as   an
                    international athlete at risk per se from Al-Shabaab  on
                    return to Somalia.

                    No anonymity direction is made.
                  Signed   [pic]
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 August 2019

To the Respondent
Fee Award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.
                  Signed   [pic]
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 August 2019
