
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01463/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     jI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadeeshan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1975.  He has a wife
         and three children.  The children were born in 2012, 2014 and  2016
         respectively.  The wife and children are all citizens  of  Pakistan
         as well.

      2. I have made an anonymity direction because this decision refers  to
         the circumstances of three children.


      3. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT'), dismissing his appeal that sent on 12 March 2018.

Background

      4. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  ('UK')  on  24  March
         2006, having been granted a visit visa but overstayed.  He  made  a
         further application for leave  to  remain  in  2011  but  that  was
         rejected.

      5. The appellant's wife entered the UK on 6 January 2012  having  been
         granted entry clearance as a student.  They  began  a  relationship
         very quickly and married on 17 July 2012.  They gave birth to their
         first child on 12  October  2012  some  three  months  after  their
         marriage.  On 3 October 2013 the respondent  curtailed  the  wife's
         visa.  On 18 August 2014 the appellant's wife claimed  asylum  with
         the  appellant  and  the  eldest  child  as  her  dependants.   The
         appellant's wife gave birth to a second  child  in  November  2014.
         The respondent rejected the appellant's wife's asylum claim and the
         FtT dismissed her appeal in a decision dated 9 July 2015.

      6. The appellant made his own application for asylum  relying  upon  a
         very similar claim to that provided by the wife.  In summary,  they
         claim  they  entered  a  'love  marriage'  and  face   the   strong
         disapproval of family members in Pakistan.

2018 FtT

      7. The matter came before FtT Judge Maxwell on 28 February  2018.   He
         heard evidence updating  the  asylum  claim  and  maintaining  that
         family members in Pakistan still viewed the relationship adversely,
         and had made various threats as a result.  Judge  Maxwell  did  not
         accept the credibility of the claim put forward.  He rejected  that
         there had been any threats on the part of family  members  and  any
         fatwa issued.  Judge Maxwell took into  account  a  country  expert
         report dated 6 June 2016 but considered that that did no more  than
         assist in explaining the position if the evidence was  accepted  to
         be true.  Judge Maxwell concluded at [38] that he found "nothing in
         this evidence whether looked at individually or  cumulatively  that
         would persuade me the  earlier  findings  of  this  Tribunal  ought
         properly to be further considered or interfered with".  Neither the
         appellant or his spouse was found to be a credible witness  of  the
         earlier appeal.  At [41] Judge Maxwell also said this.

             "I find the  appellant  has  failed  to  prove  to  the  lower
             standard required as neither he or his spouse are in danger of
             persecution by or on  behalf  of  either  his  family  or  his
             spouse's family by reason of their entering a  love  marriage,
             having sexual relationships prior  to  any  form  of  marriage
             and/or not having entered an Islamic marriage."

         Judge Maxwell therefore dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

      8. Judge Maxwell went on to deal with the submission that it would  be
         breach of Article 8 for the family to be returned to Pakistan.   He
         first of all dealt with the submission that  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to the family integrating.  He rejected  that
         submission  observing  that  the  only  very  significant  obstacle
         claimed to  exist  related  to  the  behaviour  of  the  respective
         families and he had rejected that evidence when  dealing  with  the
         asylum claim.  In relation to the  position  of  the  children  the
         judge said this:

             "[52]    Looking at the children the eldest of  these  is  now
                  aged 5 years and 5 months.  The youngest is still a  baby.
                  No evidence has been produced to suggest that  they  would
                  not continue or enter education in Pakistan or that  there
                  will be any particular difficulties facing any of them.

             [53] The best  interests  of  these  children  are  served  by
                  remaining with the family  unit  with  their  parents  who
                  based on my conclusions above  are  perfectly  capable  of
                  living safely and securely in Pakistan."

Appeal against 2018 FtT decision

      9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  against  the  FtT's
         decision on one ground only: the FtT failed to  carry  out  a  full
         best interests assessment of the children but in particular  failed
         to consider that the eldest child was conceived before the marriage
         of  her  parents  and  may  face  huge  social  stigma  and   other
         difficulties as a result.

     10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by FtT Judge Davidge  in
         a decision dated 6 April 2018 but granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Coker in a decision dated 7 September 2018.  Judge  Coker  observed
         it to be arguable that the FtT failed to address  the  evidence  of
         the country expert in relation to the eldest child.

     11. In a Rule 24 response dated 7 November 2018 the respondent  opposed
         the  appeal  submitting  that   the   FtT   had   directed   itself
         appropriately.   The  respondent  also  submitted  that   the   FtT
         correctly pointed out that the child was born when the parents were
         married.  As such the child was not born out of wedlock  and  there
         would therefore be no risk for the child.

Hearing

     12. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Jagadeeshan  relied  upon  written
         submissions which mirrored the grounds of appeal.  Like the grounds
         of appeal, Mr Jagadeeshan focussed upon the  circumstances  of  the
         eldest child.  Mr Jagadeeshan invited me to  note  that  FtT  Judge
         Maxwell accepted that the eldest child  was  conceived  in  January
         2012, that is prior to her parents marrying on 17  July  2012.   It
         was submitted that the FtT failed to address  the  submissions  and
         the evidence to  the  effect  that  the  eldest  child  would  face
         significant deleterious consequences as a result of this  and  that
         should  have  informed  the  best  interests  assessment  that  was
         undertaken.

     13. Mr Jagadeeshan took me to  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance
         'Pakistan Women Fearing Gender Based Harm/Violence' dated  February
         2016 ('the CIG'), to  support  his  submission  that  the  FtT  was
         obliged to address the difficulties that a child who was  conceived
         prior to her parents' marriage  would  face.   The  country  expert
         report touched upon the issue at paragraph 16  but  Mr  Jagadeeshan
         acknowledged that the report did not add very much given the way in
         which it was worded.  Mr Jagadeeshan submitted that it could not be
         said that had the FtT taken into account the evidence contained  in
         the CIG that the same outcome would have been inevitable.

     14. Mr Tan relied upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He  emphasised  that
         although a sub-heading in the CIG referred to  'Children  Conceived
         or Born outside of Marriage' the substance  of  the  material  only
         dealt with illegitimate children and not  with  children  conceived
         outside of marriage.  For those reasons Mr Tan  submitted  the  FtT
         did not make any error of law because there was simply no  evidence
         available as to any real difficulties to be faced by those children
         conceived out of marriage.

Error of Law Discussion

     15. Although the FtT addressed the children's  circumstances  and  best
         interests briefly, given the limitations of the evidence  that  was
         available, there was an adequate consideration of  best  interests.
         As the FtT noted the children were very young, the eldest  being  5
         and the youngest still a baby.  Although they were born in the  UK,
         both their parents lived for a lengthy period in Pakistan and  were
         able to return to Pakistan without any significant difficulty.  The
         FtT found there to be no evidence to suggest  there  would  be  any
         particular difficulties facing any of the children.   The  argument
         on behalf of the appellant is that this conclusion was not open  to
         the FtT for one reason only: the contents of the CIG at 9.2.  I set
         that out in full:

             "9.2 Children conceived or born outside of marriage

                  9.21 As sexual relations outside of marriage  is  strictly
                      prohibited under the 1979 Hudood Ordnances  having  a
                      child outside of marriage caused huge  social  stigma
                      in Pakistan.  Deutsche Welle noted in a report  dated
                      21 April 2015 that in Pakistan  abortion  is  illegal
                      and  so  is  adultery  creating  a  situation   where
                      hundreds of children born out of wedlock are secretly
                      killed each year.  Their bodies are literally  thrown
                      out with the  garbage.   Illegitimate  children  were
                      referred to as harami meaning forbidden under  Islam.
                      They do not have rights of inheritance and could  not
                      be  registered  with  the   National   Database   and
                      Registration Authority - NADRA (except when abandoned
                      or in the care of  a  registered  orphanage)  without
                      providing the father's name.  Not having an  ID  card
                      cause  difficulties   in   accessing   government-run
                      services.  Khan and Piracha  a  consultancy  firm  in
                      Islamabad stated  the  requirement  for  ID  card  is
                      becoming increasingly vital  for  gaining  access  to
                      admission to  educational  institutions.   Employment
                      both in the private and governmental sectors  and  in
                      all practical day-to-day affairs such  as  access  to
                      travel by air telephone connections etc.  Any  access
                      to  healthcare  in  the  social  welfare/governmental
                      sector will also be dependent  on  production  of  ID
                      card.  However so far production of ID  card  is  not
                      required for  obtaining  healthcare  in  the  private
                      sector."

     16. It is clear from this passage that no reference has  been  made  to
         the position of children conceived outside of marriage but  who  at
         the time that they are born are legitimate children.   Indeed,  the
         reference to children not being registered is predicated  upon  the
         inability  to  provide  the  father's  name.   There  could  be  no
         submission in this case that the eldest child would not  be  viewed
         by family members and the authorities as the  legitimate  child  of
         her parents.  As Mr  Jagadeeshan  accepted,  the  eldest  child  is
         legitimate.  Neither could it be said that the father's name  could
         not be provided for  obvious  reasons.   Although  the  sub-heading
         refers to both children conceived or born outside of marriage there
         was simply no evidence to support  the  proposition  that  children
         such as the eldest child, who was conceived prior to  her  parents'
         marriage  would  face  any  real  difficulties  in  Pakistan.    Mr
         Jagadeeshan emphasised that there was  no  differentiation  between
         the two categories of children.  Whether there has been  a  mistake
         in referring to children conceived outside of marriage in the  sub-
         heading or not, the FtT could only act and  consider  the  evidence
         that  was  before  it.   The  evidence  relevant  to  these   three
         legitimate children was very limited indeed.

     17. Given the lack of clarity and absence of any evidence regarding the
         position  of  those  children  conceived  before   their   parents'
         marriage, one might have expected the country expert instructed  in
         this case to clarify the matter.  Yet, the country expert's  report
         makes no attempt to clarify 9.2 or 9.21 of the CIG.  Rather it says
         only this at [16]:

             "I note that Mrs [K] claims that first entered into an illicit
             relationship with Mr [I], got pregnant and then the couple got
             married.  She claims that her family and in-laws were aware of
             the situation.  I am told her first-born  child  that  is  her
             daughter's birth certificate carries the date of  birth  which
             is just three months subsequent to the date mentioned  on  her
             marriage certificate.  Hence it is suggested to me  that  this
             would alert those concerned or the authorities of illegitimacy
             of the child and may result in prosecution of the couple under
             Zina laws in Pakistan.  I note  they  now  have  two  children
             together."

     18. Mr Jagadeeshan fairly did not rely upon that passage  and  did  not
         suggest that the FtT erred in law in failing  to  do  so.   He  was
         right to take that position.   The  passage  is  entirely  unclear.
         First, it seems to be said that the eldest child  was  born  as  an
         illegitimate child, she was not, she was born  after  her  parents'
         marriage.  Secondly, no reference is made  whatsoever  to  the  CIG
         evidence.  Thirdly, no conclusions  are  reached,  no  sources  are
         provided reference is merely made to risk being  suggested  to  the
         expert.  At [17] the country  expert  goes  on  to  make  reference
         albeit  not  in  a  particularly  clear  way  to  cases  which  are
         registered against married couples or  women  for  committing  Zina
         with their husband post or prior to  the  marriage  and  says  that
         there are no such cases.  That  gives  the  clear  indication  that
         where those who had an  extramarital  relationship  go  on  to  get
         married, they are not prosecuted under  the  Zina  laws.   That  is
         consistent with the remainder of  the  report  which  focuses  upon
         families being the main initiator of prosecutions in this  context.



     19. There was therefore no cogent or credible evidence before  the  FtT
         that the eldest child would face any particular difficulties  as  a
         result of being conceived prior to her parents' marriage.  The  FtT
         was aware of the circumstances of her conception and  birth  having
         referred to that expressly at [23].

Conclusion

     20. The evidence was wholly insufficient  to  support  the  proposition
         that was being made in relation to the eldest  child.   It  follows
         that the FtT decision does not contain an error of law.

     21. Even if there was some evidence to  suggest  that  there  might  be
         difficulties for the eldest child and as such the FtT was  required
         to engage with that evidence, I am satisfied that the same  outcome
         would have been inevitable.   The  child  would  be  returned  with
         loving parents, who can  on  the  FtT's  findings,  rely  upon  the
         support of the wider family members.  Any difficulties as a  result
         of her conception prior to  her  parents'  marriage  would  not  be
         significant in the context of that extensive network of support.

Notice of decision

22. The FtT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not  set  it
    aside.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     30 January 2019


