
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01165/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2018                           |On 31st October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  biruk [s]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chohan, promulgated on 11th August 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  26th  July  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, a consequence of which, the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ethiopia, and was  born  on  10th
    May 1992.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 4th
    September 2015, refusing his claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339F of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his father was a member of
    the Ethiopian People's Patriotic Front  (EPPF).   He  claims  that  his
    father came to the attention of the Ethiopian  authorities  in  October
    1998 and he has not been seen since.  The Appellant's brother, Tesfaye,
    was also taken away by the authorities in 1998 and has simply vanished.
     The Appellant, for his part, was involved  also  with  the  EPPF.   In
    1999, his mother gave him a document to pass on to his father's friend,
    and this is when his problems began.   He  later  discovered  that  the
    documents contained a list of EPPF members.  He did not realise he  had
    been followed.   He  ended  up  being  arrested.   He  was  beaten  and
    tortured.  He was forced to confess.  He was  falsely  accused  of  the
    murder  of  another  person.   He  was   sentenced   to   eight   years
    imprisonment.  He was then, however, released after five years and  six
    months, following the payment of a bribe by his mother.   Upon  release
    the Appellant began work as a minibus  driver.   He  also  resumed  his
    political activities with the EPPF.  About eight months after that, the
    Appellant found that a co-worker had been arrested.  The Appellant also
    was on the wanted list.  He made arrangements to  leave  Ethiopia.   He
    travelled through various countries and arrived in the UK  on  3rd  May
    2015.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant's claim that his problems began  when
    his mother gave him a document which contained a list of EPPF  members,
    to pass on to his father's friend, was  lacking  in  credibility.   The
    Appellant's mother would not have put the appellant  at  such  a  risk,
    bearing  in  mind  that  the  Appellant's  father   and   brother   had
    disappeared, in circumstances  where  the  Ethiopian  authorities  were
    apparently responsible.  Indeed, the Appellant was only 14 years of age
    at the time.  Therefore, the risk would not have been taken.

 5. Second, the judge found that even whilst making allowance for the  fact
    that the Appellant had been detained as a young boy,  his  account  was
    vague and lacking in detail.  There was no explanation as  to  why  the
    Appellant's mother did not  seek  to  secure  the  Appellant's  release
    sooner than after as much as five years.

 6. Third, the Appellant submitted documents relating to his detention  but
    these relate  to  the  application  for  a  bail,  an  appeal,  and  an
    application for transfer to a different prison.  There was no  evidence
    of the envelope in which the documents  were  received  from  Ethiopia.
    The judge did not find it plausible that the Appellant would have  made
    an application for bail and  an  appeal  when  his  mother  could  have
    secured his release by the payment of a bribe.

 7. Fourth, following his release from detention, the Appellant claims that
    he continued with his activities with the EPPF in  the  full  knowledge
    that he was on the watch list.  In fact, since arriving in the UK,  the
    Appellant claims he has been aware that he is  at  risk  and  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities know he is in the United Kingdom.  He knows  this
    because the Appellant claims to have received a letter from a  friend's
    sister in Ethiopia.  During his oral  evidence,  the  Appellant  stated
    that his friend had been captured by the Ethiopian authorities  and  he
    was still in custody.  However, while in custody the Appellant's friend
    managed to instruct his sister to write a letter and  send  it  to  the
    Appellant.  The judge found this to be lacking in credibility.

 8. Finally, the Appellant's claim was that he was a member of the EPPF  in
    the UK.  He claimed to have attended demonstrations.  This  he  did  in
    Manchester and in Birmingham.  These were his sur place activities.  He
    provided a letter dated 19th April 2016 from the  EPPF  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He provided membership  documentation  and  photographs.   He
    also provided a statement from a witness.   In  his  own  evidence  the
    Appellant stated he attended demonstrations and meetings.  According to
    the letter from the EPPF it is stated that the Appellant "is named as a
    head of cultural affairs ... in the United Kingdom" but  the  Appellant
    himself makes no mention of this either in his oral evidence or in  his
    witness statement.  The letter also states that the  Appellant  "was  a
    supporter to our movement while in Ethiopia"  but  the  author  of  the
    letter does not state how he came to know of this.  The judge did  also
    have regard to the photographs and took the view that they do not  take
    the matter any further because they depict no placards and no signs and
    there are no distinguishing features on the photographs (see paragraphs
    11 to 14).

 9. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application are detailed and comprehensive.  They  state
    that the judge failed to take into account  the  court  documents.   He
    failed to take into account a DVD screenshot (see paragraph  9).   They
    also state that the YouTube link regarding the  Appellant's  activities
    in the UK was also not considered by the judge.  In essence, it is said
    that "no finding at all has been  made  as  to  the  Appellant's  court
    documents or the YouTube evidence.  These documents directly assist the
    Appellant's credibility aspect as they corroborative his claim in  full
    and would have assisted the IJ..." (paragraph 7).  It is also said that
    the judge placed no weight on the letter sent by the EPPF in the UK and
    that "this is an authentic document" that should have been considered.

11. Following the refusal of permission on 8th November 2017 by the  First-
    tier Tribunal, permission to appeal was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 9th January 2018 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had not considered the  material  evidence  (YouTube  video  and  court
    documents) which was relevant.

12. On 6th February 2018 a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect  that
    the judge set out the reasons for rejection of the  Appellant's  claim,
    particularly in relation to the sur place activities, at paragraphs  14
    to 15 of the determination.  There was no error of law.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 3rd  October  2018  Ms  Naz,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied on the  grounds  of  application.   She
    said that she could do  no  better  than  simply  draw  the  Tribunal's
    attention to these grounds which were fulsome and detailed.

14. For her part, Mrs Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response.  However, she
    went  on  to  further  state  that  the  grounds  of  application  were
    misconceived.  The fact was that there was no DVD evidence  before  the
    judge at all.  This is clear, submitted Mrs Aboni, from the  Presenting
    Officer's hand-written notes on the date of the  hearing  before  Judge
    Chohan.   These state that there had been  an  application  before  the
    Tribunal on that day for an adjournment on  the  basis  that  the  DVD,
    which transcribed the YouTube evidence, which was now being  prayed  in
    aid, was with  a  previous  firm  of  solicitors,  who  had  been  dis-
    instructed  to  proceed  with  the  Appellant's  claim.   The   present
    solicitors had applied for this DVD evidence to be transferred to  them
    so that it would be put forward as evidence on the Appellant's  behalf.
    Therefore, the plain fact was that there was no  such  evidence.   What
    did exist was the form of screenshots  of  the  DVD,  and  the  YouTube
    evidence that was being referred to.   These  screenshots  were  indeed
    considered by the judge.

15. At this point, Ms Naz accepted that she now had  a  copy  of  the  DVD,
    which she held up for the Tribunal to see, and she also  accepted  that
    it contained the YouTube evidence, as transcribed onto the  DVD,  which
    was going to be referred to had  the  adjournment  been  granted.   Mrs
    Aboni continued to say that it was not true that the judge  had  failed
    to consider the fact  of  the  Appellant's  arrest,  because  this  was
    expressly done at paragraph 9 of  the  determination  where  the  judge
    stated that, "the Appellant has submitted  documents  relating  to  his
    detention" and these were taken  into  account,  with  the  judge  then
    giving no less than three reasons for why the claim was  unsustainable.



16. In relation  to  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities,  these  were
    considered at paragraphs 12 to 13 of the determination, with the  judge
    dealing with the Appellant's claim that he was a member of the EPPF  in
    the United Kingdom.

17. In reply, Ms Naz submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the photographs and the supplementary evidence, and if  he  had
    done so, he had not done so in sufficient detail.  The judge  had  said
    that, "the photographs do not take the matter any  further"  (paragraph
    14).  She submitted that the photographs did  indeed  take  the  matter
    further and the judge was wrong to have concluded otherwise.

18. At the end of the submissions, I asked Ms Naz what her strongest  point
    was in relation to the claim that Judge Chohan had erred in  law.   She
    submitted that the failure to consider the  YouTube  evidence  was  the
    high point of the challenge today.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

20.  First,  in  what  is  a  clear,  succinct  and  wholly   comprehensive
    determination, the  judge  does  consider  practically  every  relevant
    aspect of the claim put forward on behalf of the Appellant.  It is  not
    the case at all that the judge failed to  heed  the  YouTube  evidence.
    Any suggestion to the contrary (whether deliberate or  inadvertent)  is
    misleading.  As Ms Naz has herself conceded, after Mrs Aboni had  drawn
    attention to the Presenting Officer's notes of the hearing before Judge
    Chohan on 26 July 2017, the YouTube evidence did  not  actually  exist,
    because its transcription onto a DVD  was  evidence  that  was  in  the
    possession of previous solicitors and there had been an application for
    an adjournment on that day.  What did exist before the judge, and Judge
    Chohan made this clear, was the screenshot evidence, which he  said  he
    could look at equally as well, without granting an  adjournment.   This
    he did do.  Therefore there was simply no material point to argue here.

21. Second, insofar as there is  other  evidence,  the  judge  plainly  has
    express regard to this.  He gives specific regard to the  letter  dated
    19th April 2016 from  the  EPPF.   He  gives  specific  regard  to  the
    membership documentation.  He specifically  looks  at  the  photographs
    (see paragraph 12).  He then rejects the letter from the EPPF by giving
    clear and comprehensible reasons for why  the  letter  was  simply  not
    credible  (see  paragraph  13).   When  the  judge  states  that,  "the
    photographs do not take the matter any further" (paragraph 14),  it  is
    not the case, as Ms Naz submits, that this is  an  error,  because  the
    very next sentence goes on to show, in the words  of  the  judge,  that
    "the photographs depict no placards and no  signs.  Furthermore,  there
    are no distinguishing  features  in  the  photographs  to  suggest  the
    Appellant is undertaking activities for  the  EPPF  or  for  any  other
    group" (paragraph 14).  In short, the findings  reached  by  the  judge
    were those which were entirely open to him.  There is simply  no  error
    of law in this determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018

