
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01353/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 October 2017                       |On 01 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE))
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adeel Malik, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  appeals  with  permission
    against a determination of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Housego,
    who in a determination promulgated  on  30  March  2017  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    25 January 2017 to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  3  March  1985.   He
    left Afghanistan in  1994,  moving  to  Pakistan  with  his  family  as
    refugees from the war in Afghanistan.  He received refugee status there
    and lived there until 7 October 2004 when  he  came  to  Britain  as  a
    student.  Thereafter he received extensions of stay as a student before
     making  an application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant in 2008. He  was granted  leave  to  remain  until  2011.
    Thereafter he had leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General)  Migrant  until
    2013 when he applied for further leave to  remain.   That  was  granted
    until 26 October 2016.

3.   In September 2014 he applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence.  That application  was
    refused without a right of  appeal.   He  returned  to  Afghanistan  in
    January 2016 and on 29 July that year he re-entered Britain and claimed
    asylum.

4.    The  appellant  said  that  he  had  gone  back  in  January  2016  to
    Afghanistan to visit his family.  The basis of the appellant's claim to
    asylum was that in April that  year,   while  at  his  family  home  in
    Nangarhar five or six people came to his house asking his father  about
    his brother.  He suspected that these people  were  either  Taliban  or
    ISIS who wanted to recruit young people  from  the  whole  village  and
    therefore had come for his brother.   His  father  had  said  that  his
    brother was not at home.  The house was searched but  his  brother  was
    not found.  The men then came to the appellant and asked his father who
    he was.  His father lied to them and said that he was a  guest  because
    he had worried that they would take him if they found out that  he  was
    another  son.  The men told his father that  they would return and that
    he should keep his son at home.  They said they would find out  who  he
    was.

5.   That night when his brother returned home his father  said  it  was  no
    longer safe for the two of them to remain  in  the  family  home.  They
    therefore  moved to Jalalabad where the appellant stayed with a  friend
    for fifteen to twenty days and then moved to Laghman because his father
    had received a message saying it was not safe for him to live there.

6.   At the end of June 2016,  while  living  in  Laghman  he  went  to  the
    police to ask them to find out about his parents  because  he  had  not
    heard from them.  He told the police what had happened and  the  police
    said they would communicate with other police stations to find  out  if
    there was any news of his parents.  That  night  the  Taliban  or  ISIS
    visited his father's friend's house where he had been living, bound him
    and beat him, telling him that they had found out that he was also  the
    son of his father and he had come from a foreign country.  He said  his
    hands were tied, he was blindfolded and placed in a car and  driven  in
    the back of the car for 40 minutes after which they  stopped,  the  men
    left the car, leaving the doors open.  The appellant  and  his  brother
    had used the opportunity to escape and jumped on  a  lorry  which  took
    them to Kabul where the appellant stayed for one month with a friend of
    his father.   He then left Kabul.  His brother remained  there  and  he
    was joined later by his family.  He had  said  at  interview  that  his
    family was safe in Kabul but were grounded.

7.   The Secretary of State considered the appellant's  application  and  in
    paragraphs 36 onwards of the letter of refusal stated that it  was  not
    accepted that the Taliban or ISIS had forced him to flee.  The  reasons
    given were that if the appellant would be  in danger his parents  would
    have informed him and he would not have returned.  Moreover, it was not
    credible that if the situation had been  that  the  Taliban  recruiting
    people between the age of 20 and 40 that  he  would  have  returned  to
    Afghanistan given his age and  placed  himself  at  such  risk.   These
    issues   undermined   the  credibility  of   the   appellant's   claim.
    Moreover, it was not accepted that people who had  come  to  his  house
    were the Taliban or ISIS - the appellant had been unclear about his  at
    interview and had only said that these people had  been  identified  as
    Taliban or ISIS. The reason the appellant had given  for  stating  that
    these men were Taliban or ISIS was   because  of  "the  way  they  were
    dressed with their beards and all that so that's the formal dress code"
    and they had said they were taking people for jihad.  It was considered
    that the appellant was speculating.

8.   There was thought to be no reason  why the Taliban or ISIS  would  have
    a particular interest in the appellant or his brother, particularly  if
    the appellant had not been able to give any answer why there had been a
    specific interest in recruiting him rather than the many people who had
    lived in the village.  The appellant had then said that was because  he
    was considered to be a  foreigner.   It  was  considered  that  was  an
    embellishment of his claim and  he  had  been  asked  why  he  had  not
    mentioned this  and he merely said it was because he  was  between  the
    age of 20 and 40.

9.   Moreover, his claim that the Taliban  were  recruiting  people  between
    the ages of 20 and 40 in his whole village was at odds  with  the  fact
    that he had come face to face with them in  the  family  home  and  had
    received no problems other than them saying they would find out who  he
    was.

10.  His story of how he had escaped from the car  was  not  thought  to  be
    credible and it was pointed out that he  had  been  inconsistent  while
    saying where he had lived in Afghanistan.  Moreover, it was noted  that
    his brother remained in Afghanistan and faced no further problems.

11.  The judge heard evidence from the appellant, setting out in detail  the
    appellant's  claim  and  the  relevant  case  law.   He  detailed   his
    conclusions in paragraphs 68 onwards of the  determination.   He  noted
    the  claim  that  the  appellant  might  face  forced  recruitment  and
    considered the background documentation thereon as well as setting  out
    details of other background information in the bundle before  him.   He
    referred to the fact that the appellant had said that he  had  suffered
    beatings, recording this at paragraph 74 of the determination.  He made
    his findings of fact and reasons in paragraphs 91  onwards.   He  noted
    that there was no evidence from the wife or father of the appellant  or
    about his brother, all of whom remain in Kabul.  He  said  it  was  not
    credible  that  they  would  not  have  remained  in  touch  with  him.
    Moreover, it was not credible that the Taliban would seek to  conscript
    everyone between 20 and 40 in Kabul nor that both the then 15 year  old
    brother of the appellant and the appellant himself would be targeted by
    the Taliban.

12.  The appellant claimed that all his family were in hiding in  Kabul  and
    in paragraph 96 the judge stated that:   "His  witness  said  that  the
    whereabouts of the wife and children of the appellant were unknown  but
    probably in Kabul.  The appellant has not been  candid  even  with  his
    friend, the witness."

13.  It was not accepted that when taking  the  appellant  his  hands  would
    have been tied by something like a handkerchief nor that  if  they  had
    wanted to abduct him they would have left the car doors open so that he
    and his brother could get away.

14.  In paragraph 98 he stated:-

         "98. There is the photograph of  several  wheels  on  the  back  of
             someone said to be the appellant.  The appellant  did,  as  he
             said, say that he had marks  on  his  back  in  the  screening
             interview.  There is no proof that it is his  back,  but  many
             Afghans are so keen to stay in the UK (and the  appellant  had
             been here a long time) that if it is his back  self-infliction
             by proxy is a possibility.  There  is  no  objective  evidence
             about these marks.  I make no finding of fact that this is  or
             is not the back of the appellant, or that if it  is  there  is
             any particular causation or as to who inflicted  the  injuries
             if they were inflicted deliberately, but the burden  of  proof
             is on the appellant and there is nothing other  than  the  one
             photograph and the oral evidence of the appellant advanced  by
             him.  I  have  not  found  him  a  credible  witness  and  so,
             holistically, do not accept his account about  the  photograph
             A1:A1.


         99.  Put another way, look at in the  round,  I  do  not  find  the
             presence of these scars on the back of the appellant (assuming
             it is his back) to be sufficient (with the  oral  evidence  of
             the appellant) to find  his  account  proved  (all  the  while
             bearing in mind the lower standard of proof and the  need  for
             anxious  scrutiny,  and  the  fact  that  unlikely  things  do
             happen).   The  appellant  portrayed  this  to  me   as   very
             distressing (it was the point at  which  he  appeared  upset).
             Were this so large in his  recollection  it  is  difficult  to
             accept  that  he  would  not   have   told   the   immigration
             interviewers about it in the substantive  interview,  and  the
             explanation that he  did  not  know  the  word  'whipping'  in
             English is not a valid explanation.  There  are  a  myriad  of
             ways he could have communicated that he had scars on his  back
             and how they had been caused -  even  a  simple  'look  at  my
             back!' would have done the job.  It was the one tangible thing
             he could have shown the interviewers and he did not do so,  at
             either interview.  Taken with everything else, I conclude that
             his account of injuries to his back is not true."


15.  The judge also stated in the following paragraphs that the  appellant's
    visa  was  running  out  and  he  had  used  deception  in  a  previous
    application and that therefore his chances of getting a new grant  were
    very small.  He went on to say:-

         "101.    I do not accept that the appellant was an innocent in  the
             false documentation, and that he blindly trusted the  firm  he
             retained for his visa, and did not think to check the form  he
             signed.  This was an important form for him, for  he  had  run
             out of student leave and wanted to stay  as  an  entrepreneur.
             The whole basis on which he did so was fraudulent."


16.  He went on to say that there was a  further  consideration  as  to  his
    credibility in that the appellant had previously used deception to stay
    in Britain and he considered that this application  and  appeal  was  a
    further example of deception - there was no  basis  for  the  appellant
    applying for the First-tier visa and he had used fraud to obtain it: by
    the time of the second such visa application he had a business  and  so
    used that business to make a second Tier 1 application.   His  previous
    deception was relevant to the estimation of his  credibility  "on  this
    occasion".

17.  The judge was stated that there was a pretence at being  upset  on  one
    occasion during the  hearing  and  he  considered  that  that  was  not
    genuine.

18.  In effect the decision of the judge was that the appellant had  totally
    fabricated his claim for asylum.

19.  There were  detailed  grounds  of  appeal  which  were  considered  and
    refused in the First-tier, thereafter they were amplified and then were
    considered again by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt, who granted  permission.
    She refused permission on all grounds apart from those  which  she  had
    assessed in paragraphs 8 and 9 of her decision where she wrote:-

         "8.  The FtTJ assessed the appellant's evidence on scarring at [98]
             and [99].  The appellant did refer to these scars and to being
             beaten in his various accounts and invited inspection  of  his
             scars at question 146 of his interview, contrary to  what  the
             FtTJ appears to be suggesting at [99].   It  is  difficult  to
             marry up the indication at [98] that no finding  was  made  on
             whether the person with scars in the photos provided  was  the
             appellant with the earlier comment on there being  'no  proof'
             of this and comment that 'so many Afghans are so keen to  stay
             in the UK' that 'self-infliction by proxy is  a  possibility'.
             The  potential  difficulties  with  the  assessment  in  those
             paragraphs also have to be read with the comment at  [103]  on
             the appellant's use of 'pretence' when giving evidence on  how
             his scars were incurred.  The grounds at paragraphs 14, 15 and
             20 are arguable.


         9.   It is  also  arguable  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  address  the
             appellant's claim to be at  risk  on  return  because  of  his
             'westernised' profile.  The grounds set out in paragraphs 8 to
             12 are arguable."


20.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr  Malik  argued  firstly  that
    the judge had improperly  considered  the  issue  of  scarring  and  in
    particular the fact that the appellant  had  invited  the  interviewing
    officer to look at his back.  He confirmed, however, that there was  no
    medical evidence regarding the  scarring.   He  stated,  however,  that
    there was a picture of the scarring in the bundle.

21.  He  questioned  the  finding  of  the  judge  that  the  appellant  had
    previously used deception to  stay  in  Britain  and  stated  that  the
    appellant had accepted that  false  documentation  had  been  used  but
    stated that had been the fault of his advisers.

22.  Moreover, there was a  lack  of  findings  regarding  private  life  or
    whether or not the appellant would  qualify  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  Also, the judge had not dealt with the fact that the
    appellant was now westernised and looked more like a westerner than  an
    Afghan.  With regard to forced recruitment he  referred  to  the  UNHCR
    report.

23.  Mr Tufan accepted that the judge had been  in  error  to  discount  the
    fact that the interviewing officer had been  invited  to  look  at  the
    appellant's scars but he  stated  that  was  not  material.   What  was
    relevant was that the appellant's claim was itself  not  credible.   He
    stated that there was  clear  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception to obtain leave to remain.  What had happened,  however,  was
    that his leave to remain had not been curtailed and therefore there was
    no right of appeal although of course  the  decision  could  have  been
    subject to an application for judicial review.  There was no suggestion
    that the appellant would have been able to qualify under the provisions
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and nothing to indicate that the  fact
    that he had been westernised would lead to his being persecuted.

24.  He referred to the UNHCR  report  about  the  possible  recruitment  of
    young people but stated that little weight could be put on that,  given
    that UNHCR documents were produced for a rather different purpose.   In
    this regard he referred to the decision in NM and Others (Lone women  -
    Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076.  He argued  that  in  any  event
    internal relocation to Kabul was open to the appellant, given the  fact
    particularly that his brother and family were there -  he  referred  to
    the decision in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163
    (IAC).

25.  In reply Mr Malik stated that the issue was whether there  had  been  a
    material error with regards to the issue of  scarring.   Moreover,  the
    judge should have  relied  on  the  report  from  UNHCR  regarding  the
    recruitment of  young  men  and  indeed  he  stated  that  the  judge's
    credibility assessment was flawed - he had failed to give regard to  an
    innocent explanation of the way in which the appellant had obtained his
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant.  He argued  that  it  was  correct
    that the judge had erred in his consideration  of  internal  relocation
    although he did not argue that that was not open to the appellant.

26.  I have considered in detail the basis  of  the  appellant's  claim.   I
    consider that the judge was correct to place weight on  the  fact  that
    the appellant would not have returned to Afghanistan  if  there  was  a
    danger to his being there - he would surely have heard from his  family
    that he should not return if he was  likely  to  suffer  harm.   Having
    returned to his home area I consider that  the  judge  was  correct  to
    consider that his claim that he would be subject to recruitment by  the
    Taliban was not credible.  I note the appellant's age - he is  now  28.
    The UNHCR report regarding forced recruitment is somewhat unclear as it
    repeatedly refers to the recruitment of children to carry  out  attacks
    or act as human shields while  participating  in  acts  of  combat  and
    smuggling weapons, acting as spies or scouts.  The reference to which I
    was referred  is  headed  "Forced  and  Underage  Recruitment  by  Pro-
    Government Forces" and  refers  to  attempts  to  criminalise  underage
    recruitment. The paragraph refers only to the recruitment  of  children
    with a very brief reference to "young men"  being  forcibly  recruited.
    I consider it is most unlikely that the Taliban would want  to  recruit
    an independently minded adult  who  had  not  been  immersed  in  their
    culture for some time. I consider that the judge was entitled  to  find
    that that was not credible.  In any event although the  appellant  said
    that he and his brother were captured by the Taliban at no time was the
    appellant certain who actually  had  detained  him.   The  reality  is,
    however, he said that he was able to escape without difficulty from his
    captors' car.  That, again, does not seem credible: given that he  said
    that  his hands were tied, it is not credible that he would be able  to
    get out of a car when the door was left open and  the  Taliban  or  his
    captors had walked away.

27.  Clearly the appellant's claim that he had lost touch  with  his  family
    in Kabul is also lacking in credibility as he at one stage said that he
    was there with his brother and that his family had joined him.  I  note
    that there is a reference in the determination to the appellant's  wife
    and family  and in answer to a question in the  questionnaire  he  said
    that he had been married in 2014. He also says that he  had  been  able
    to go to Peshawar to meet his family.  In paragraph 10 of his statement
    he refers to his having a wife and daughter in Kabul but says  that  he
    does not know where they are hiding.  However,  he  nowhere  states  in
    terms  when and where he was married or when his child was born.  There
    is a clear lacuna in his evidence  on the issue of his wife and child.

28.  With regards to the appellant's scarring on  his  back,  a  picture  of
    which is at page A1 of the bundle, while the  judge  erred  in  stating
    that  the scarring had not been mentioned to the  interviewing  officer
    the judge was entitled to be sceptical about the issue of scarring.  It
    is not mentioned in the body of the  interview  despite  the  appellant
    stating that he and his brother had been taken by the  Taliban.  It  is
    only mentioned at question 146,  which  gives  the  appearance  it  was
    mentioned as an afterthought. Moreover,  the reality  is  that  in  his
    statement  the  appellant  only  briefly  mentioned  the  scarring   at
    paragraph 16 and gives no detail  of  exactly  what  happened  when  he
    received a "whipping".  I consider  that,  given  the  brevity  of  the
    assertion by the appellant that  he was whipped, the judge was entitled
    to consider that he was not  credible  in  that  regard.  He  was  also
    entitled to conclude that marks on  the  appellant's  body   would  not
    necessarily have been inflicted  in the way he claimed.  There  was  no
    medical report that indicated that the marks  shown in the   photograph
    could have been inflicted by whipping.

29.  In all I can only come to the  conclusion  that  the  judge  did  reach
    conclusions which were fully open to him on the evidence and  that  his
    decision was reached after proper consideration  of  all  the  evidence
    before him. As he said,  the reality is  that  he  considered  all  the
    evidence  before him holistically  and I consider that  he  gave  clear
    and sustainable  reasons  for   finding  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible. His conclusion that the  appellant   did  not  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to Afghanistan was fully open  to
    him and I therefore find that the judge was fully entitled  to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum grounds. I would add that  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate that the removal of the appellant would be a  disproportionate
    interference with his rights  under Article 8 of the ECHR.

30.   I therefore find that the decision of the judge shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 31 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


