
                                                              [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/01141/2020 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2021                                |On 20 July 2021               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SR

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms L Butler of Fountains Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of  birth  given  as
   6.10.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 16.12.20,  dismissing  on
   all grounds his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 27.1.20, to refuse his claim for international protection, made  on
   the basis of being at risk on return  as  a  former  police  officer  who
   killed two Taliban members.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  on  25.1.21.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission on 19.2.21,  strictly  limited  to
   those matters set out at [3-5] and [7-9] of ground A.

3. The Rule 24 Reply, dated 2.3.21, points  out  that  having  rejected  the
   credibility of the appellant's claim to have received threatening letters
   from the Taliban or that he would face a real risk of  suffering  serious
   harm on return, the judge rejected the asylum claim  and  in  consequence
   found that sufficiency of protection and relocation issues did not arise.
   The  respondent  submits  that  the  judge  considered  the   appellant's
   vulnerabilities at [11] and the contents of the  medico-legal  report  at
   [42] and [45]. It is  submitted  that  given  that  as  the  humanitarian
   protection  claim  turned  on  the  same  factors  as  those  under   the
   Convention, the judge was entitled to conclude at [67] that the appellant
   was not entitled to humanitarian protection.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. I find the grant of permission somewhat difficult to follow. The  grounds
   referred to in the reasons for the grant related to  and  articles  15(b)
   and 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, which was ground B. Judge  Gill
   considered it arguable that in light of what is set out at [32(vii)]  and
   [33] of the decision the judge may  have  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
   consider humanitarian protection. However, ground A  was  the  article  3
   medical condition issue. One of the difficulties is that Judge Gill  felt
   hampered by the absence of the appellant's skeleton argument, referred to
   in the grounds of application for permission to appeal.

6. Permission was expressly refused on the  remaining  ground,  relating  to
   arguments based on articles 3 and 8  ECHR  and  the  appellant's  medical
   condition  and  the  subjective  fear  of  being  persecuted  being   re-
   retraumatising, the concern expressed by the author of  the  medico-legal
   report, summarised by the judge at [29(a)]  of  the  decision.  This  was
   ground A.

7. It should first be noted at [33] of the decision that the  appellant  did
   not rely on asylum or article 8  ECHR  grounds.  I  also  note  that  the
   appellant's skeleton argument, drafted by Ms Patel on  11.11.20,  clearly
   set out the schedule of issues as being:

     a. Is the appellant at risk on return from the Taliban

     b. Is there a sufficiency of protection for him in Pakistan

     c. Can the appellant internally relocate to Lahore.

8. Whilst the judge accepted that the appellant had  been  involved  in  the
   incident in at the airport which he shot  dead  two  Taliban  members  in
   2012, all three issues identified in the skeleton argument were  resolved
   against the appellant for the cogent reasons  set  out  in  the  impugned
   decision. In essence, as set out at  [60]  of  the  decision,  the  judge
   rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  ever  threatened  by  the
   Taliban. Neither did the judge accept that he would face any real risk of
   suffering serious harm on return to Pakistan. As the judge noted at [42],
   the appellant made clear in his evidence  that  it  was  because  of  the
   alleged receipt of threatening letters  from  the  Taliban  that  he  was
   living in fear of his life in Pakistan to the  extent  that  he  and  his
   family moved to different locations in order to  avoid  detection.  Given
   the findings rejecting that part of the claim there  was,  therefore,  no
   factual basis for any subjective fear of being persecuted on return.

9. The grounds argue that the appellant's vulnerability must be  taken  into
   account in assessing his  risk  on  return,  assessed  in  terms  of  his
   personal characteristics. It is argued that the judge did  not  give  due
   consideration to the "confluence of country conditions and the particular
   vulnerabilities  of  the  appellant."  It  is  not  clear  what  'country
   conditions' are relied on. The judge granting permission pointed out that
   the CPIN referred to in the grounds post-dates the  promulgation  of  the
   impugned decision. The CPIN referred to in the skeleton argument  related
   to sufficiency of protection.

10. The judge made a careful summary of Ms Patel's closing submissions,  set
   out at length at [32] of the decision. There was no  reliance  either  in
   those submissions or the skeleton  argument  on  vulnerability  as  being
   relevant to the risk on return, outside of the article 3 claim  based  on
   medical grounds.

11. Having asked Ms Butler to explain the grounds,  she  asserted  that  the
   judge failed to recognise the appellant's  specific  vulnerabilities  and
   submitted that following Elgafaji  there  and  Sufi  there  should  be  a
   'sliding scale' in assessing a particular  claimant's  risk  of  harm  on
   return taking into account his personal characteristics.  However,  I  am
   satisfied that was never an argument or issue put before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

12. It is  clear  that  the  judge  did  take  account  of  the  appellant's
   vulnerability. At [11] of the decision the judge noted from  the  medico-
   legal report that the appellant suffered from mental health  difficulties
   as well as cognitive difficulties arising from a traumatic  brain  injury
   when he was shot in the head. In consequence, the judge agreed  to  treat
   the appellant as a vulnerable witness. At [29(a)]  the  judge  summarised
   the contents of the  medico-legal  report.  This  included  that  he  had
   symptoms "suggestive" of PTSD and the concern  expressed  by  the  expert
   that were the appellant to be returned to Pakistan, "his subjective  fear
   of being persecuted would be 're-traumatising' and could  exacerbate  his
   depression and trauma related symptoms." However, as stated above,  given
   the rejection of the claim to have been targeted by the Taliban  and  the
   finding that the appellant only sought to remain in the UK to be able  to
   access medical treatment, there was no factual basis for  the  subjective
   fear  of  being  persecuted.  In  considering  the  appellant's   medical
   conditions, at [66] the judge considered that  there  was  a  functioning
   social security system in Pakistan "that would help support the appellant
   with his medical conditions moving forward, in addition to any support he
   might receive from his immediately and extended family."

13. As Mr McVeety submitted, given the rejection of the claim to  have  been
   threatened  by  the  Taliban  and  the  refusal  of  permission  on   the
   vulnerability point under article 3, it is not clear  on  what  remaining
   basis the judge could be said to  have  failed  to  properly  assess  the
   humanitarian protection issue.  The  issues  raised  by  the  appellant's
   representative were all addressed and adequate reasons provided  for  the
   findings made. In the light of those  findings,  it  is  not  clear  what
   particular circumstances could be said to put the appellant  at  risk  of
   inhuman or degrading treatment. The judge found that the appellant  would
   have access to treatmen and the support of  his  immediate  and  extended
   family  in  Pakistan.  Nothing  in  the  submissions  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, or the skeleton argument, or  Ms  Butler's  submissions  to  me
   identify how the appellant's medical conditions or his vulnerability,  or
   other personal circumstances could sustain  a  finding  that  his  return
   would or could infringe article 15(b) or put him at such risk of harm  as
   to entitle him to humanitarian protection. In the premises, no  error  of
   law is identified.

14. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       5 July 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       5 July 2021





