
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01720/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th August 2017                    |On 05th October 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                   mr A H
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox (Counsel), Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willock-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REMAKING

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  In a  decision  promulgated
    on 23rd May 2017, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McIntosh  ("the  judge")
    allowed his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.  At the end of her decision, she allowed  the  appeal
    on asylum  grounds  and  immediately  went  on  to  also  allow  it  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

2.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge made insufficient findings, or provided no adequate  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.  There was  no  mention  in  the
    grounds of the decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  On 20th  June  2017,  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted
    permission to appeal, expressly limited to the decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.  At the end of the grant of permission  there
    is the following:

         "For the avoidance of  doubt,  permission  to  appeal  against  the
         decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  is
         refused".

Submissions on Error of Law

3.   In response to a question from me, Ms  Willock-Briscoe  confirmed  that
    the respondent had not sought to  challenge  the  judge's  decision  to
    allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.   So  far  as  the
    asylum grounds were concerned, the  decision  showed  that  the  judge,
    while accepting the appellant's account and finding that his subjective
    fear of persecution was real, failed to find that his  fear  was  well-
    founded.  The material paragraphs were 41 to 45.  There was nothing  in
    them amounting to a relevant finding in this context.  The  judge  also
    failed to identify an agent of persecution, expressly finding that  the
    appellant would not be targeted on return to Afghanistan and that there
    was no real risk that the Taliban would seek to locate him.

4.   Mr Wilcox said that although there might be some scope for argument  on
    the extent and impact of the findings made by the judge, this would  be
    academic as the decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds was not challenged.

Conclusion on Error of Law

5.   As Ms Willock-Briscoe submitted, the  material  findings  made  by  the
    judge appear at paragraphs 41 to 45 of her  decision.   She  found  the
    appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  and  accepted  that  he  had  a
    subjective fear that he would be pursued by the Taliban  on  return  to
    Afghanistan.  However, she made no findings at all that this  fear  was
    well-founded.   On  the  contrary,  her  findings  clearly   show   her
    assessment that the appellant would  not  be  targeted  or  pursued  on
    return.  No  agent  of  persecution  was  identified,  other  than  the
    Taliban.

6.   The decision reveals a further error.   It  is  trite  law  that  if  a
    person succeeds in showing that he or she is a refugee, he or  she  has
    no need of humanitarian protection.  It is only if a  person  fails  to
    show a real risk of persecution  within  the  meaning  of  the  Refugee
    Convention that he or she  may  need  humanitarian  protection.   As  a
    matter of law, it is not possible for an  appeal  to  succeed  on  both
    asylum grounds and humanitarian protection grounds.   This  is  clearly
    shown by paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules, which provides that a
    person will be granted humanitarian  protection  if  the  Secretary  of
    State is satisfied that he is in the United Kingdom, does  not  qualify
    as a refugee (subparagraph (ii))  and  substantial  grounds  have  been
    shown for believing that the person concerned, on return, would face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm.

7.   The error of law is material as it concerns the  fundamental  bases  on
    which international protection is founded.  The decision  must  be  set
    aside and remade.

Remaking the Decision

8.    Remaking  the  decision  is  a  straightforward  task.   All  that  is
    required, in the light of the application for permission to appeal, the
    precise terms of the grant and the absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
    humanitarian protection decision, is to dismiss the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, for the reasons set out above and  allow  it  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade as  follows:
the appeal is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds;  the  appeal  is  allowed  on
humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell     4 October 2017



ANONYMITY

In  view  of  the  outcome,  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,  I
continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell     4 October    2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable and so there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell         4 October 2017



