
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA019622015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 June 2016                                |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                 fiatu loko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Messrs Shanthi &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal  by  the  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo (DRC), born on 4 January 1964 against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge B A Morris who following a hearing at  Taylor
    House on 9 March 2016 and in a decision promulgated  on  4  April  2016
    dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 30 September 2015 to refuse his protection  and  human
    rights claims and to refuse to  revoke  a  Deportation  Order  made  by
    virtue of Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The Appellant's immigration and criminal history were set  out  by  the
    Respondent at paragraph 3 of her letter of refusal dated  30  September
    2015 as follows:

3.   The Appellant arrived in the UK illegally on 15 June 1991  and  claimed
    asylum.  He was interviewed on 3 April 1995  when  he  was  interviewed
    after being caught entering the UK using a forged French ID card.  On 6
    June 1995 his asylum  claim  was  refused.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision on 9 June 1995 and his appeal was heard on 12 July  1996.   On
    27 September 1996 his appeal was dismissed.  On  31  October  1996  his
    application  for  Permission  to  Appeal  (PTA)  to  the  Tribunal  was
    rejected.


4.   On 8  January  1997  he  was  arrested  for  fraud  and  convicted  and
    sentenced on 9 May 1997 to two years' imprisonment  for  Conspiracy  to
    obtain property by deception.

5.   The Appellant became the subject of a signed Deportation Order (DO)  on
    30 December 1997.  He appealed against the DO but failed  to  submit  a
    valid appeal.

6.   On 1 May 1998 the Home  Office  submitted  to  the  Immigration  Asylum
    Tribunal (IAT) that the Appellant's appeal was an invalid appeal.   His
    appeal was subsequently withdrawn  on  27  July  1998.   The  Appellant
    became Appeal Rights Exhausted on 28 July 1998.

7.   On 7 March 2001 the Appellant was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown  Court
    for Fraud/Embezzlement for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  four  years'
    imprisonment.  On 28 November 2001 the Appellant  was  sentenced  to  a
    further six months' imprisonment to run consecutively.

8.    On  20  January  2004  the   Appellant's   solicitors   submitted   an
    asylum/human rights claim.

9.   On 25 August 2004 a bail renewal application was  received  and  on  30
    November 2004 the Appellant's bail was renewed until 22 February 2005.

10.  On 16 January 2006 the Appellant's MP requested an update on the  case.



11.  On 4 December  2008  the  MP  requested  an  update  on  the  case  and
    questioned the delay on the Appellant's application for  permission  to
    work.  A response was sent to the MP on 30 December 2008 informing  him
    that permission to work had been refused.

12.  On 15 April 2013 the Home Office wrote to  the  Appellant  and  offered
    FRS to which no response was received.

13.  On 29 August  2013  the  Appellant's  case  was  referred  to  Criminal
    Casework in Liverpool.

14.  On 8 October  2014  the  Appellant  was  sent  a  status  questionnaire
    (ICD.3544) and letter with a One-Stop Notice paragraph.  The  Appellant
    completed this Questionnaire and returned it to Criminal Casework on 28
    October 2014.

15.   The  Appellant  failed  to  report  in  accordance  with   immigration
    reporting requirements on 15 January 2015 and was issued with a warning
    letter.  He resumed reporting on 26 March 2015.

16.  On 15 May 2015 a fax was received from  him  in  which  he  provided  a
    letter from North Middlesex University Hospital advising that he  could
    not report on 14 May 2015 as he had  attended  a  hospital  appointment
    with them.

17.  I should say at this stage that Permission to  Appeal  was  purportedly
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Robertson  on  28  April  2016.   I  say
    "purportedly" because clearly for  the  reasons  the  Judge  gave,  his
    intention was to refuse permission but on its face the application  was
    "granted".

18.   I raised the matter with the parties' representatives  at  the  outset
    of the hearing on 1 June 2016. In that regard I noted that this was  of
    course a matter already recognised by the Respondent  in  her  Rule  24
    response dated 17 May 2016.

19.  The parties agreed with me that it must follow  that  I  had  now  been
    seized with the hearing of this appeal and that the appropriate  course
    was to proceed to deal with it on that basis.

20.  It would however be as well,  to  set  out  below  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson's reasons that were clearly intended  to  lead  to  his
    refusal to grant permission.  They were as follows:

         "As to grounds at para 14-16,  the  Judge  took  into  account  the
         Appellant's  rehabilitation  and  the  delay  in  the  Respondent's
         consideration of the Appellant's further  representations  at  [31-
         32].  Whilst the guidance in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41  is  raised
         in the grounds, this case related to an illegal entrant who had  no
         leave to enter or remain.  In  the  Appellant's  case,  he  was  an
         illegal entrant who had never had leave to enter or remain and  who
         also was sentenced to a term  of  four  years'  imprisonment.   The
         Judge was statutorily bound to apply the provisions of s.117 of the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in the  context  of  a
         private and family life built up when the Appellant  had  no  leave
         and his wife, when they married, knew that he had no leave."

21.  I pause there because in the course of the hearing, Ms Tobin  clarified
    to me that in fact the Appellant and his wife and their first child had
    been born in the DRC prior to coming to the UK.

22.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson's reasons continued as follows:

         "The fact that the Appellant  made  further  submissions  does  not
         detract from the fact that he had no leave.  As to paras 6-8 of the
         decision, the judge was entitled to find that  notwithstanding  the
         Appellant's rehabilitation, there was still the public interest  in
         deterring foreign criminals  from  committing  offences  [see  31].
         Whilst another Judge may have reached  a  different  decision,  the
         Judge's findings were open to him on the evidence  before  him  and
         are not unreasonable or irrational.


         At the grounds at paras 13-15 the  Judge  referred  to  the  letter
         submitted by the Appellant's child at [36] and his oral evidence at
         [19], including that the child could not imagine life  without  his
         father.  However, on the evidence before him, the Judge found  that
         he could continue to be cared for by his family in the UK  if  they
         did not choose to relocate to the DRC with the Appellant [37];  the
         fact was that his wife coped with younger children when he  was  in
         prison [see 23] and there is nothing  to  prevent  the  Appellant's
         wife from taking responsibility for their child if they choose  not
         to relocate.  As to the grounds at  paras  16-17,  the  Appellant's
         wife and child are not being expected to relocate to the DRC; it is
         a decision for them.  There was no independent evidence before  the
         Judge that the Appellant was the child's primary carer.


         As to paras 18-23, the Judge is mindful of the education  provision
         in the DRC (in the context of the  decision  which  will  face  the
         family), and the circumstances of each family member are considered
         before the Judge  concludes  that  the  factors,  taken  singly  or
         cumulatively, do not amount to compelling circumstances.  The Judge
         has stated that he has considered the factors cumulatively  and  it
         cannot therefore be said that he has not.   As  stated  previously,
         whilst another Judge may have reached  a  different  decision,  the
         Judge's findings were open to him on the evidence  before  him  and
         are not unreasonable or irrational."


23.  It is right to say that as recorded by the Judge in her decision,  that
    in the course of the hearing  before  her,  she  was  informed  by  the
    Appellant's Counsel that asylum was not relied upon, that the Appellant
    accepted that he was not at risk on  return  to  the  DRC  due  to  his
    membership of the UDPS.

24.  Further, that the Appellant's case was  not  argued  on  the  basis  of
    family life with his eldest son.   In  addition,  as  conceded  in  the
    Appellant's Counsel's skeleton argument that the  Appellant  could  not
    bring himself within paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules or
    Section 117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.

25.  It was  accepted  that  there  was  a  prima  facie  compelling  public
    interest in deportation and  that  whilst  the  Appellant  was  English
    speaking and his wife was in employment, his circumstances fell  within
    Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act such that neither his private life  nor
    his relationship with his wife could be accorded significant weight  in
    the proportionality balancing exercise.  It was accepted the  Appellant
    had  to  show  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraph 399 or 399A.

26.  The Judge recorded that the Appellant relied upon Section  84(1)(c)  of
    the 2002 Act, that his removal would be unlawful under the Human Rights
    Act 1998 and that in that regard he relied upon his membership  of  the
    UDPS as a factor to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  proportionality
    assessment of his proposed removal.

27.  The Judge was clear in her decision that she  had  considered  Sections
    117A-D of the  statutory  scheme  and  the  Immigration  Rules  and  at
    paragraph 27 that she had also borne in mind Section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and the Immigration Act 2009.

28.  The Judge noted with care the decision of the Secretary  of  State  and
    concluded that there were no factors to outweigh the public interest in
    the deportation of the Appellant.

29.  It was noted that mindful of the provisions of  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Appellant fell within paragraph 398(a)  in  that
    he was sentenced to  four  years'  imprisonment  and  that  the  public
    interest in deportation, meant that very compelling circumstances,  had
    to be shown.  Further that Section 117C(6) mirrored the  provisions  of
    paragraph 398.  The Judge further took account  of  relevant  case  law
    guidance.  In that regard it included Danso [2015] EWCA  Civ  596,  KMO
    (Section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543  and  JZ  (Zambia)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 116.

30.  I would pause there because there has  recently  been  promulgated  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) and Another [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 450 in which their Lordships  reminded  themselves  that  in  cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, the Court or  Tribunal
    must have regard to the considerations set out  in  Section  117C  that
    provided:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.  [Emphasis added]

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."


31.   Their  Lordships  further  noted  that  at  the  same  time  as  those
    provisions were  entered  into  force,  amendments  were  made  to  the
    applicable Immigration Rules that built on previous amendments made  in
    2012, that those had been sought to emphasise the  strength  of  public
    interest regarding the desirability of deportation of foreign criminals
    and also to secure a consistency of approach.

32.  In that regard their Lordships noted that Rule 398(a)  in  its  amended
    form stated:

         "(a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years.


         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,


         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A." [Emphasis added].


  33.    The primary question before their  Lordships  was  to  resolve  the
    question as to the proper construction of the phrase 'unduly harsh'  in
    Section 117C in which regard the guidance of the Tribunal in MAB  (USA)
    [2015] UKUT 435 was disapproved but that in KMO (Section 117  -  unduly
    harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC) was approved.  It  would  be  as
    well for the sake of completeness to set out the head note of KMO  even
    though of course in this case we are dealing with an Appellant who  was
    required to establish very compelling circumstances over and above that
    of undue harshness.   Nonetheless  the  head  note  to  KMO  stated  as
    follows:

         "The  Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the  context  of  the
         deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code.  Where  an
         assessment is required to be made as to whether a person meets  the
         requirements  of  para  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  that
         comprises an assessment of that person's claim under article  8  of
         the  ECHR,  it  is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in  making   that
         assessment, to the matters to which the Tribunal must  have  regard
         as a consequence of the provisions of s.117C. In particular,  those
         include that the more serious the offence committed, the greater is
         the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  a   foreign   criminal.
         Therefore, the word 'unduly' in the phrase 'unduly harsh'  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh."


34.  At  paragraph  30  of  her  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    carefully and comprehensively set out the Appellant's submissions as to
    the compelling circumstances upon which he relied that it was submitted
    in  aggregate  outweighed  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   At
    paragraphs 31 to 44 of her decision  the  Judge  comprehensively  dealt
    with and reasoned her consideration in response  to  those  submissions
    and in reaching her  conclusions  considered  with  care  the  relevant
    aspects of the Immigration Rules and statutory scheme that  applied  in
    this case that she set against the backdrop of the facts as found.

35.  In terms of the application to revoke  the  Deportation  Order  account
    was also taken of paragraph 390.

36.  Much of what the Judge concluded was  indeed  carefully  summarised  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson whose reasoning in what was clearly
    intended to be a refusal of permission I have set out  above  and  with
    which (following my own consideration  of  the  evidence;  the  Judge's
    decision and; the submissions of the parties before me), I agree,  save
    for the Judge's observation that I have above corrected.

37.  I had indeed at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  further  drawn  to  the
    parties' attention Taylor [2015] EWCA Civ 845 that held that whilst the
    First-tier Tribunal recognised the need to attach significant weight to
    the public interest, they had failed to identify clearly the  different
    purposes served by deportation, namely; to reflect public revulsion  at
    serious crimes; to protect the public from further  offending;  and  to
    deter others from acting in a similar way. Further that inter alia, the
    provisions of 399 and 399A did not apply where a person  was  sentenced
    to four years or more.

  38. Their Lordships further held that the cases  in  which  rehabilitation
    could  make  a  significant  contribution  to  establishing  compelling
    reasons sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation  were
    likely to be rare.  It was primarily relevant to the reduction of  risk
    of re-offending but was less relevant to other factors that contributed
    the public  interest  in  deportation.   This  judgment  confirmed  the
    approach in Danso (above) to which the First-tier Tribunal Judge in her
    decision had properly referred as to the approach to rehabilitation but
    which is very different from that in EEA removals.


39.  I had also referred the parties to Suckoo [2016] EWCA Civ 39 that  held
    that an Article 8 assessment outside the ambit of the Immigration Rules
    on deportation was wrong in law.  See also LC (China) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1310 and AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.

40.  In that case their Lordships held consistent with other guidance,  that
    an assessment of Convention rights must be made through the lens of the
    Immigration Rules.  The  public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals and Article 8 rights were not held in a suspenseful  balance.
    The scales were weighted in favour of  deportation  unless  there  were
    circumstances  that  were   sufficiently   compelling   and   therefore
    exceptional to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

41.  Further, paragraph 399 was not applicable  to  a  person  sentenced  to
    four  years'  imprisonment  or  more.    Thus   the   very   compelling
    circumstances that the Secretary of State must take into  account  were
    over and above the fact that it would be unduly harsh for the child  in
    such circumstances.

42.  Finally I drew the parties' attention to  the  recent  decision  in  CT
    (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 that held inter alia as follows:

         "The best interests of the child  always  a  primary  consideration
         were not sole paramount but to be balanced against  other  factors,
         in this case that only the strongest Article 8 claims will outweigh
         the public interest in deporting someone sentenced to at least four
         years' imprisonment.  It would almost always  be  proportionate  to
         deport event taking into account as  a  primary  consideration  the
         best interests of a child."


43.  At paragraph 36 of her judgment Lady Justice Rafferty had this to say:

         "36. The effect on the children was, on the evidence to leave  them
             unhappy at the prospect  of  their  father  being  on  another
             continent.  I readily accept  that  description.   Experienced
             teaches that most children would so react.   I  cannot  accept
             the conclusion that added to a low risk  of  re-offending  the
             effect on them tips the balance.  These children will  not  be
             bereft of both loving parents.  Nor was there evidence of  the
             striking  condition  which  his  presence  in  the  UK   would
             dispositively resolve.  He is said to have 'a particular  tie'
             with the respondent.  The son was said  to  have  spoken  less
             confidently when his father was in prison and to have returned
             to confidence upon his release.  That is not exceptional.


         37.   Neither  can  I  accept  the  respondent  had  rebutted   the
             presumption that he posed a danger to the public.  This  could
             only have been based on three and a half years  of  unreported
             further offending.  In the context of such  serious  offending
             and on lessons plainly not learnt between prison  sentences  I
             agree with the SSHD that he failed to rebut the presumption.


         38.   Appellate  guidance  is  clearer  now  than  when   the   FtT
             promulgated its decision.   As  paragraph  24  of  LC  (China)
             succinctly explains, where the person to be deported has  been
             sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment  or  more  the  weight
             attached to the public interest in  deportation  remains  very
             great despite the  factors  to  which  paragraph  399  refers.
             Neither the British nationality of the  respondent's  children
             nor their likely separation from their father for a long  time
             is  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh   the   public
             interest in his deportation.  Something more  is  required  to
             weigh in the balance and nothing of  substance  offered.   The
             approach of both the FtT and the UT failed to give  effect  to
             the clearly expressed parliamentary intention."


44.  Ms Tobin invited me to distinguish the facts in CT from  those  of  the
    Appellant in the present case, in that  he  was  not  convicted  of  an
    offence of violence.  I recognise that distinction but it  is  apparent
    to me on reading of the judgment in CT as a whole that  the  principles
    that Rafferty  LJ  enunciated  generally  applied  to  those  who  were
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more.

45.  I have  observed  that  although  the  decisions  in  MM  (Uganda),  CT
    (Vietnam),  Suckoo  all  postdated  the  Judge's  decision,  they  were
    nonetheless declaratory of existing legal principles and  interestingly
    the Judge's approach in the  present  case  to  the  relevant  guidance
    applicable at the time of her  decision,  was  consistent  with  recent
    decisions and properly applied against the backdrop of the facts as she
    found them.

46.  Ms Tobin in her submissions  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had failed to deal with the delay in the making of the  Secretary
    of State's decision.  In that regard I would point out that as a matter
    of law, the Appellant has not technically been  ever  admitted  to  the
    United Kingdom and has had no lawful  basis  for  being  present.   The
    Appellant has known since the first Deportation Order was signed on  30
    December 1997 that he was a person in respect of whom the Secretary  of
    State was seeking  his  deportation  and  therefore  the  decision  was
    proportionate and was not subject to any delay in consequence.

47.    The question of delay cannot in the circumstances of this  Appellant,
    amount to  very  compelling  circumstances  and  indeed  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 32 of his decision, whilst accepting that there  had  been  a
    lengthy delay in this case pointed out that he also took  into  account
    that the Appellant never had permission to be in the United Kingdom  in
    that his arrival was unlawful, that he had remained here  knowing  that
    he had no permission to do so.  He had remained in the  United  Kingdom
    knowing that a Deportation Order was signed on  30  December  1977  and
    therefore did not find that such delay  amounted  to  "very  compelling
    circumstances".  I find not even an  arguable  error  of  law  in  that
    reasoning.

48.   Ms Tobin further submitted that there had been  a  failure  to  engage
    with Section 55 and the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  youngest
    child in terms of whether there were compelling circumstances as to why
    deportation should not proceed.  In that regard I would point out  that
    under the Immigration Rules and Section 117C, the public interest as  I
    have described  above,  requires  deportation  unless  very  compelling
    circumstances are established over and above Exceptions 1 and 2.  If it
    is accepted that the effect of deportation would be unduly  harsh  that
    would not be enough in this case because very compelling  circumstances
    had to be shown.
49.  It was submitted that the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his
    child had developed to the point where disturbing it  would  be  unduly
    harsh on the child. Whilst it was during a period  when  the  Appellant
    could have been but was not deported, I can appreciate that  this  fact
    could be a  compelling  circumstance  over  and  above  the  exception.
    However, in that regard the First-tier Tribunal Judge made reference to
    the evidence concerning the child and as to the  child's  circumstances
    at paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 19, 23 and 30 of his decision.  It is impossible
    in those circumstances to conclude that the Judge could not have had in
    mind throughout his decision in this appeal, the best interests of  the
    child.  Indeed it  is  apparent  to  me  that  it  is  a  thread  woven
    throughout the whole determination.

50.  Ms Tobin further submitted that the Judge had  looked  at  the  various
    aspects of the case but had failed to look at them cumulatively and  in
    the round and had  instead,  looked  at  each  issue  in  the  case  in
    isolation and made a decision as to whether in  isolation  each  factor
    constituted compelling circumstances.

51.  I do not agree.  At paragraph 30 of her decision  the  Judge  carefully
    and comprehensively set out  the  Appellant's  submissions  as  to  the
    compelling circumstances upon which  he  relied  and  as  a  matter  of
    practicality she had to deal with the issues  sequentially,  making  of
    them what she did.  At  paragraph  45  of  her  decision  she  made  it
    unambiguously clear that she  had  then  drawn  all  of  that  material
    together in reaching a balance between the competing interests in play.



52.  The Judge was indeed clear at paragraph 45 that:

         "Taking account of the evidence as a whole as I  do,  I  find  that
         there are no circumstances considered singly or cumulatively  which
         amount to very compelling circumstances which outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation of this appellant.  Consequently the appeal
         is dismissed."


53.  Whilst in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  00085
    (IAC) it was made clear that reasons for  conclusions  in  the  central
    issues of appeals need not be extensive if the decision as a whole made
    sense, in fact in  the  present  case  and  within  the  determination,
    comprehensive reasons were provided by the Judge for  her  conclusions.
    This is not a case where such reasoning could in any sense be described
    as inadequate.  It  is  apparent  that  the  determination  reveals  no
    misdirection of law.  Further the Judge's fact-finding  process  cannot
    be criticised.  Additionally it is  apparent  that  relevant  case  law
    guidance was properly taken into account  within  the  context  of  the
    Judge's findings and that of the statutory scheme on the basis  of  the
    evidence that was reasonably open to her.

54.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 902, I find that it cannot be said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable such as
    to amount to perversity.  It cannot be said that they were  inadequate.
    This is not a case where the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning  was
    such that the Tribunal was unable to understand the  thought  processes
    that she employed in reaching her decision.

55.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that she considered to be critical to  her  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before her in this appeal.  The findings  that  she  made
    were clearly open to her on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Notice of Decision

56.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

57.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7 June 2016


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

