
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01264/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2016                    |On 25 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                  samer [i]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. R. Frantzis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs. R. Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

ANONYMITY

1.    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
    been asked to make one and I see no reason for doing  so  and  none  is
    made.

INTRODUCTION

2.    This appeal has its origin  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 08 September 2015, whereby the claim of the Appellant for refugee
    status was refused. The Appellant's ensuing appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed.

THE ASYLUM CLAIM

3.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1977.  The
    asylum claim was based on his fear of the Taliban. He claimed that  the
    Taliban killed two of his brothers, and that he was  physically  beaten
    by them for working as a labourer  in  an  American  military  camp  in
    Kandehar. The Secretary of State refused the  application  because  she
    rejected key  elements  of  the  Appellant's  claim  as  untruthful  or
    unreliable.

DECISION OF THE FtT

4.    The FtT, in essence, endorsed the Secretary of State's  decision.  The
    Appellant's account was considered  unreliable  in  its  entirety.  The
    Judge, in reaching this omnibus conclusion, made a series  of  findings
    on discrete issues adverse to the Appellant save for the fact  that  it
    was accepted he is an Afghan national and a Shi'a Muslim. The FtT  thus
    refused the asylum appeal. The FtT further found that the Appellant did
    not qualify for humanitarian protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive. In so doing the FtT referred to  the  guidance
    given in AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  163  and  the
    background country evidence. Significantly, the FtT referred at [31] to
    an Amnesty International report of 2015  that  noted  inter  alia  that
    there had been a 3%  decrease  in  the  stated  deaths  and  casualties
    recorded when compared to the same period in 2014.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dineen
    on 13 July 2016.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

6.    An initial issue with which I  have  to  deal  is  the  scope  of  the
    permission to appeal from the  FtT.  The  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal plead three  grounds  of  appeal.  The  permission
    granting judge gave an opinion that there was no merit in  grounds  one
    and three but found merit in ground two. Miss Frantzis argued that  the
    FtT's grant of permission was generic and that it had not  limited  the
    grant of permission to ground two only. She referred to the decision in
    Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304  and  indicated
    that the FtT had not put the Appellant on notice  that  the  grant  was
    limited thereby denying him an opportunity of renewing his  application
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mrs  Pettersen  conceded  that  there   were
    difficulties with the FtT's grant of permission in which the Judge  had
    expressed his opinion as to the merits of grounds one  and  three,  and
    she quite properly recognised that the FtT had  not  expressly  refused
    permission on grounds one and three.

7.    It is clear that in order to grant permission on limited grounds  this
    must be made "abundantly  plain"  in  the  decision  on  permission  to
    appeal, and that the Tribunal staff must send out  the  proper  notices
    informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper Tribunal for
    permission to appeal on the  grounds  on  which  he  or  she  has  been
    unsuccessful in the application to the FtT (see conclusion (2) of  head
    note in Ferrer (supra)). It was  quite  clear  that  Judge  Dineen  had
    discounted giving permission to appeal on grounds one and three but  it
    is also quite clear that the  relevant  notices  regarding  options  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal for permission on these grounds  were  not
    provided to the Appellant. In view of the representatives submissions I
    found that the grant of permission to appeal was  not  limited,  taking
    all matters into consideration. The Appellant  was  thus  permitted  to
    argue all three grounds of appeal.

8.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal  advance  three  challenges  to  the
    FtT's decision. Broadly put, they state that the FtT erred in law  when
    considering the Appellant's claim for protection  pursuant  to  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive, in that, it  failed  to  consider
    material evidence in the form of an expert report of Dr Giustozzi and a
    UNHCR report and, whilst the FtT referred to an  Amnesty  International
    Report with reference to a 3% reduction in civilian casualties by armed
    groups, it did not advert to reference on the same page of that  report
    to a 60% increase in such casualties at the  hands  of  pro  government
    forces.

9.    At the hearing Mrs Pettersen fairly conceded  that  the  grounds  were
    made out, in that, the FtT had materially erred in law  in  failing  to
    consider the expert report and inadequately considering the  background
    evidence directed towards the Appellant's claim under Article 15(c).

10.   In view of the Respondent's concession rightly  made  I  announced  at
    the hearing that I found that the FtT materially erred in law and I set
    aside its decision. I find that  the  FtT's  consideration  of  whether
    there was an Article 15(c) risk to the  Appellant  was  inadequate  and
    unbalanced. The  FtT  does  not  refer  to  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi, other than within the context of its  credibility  findings,
    or, the UNHCR report, all of which purport to  demonstrate  that  there
    has been a recent increase in violence and an  intensification  of  the
    conflict in Afghanistan. The FtT's analysis of the background  evidence
    is limited to  a  consideration  of  an  EASO  report  and  an  Amnesty
    International report. In respect of the latter, the FtT referred  to  a
    3% decrease in casualties at the hands of armed groups since 2014,  but
    failed to balance this against the reported findings on the  same  page
    of that  report  that  there  had  been  a  60%  increase  in  civilian
    casualties at the hands of pro government forces.  I  find  that  these
    failures are material shortcomings in the FtT's decision and constitute
    errors of law.

Disposal

11.   Miss Frantzis sought a remittal to the FtT given the  extent  of  fact
    finding required in respect of the Appellant's claim under  Article  15
    (c). Mrs Pettersen took a neutral stance on the matter. I am  persuaded
    that the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal  to  the  FtT.  The
    Appellant's claim under Article 15(c) has not been properly  considered
    by the FtT and given the extent of fact finding required remittal to  a
    differently constituted FtT  is  the  appropriate  course.   The  FtT's
    findings of fact at [12] to [26] are preserved. For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt the remittal is limited to a  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    claim under Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the FtT did  involve  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision of the FtT.

    The appeal is remitted to the FtT for rehearing by a judge  other  than
    Judge LSL Mensah.


Signed:     Date: 22 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

