
                                    [pic]
IAC-AR-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01896/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 November 2016                        |On 17 November 2016            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     L K

                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr. M. Saleem, of counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr. L. Tarlow,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on  6  November  1970,  is  a  national  of
    Albania.  She entered the United Kingdom on 8 November 2015 and applied
    for  asylum  on  12  November  2015.  She  was  interviewed  about  her
    application on 29 January 2016. The basis of her application  was  that
    her husband, who had  been  a  police  officer  in  Albania,  had  been
    threatened by criminals he had previously arrested  and  who  had  been
    sent to prison.

2.   The Appellant's application  was  refused  on  15  February  2016.  She
    appealed against this decision  on  24  February  2016  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin dismissed her appeal in a decision  promulgated  on
    22 August 2016. The Appellant appealed against her decision and  on  19
    October 2016 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  granted  her  permission  to
    appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellants submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Amin had applied a higher standard of proof than was appropriate in  an
    asylum appeal and  had  also  failed  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence.  He also submitted that the Judge had  not  made  any  proper
    findings of credibility and that the objective evidence indicated  that
    there was not a sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in Albania.
    I deal with his more detailed submissions in my findings below.

4.   In his response, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  said  that  he
    relied on his Rule 24 reply and submitted that the  sections  referring
    to a higher standard of proof were merely a  typographical  error.   He
    submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account and that her findings  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.  He added that, once the Judge found that the  Appellant  was
    not credible, the other findings flowed  from  this  and,  taken  as  a
    whole,  the  evidence  indicated  that  she   was   not   entitled   to
    international protection.

FINDINGS

5.   Upper Tribunal Judge Gill did not give  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds  of  appeal  submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   no
    application was made to rely on them at the hearing.

6.   The first ground submitted to the Upper Tribunal  was  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin applied the wrong standard of proof.  I accept that
    in paragraph 57 of her decision and reasons the Judge  said  that  "the
    Appellant has not shown on a balance of probabilities  that  the  State
    would not be able to protect her". However, I also note that earlier on
    in the decision, she had  correctly  reminded  herself  that  the  "the
    standard of proof required is that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood  that  the  Applicant  will  be  persecuted  for  a   Geneva
    Convention reason". In addition, in paragraph 24, she  had  noted  that
    for the purposes of Humanitarian Protection the standard of proof which
    was necessary is that of a reasonable degree of likelihood.

7.   This does suggest, as submitted by the Home Office Presenting  Officer,
    that the later references to  standards  of  proof  were  typographical
    errors.  However, I also have  to  consider  whether  the  errors  were
    material. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Amin's  findings  in  relation  to
    sufficiency of protection in paragraph 57 only became  material  if  it
    could be shown that the Judge had erred in the manner in which she  had
    dealt with the credibility of the Appellant's  account  and  had  found
    that  she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason.  In paragraph 41 of her decision the Judge  made  it
    clear that she did not believe the Appellant's account of being at risk
    because her husband had arrested some unknown persons who had now  been
    released from prison.  She gave detailed reasons for coming to  such  a
    decision in paragraphs 41 to 55 of her decision.

8.   Therefore, even if  the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  considered  the
    question of a sufficiency of protection was marred by her reference  to
    a balance of probabilities, this did not undermine the essential  basis
    upon which the appeal was refused, which  was  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that she was at risk of persecution, as claimed.

9.   At the hearing, counsel for the  Appellant  tried  to  argue  that  the
    Judge's  reference  to  her  evidence  being  hearsay  and  speculative
    indicated that she had not  applied  the  correct  standard  of  proof.
    However, the methodology adopted by the judge of  considering  all  the
    evidence in paragraphs 41 to  55 and assigning  appropriate  weight  to
    each item was in  keeping  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Kaaranakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2000]  EWCA
    Civ 11. It did not indicate that she had applied the incorrect standard
    of proof.

10.  Counsel for  the  Appellant  also  tried  to  argue  that  the  Judge's
    findings on the Appellant's credibility did not address the contents of
    the Appellant's statement or her asylum interview.  However,  this  was
    not an issue raised in either set of  grounds  and  she  had  not  been
    granted permission on this point.  In any event, the account  given  by
    the Appellant had been considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin and
    for the detailed reasons  given  in  her  decision,  it  had  not  been
    believed.  In addition, the particular replies in the asylum interview,
    referred to by counsel for the Appellant,  did  not  suggest  that  the
    Judge had not understood the case being put forward  by  the  Appellant
    and the submissions made by counsel  were  an  attempt  to  re-run  the
    factual basis of the appeal.

11.  Counsel tried  to  rely  on  a  document  entitled  Albania  profile  -
    Timeline but this was  not  a  document  which  was  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin and he had  not  sought  permission  to  adduce  it
    before the Upper Tribunal.  He  also  argued  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to protection as the family member  of  an  individual  facing
    persecution.   I  accept  that  a  family   member   may   in   certain
    circumstances be entitled to protection under the Convention but First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Amin had found in paragraph 48  that  she  did  not
    believe that the Appellant's husband had been attacked some  ten  years
    ago and that this was why he left the police force and at paragraph  54
    she found that the Appellant and her family were not presently at  risk
    from  any  non-state  actors.   These  findings   were   not   directly
    challenged.

12.  Counsel also argued  that  the  objective  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellant had not been taken into account. However, in paragraph 39 the
    Judge expressly stated that she had taken into account any  documentary
    evidence drawn to her attention.  The objective evidence  drawn  to  my
    attention was very general  in  nature  and,  in  particular,  did  not
    address the central question of whether former criminals sought revenge
    against police officers who had arrested them.

13.  In the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  Appellant  also
    relied on the fact that in paragraph  62  of  her  decision  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin stated that "the Appellant had  not  shown  to  the
    civil standard that her return to Albania would breach articles 2 and 3
    of the ECHR". However, again this  would  only  have  been  a  material
    error, if the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  found  the  Appellant's
    account to be credible.

14.  For all these reasons, I am  satisfied  that  there  were  no  material
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and reasons,

DECISION

15.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Nadine Finch




Signed                                  Date 17 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


