
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA012132016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 22 May 2017                             |On 30 May 2017             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED BAQY RASHID
                            (ANONYMITY NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Caskie (counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bradshaw promulgated on 16 March 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.


3. The Appellant was born on 13 November 1994 and is a national of Iraq.  On
22 January 2016, the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bradshaw ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  10  April  2017  Judge  E  B
Grant gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The grounds submit the FtTJ erred in law  when  assessing  internal
      relocation,  when  assessing  article  15(c)  of   the   qualification
      directive including making conflicting findings on the one  hand  that
      the appellant can be returned to KRG via Baghdad and on the other hand
      finding that return to Iraq is not  feasible.  The  complaint  in  the
      grounds regarding to the credibility findings is devoid of  merit  and
      raises no arguable error of law in respect of the adverse  credibility
      findings made by the FtTJ which were properly  open  to  him  for  the
      reasons given.


      3. Ground 1 may be argued.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the  appellant,  Mr  Caskie  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
reminded me that the appellant is a 22-year-old man  from  a  small  village
close to Kirkuk, and that the Judge made findings that the  appellant  could
take up life in Erbil. He reminded me that the appellant is  not  from  IKR.
He referred me to AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC  (in
particular paragraph 13 of the head note) & said that the  Judge  had  erred
in law because the Judge had failed to  engage  with  what  would  face  the
appellant if he is returned to Iraq. He took me to  [94]  of  the  decision,
where the respondent's  position  that  return  to  Iraq  is  not  currently
feasible for the appellant is recorded. He then  took  me  to  [93]  of  the
decision and told me that the Judge's finding there amounts  to  a  material
error of law.

(b) Mr Caskie told me that the Judge has given inadequate  consideration  to
the events in the appellant's home area, which had been  overrun  by  Daesh,
before being reclaimed and dominated by the Iraqi  army.  He  told  me  that
inadequate consideration has been given to  the  background  materials,  and
that the Judge had failed to consider the  deteriorating  position  in  IKR,
which he says  is  overwhelmed  by  an  influx  of  millions  of  internally
displaced persons.

(c) Mr Caskie told me that the Judge's findings at [92], [93] and  [94]  are
both inadequate and contradictory. He told me that  even  if  the  appellant
held a valid CSID, the country situation is so dire that  it  is  impossible
and unreasonable to safely relocate. He told  me  that  the  Judge  has  not
properly engaged with those considerations. He insisted  that  the  decision
is tainted by material errors of law  and  urged  me  to  set  the  decision
aside.

6. (a) Mr Matthews reminded me that permission to appeal  had  been  granted
in relation to ground 1 only. Ground 1 contains four subparagraphs. He  told
me that Mr Caskie's submissions made a  fleeting  reference  to  ground  one
(iii) only,  and  that  the  argument  advanced  could  not  competently  be
considered because permission to  appeal  had  not  been  granted  for  that
argument.

(b) Taking each of the  four  parts  of  the  ground  of  appeal  for  which
permission to appeal has been granted, Mr Matthews told me that  ground  one
(i) is a misconception. He told me that what is set out in  that  ground  of
appeal discloses a misunderstanding  of  the  ratio  of  AA  insofar  as  it
relates to returned directly to IKR. (Mr Caskie interjected to say  that  he
agreed with Mr Matthews.)

(c) He told me that  ground  one  (ii)  has  no  merit  because  it  is  the
respondent's position, which is acknowledged  by  the  Judge,  that  at  the
moment for this appellant return to Iraq is not feasible. Mr  Matthews  then
focused on ground one (iii). He told me  that  [92]  of  the  decision  goes
without challenge and that the ground of appeal focuses on  [93]  and  [94].
He took me to the terms of [93] and [94] and argued that  there  is  nothing
contradictory contained in those two paragraphs. He told  me  that  [93]  is
the Judge's conclusion on the question  of  internal  relocation,  and  [94]
records a fact which is not in dispute.

(d) Mr Matthews turned to ground one (iv) and told me  that  the  Judge  had
correctly applied the country guidance contained in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq
CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC. He told with the  decision  does  not  contain  any
errors of law, material or otherwise, and urged me  to  dismiss  the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  it  was  held  that
(i) Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be  to
the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi authorities  will
allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only  if  P
is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or  a
laissez passer; (ii) No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if  not
in possession of one of these documents; (iii)  In the light  of  the  Court
of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an  international  protection  claim
made by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising
from an absence of  Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
finds that P's return is not currently feasible, given what is  known  about
the state of P's documentation.

8. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  it  was  also  held
that (i) It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the return  of
an Iraqi national (P) to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk  of
harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  will
require  judicial  determination;  (ii)  Having  a  Civil  Status   Identity
Document (CSID) is one of the ways in which it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
national in the United Kingdom to obtain a passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a passport  or
laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,
if any, identification documentation led the Iraqi authorities  to  issue  P
with the passport or laissez passer (or to  signal  their  intention  to  do
so); (iii) Where P is returned to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of  return  by
reason of not having a current passport  or  other  current  form  of  Iraqi
identification document; (iv) Where P's return  to  Iraq  is  found  by  the
Tribunal to be feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether  P
has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival  in
Iraq. A CSID  is  generally  required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
financial assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;
and medical treatment.  If P shows there are  no  family  or  other  members
likely to be able to provide means of support, P is  in  general  likely  to
face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents  to  assist
P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that  P  will  still
have no CSID; (v) Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
should as a general matter be able to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil  Status
Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a  passport,  P's
ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page  and  volume
number of the book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
ability to persuade the  officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family members  or  other
individuals who are prepared to vouch for P; (v) P's  ability  to  obtain  a
CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P is unable to  go  to  the  Civil
Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate because it  is  in  an  area  where
Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin   have   been
established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not demonstrate  that
the "Central Archive", which exists in  Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for  formal  recognition  of
identity. The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.


9. In BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) it was held that
(i) The level of general violence in Baghdad city remains significant,  but
the current evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion of  the
Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  (ii)  The
evidence shows that those who worked for non-security  related  Western  or
international companies, or any other categories of  people  who  would  be
perceived as having collaborated with foreign coalition forces,  are  still
likely to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have  high
levels of insurgent activity. At the current time the  risk  is  likely  to
emanate from Sunni insurgent groups  who  continue  to  target  Western  or
international companies as well as those who are perceived  to  collaborate
with the Government of Iraq. (iii) The current evidence indicates that  the
risk in Baghdad to those who worked for  non-security  related  Western  or
international companies is low although there  is  evidence  to  show  that
insurgent groups such as ISIL  are  active  and  capable  of  carrying  out
attacks in the city. In so far as there may be a low  level  of  risk  from
such groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to show a real risk solely as a
perceived  collaborator.  (iv)  Kidnapping  has  been,   and   remains,   a
significant and persistent problem contributing to the breakdown of law and
order in Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping  are  likely  to  be  underreported.
Kidnappings might be linked to  a  political  or  sectarian  motive;  other
kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity for a purely financial  motive.
Whether a returnee from the West is likely to be perceived as  a  potential
target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been
away from Iraq. Each case will be fact sensitive,  but  in  principle,  the
longer a person has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.  However,  the
evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this  ground
alone. (v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of  US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in  2006-2007.  A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia  militias  in  Baghdad.  The
evidence indicates that Sunni  men  are  more  likely  to  be  targeted  as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create  a
real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk
for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)   of   the
Qualification Directive  or  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the  facts  of  each  case.
(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide  sufficient
protection.

10. The grant of permission to  appeal  makes  it  clear  that  the  Judge's
credibility findings stand. Permission to appeal was granted on  ground  one
only. Ground one suggests argues that an error of law  has  been  made  when
assessing internal relocation  and  when  assessing  article  15(c)  of  the
qualification directive. No submissions were  made  to  me  in  relation  to
article 15(c) of the qualification directive. This appeal is all  about  the
question of internal relocation.

11. The Judge sets out his findings between [39] and [86] of  the  decision.
No challenge is taken to any of those findings.  At  [87]  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant has fabricated his claim; the  Judge  concludes  [87]  by
saying

      "I do not find the appellant to be a credible witness."

In terms of the grant of permission to appeal, that finding must go  without
challenge.

12. This appeal focuses on three paragraphs in the decision, [92], [93]  and
[94]. By the time the objective reader  reaches  the  end  of  [91]  of  the
decision,  the  Judge  has  made  clear,  sustainable,  findings  that   the
appellant is a young single male Kurd  from  a  disputed  area,  who  speaks
Kurdish. It is equally clear that every other part of the appellant's  claim
has been found to be a fabrication.

13.  At [90], [91] and [92] the  Judge  correctly  takes  guidance  from  AA
(Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). The  ground  of  appeal  that
was moved is, quite simply, that there is a contradiction between  [93]  and
[94] of the decision. A fair reading of the decision as a whole  shows  that
there is no such contradiction. [93] and [94] cannot be read  in  isolation.
[93] is the succinct conclusion that the  Judge  reaches  after  making  his
findings of fact and taking  guidance  in  law.   [94]  simply  records  the
respondent's position  that  for  this  appellant  return  to  Iraq  is  not
currently feasible. The fact that return to Iraq is not  currently  feasible
does  not  equate  to  a  finding  that  the  appellant  cannot  safely  and
reasonably relocate to the IKR.

14. The Judge can only make findings of fact based on  the  evidence  placed
before him after assessing the quality of the evidence. In  this  case,  the
Judge found that the appellant has lied about  what  happened  in  Iraq  and
lied about his reason for leaving Iraq.

15.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

16.  The decision does not contain an error of law. It is for the  Judge  to
decide what weight to  place  on  the  evidence.  There  is  no  justifiable
criticism  of  the  fact-finding  exercise.  The  Judge   directed   himself
correctly in law. The Judge sets  out  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the
conclusion that he reaches. The  decision  reached  by  the  Judge  is  well
within the range of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.

17. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

18. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

19. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


