
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01047/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 14 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    I.D.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper of Counsel instructed by Luqmani
Thompson.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Freer promulgated on 17 June  2019  dismissing  the  appeal  of  ID  on
    protection grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a  20  year  old  citizen  of  Albania.  His  personal
    details are a matter of record on file and are not reproduced  here  in
    accordance with the anonymity order that has previously been  made  and
    is hereby continued.


3.   An application for entry clearance as a visitor was made  in  September
    2015. The application was refused on 28 September 2015.


4.   The Appellant claims to have left Albania in February 2016,  travelling
    overland through Kosovo, Belgium, and France, before  entering  the  UK
    clandestinely at the end of February 2016. He claimed asylum on 1 March
    2016.


5.   Whilst his asylum claim was pending a referral was made in  respect  of
    trafficking / modern slavery  under  the  National  Referral  Mechanism
    ('NRM'); a decision that he was not the victim of trafficking or modern
    slavery was made on 28 September 2016.


6.   The Appellant's application for protection is based upon his  claim  to
    have unwittingly become involved with a gang selling drugs in  Albania.
    The Appellant has claimed that after leaving school he  was  introduced
    in May 2015 by his older cousin, 'H', to 3 of his friends for  whom  he
    began to deliver packages. He now claims that  the  packages  contained
    drugs, of which he had been unaware when he began the work. In  January
    2016 H told him that the packages contained drugs and  said  he  should
    leave the job. The Appellant stopped working and sought  to  avoid  his
    'employers'; however they found him after about a week, beat  him,  and
    forced him to resume working for them. In February  2016  he  overheard
    the gang saying that H had been killed in Germany; this was the trigger
    event for the Appellant leaving Albania. He fears that his attempts  to
    evade the gang will lead to his ill-treatment or death.


7.   The Appellant also alleged a history of physical abuse at the hands  of
    his father, and expressed a fear that his father  would  again  assault
    him in the future.


8.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 22 January 2019.


9.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


10.  The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Freer promulgated on 17 June  2019.  Amongst  other
    things, the First-tier Tribunal found:

         (i) Were the Appellant's account  to  be  true,  "a  fear  of  drug
         dealing gangsters is plausible"; "it would be natural to keep one's
         head down rather than helping the police  investigate  a  killing";
         "The police are often connected with gangs" (paragraph 33).

         (ii) The Appellant was related to H as claimed (paragraph  39;  see
         also paragraph 53).

         (iii) H  had  been  killed  in  Germany  (paragraph  39;  see  also
    paragraph 53).

         (iv) The Appellant was not "a reliable witness of truth" (paragraph
         32). (This particular observation was made in the  context  of  his
         evidence  as  to  his  family's  knowledge  of  H's  killing  being
         discrepant at different times.)

         (v) "He is unstable and haphazard  with  his  evidence"  (paragraph
         46). (This observation made in the context of evidence relating  to
         the circumstances of the visa application made  in  September  2015
         and the use of the Appellant's father's apparent signature.)

         (vi) The Appellant had "failed to make his case  about  the  reason
         for the killing of [H]" (paragraph 22, see also paragraph 35).

         (vii) The Appellant's claim that his father had ever  been  violent
         towards him was to be rejected (paragraph 45;  see  also  paragraph
         54).

         (viii) The Appellant has never been involved with a drugs  gang  as
         claimed (paragraph 55); "... no gang was ever  interested  in  this
         appellant or any of his family" (paragraph 57).


11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  9  August
    2019.


Consideration of 'Error of Law' challenge

12.  The Grounds of Appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal essentially seek to challenge the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on three bases, set out in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  with  the
    following headings: "Ground 1: Failure to assess the claim in light  of
    the expert evidence"; "Ground 2; Failure to apply the correct  standard
    of proof"; and "Ground 3: Failure to consider the  claim  with  anxious
    scrutiny".


13.  In granting permission to appeal Judge Grubb characterised Ground 1  as
    "arguable". In respect of Grounds 2 and 3 he observed that  they  "have
    less merit and may, on examination prove unfounded.  However,  I  would
    not exclude consideration of them".


14.   Ground  1  focuses  on  expert  evidence  filed  in  support  of   the
    Appellant's appeal. The details of the Appellant's expert witness,  and
    the contents of his report are a matter of record on file:  Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at B1-B35.  (The  expert,  as  is
    usual in protection appeals, provided a report, but did not attend  the
    hearing as a live witness.)


15.  It is manifest that the Judge was aware of the report:  indeed,  it  is
    observed at paragraph 3 of the Grounds that the Judge characterised the
    expert as having "relevant experience and  qualifications  [which]  are
    both impressive and very extensive"  (paragraph  20).  However,  it  is
    argued on behalf of the Appellant that the Judge failed to have  regard
    to the contents of the expert's report in evaluating the credibility of
    the Appellant's narrative account. Relevant aspects of the  report  are
    identified in this regard in the Grounds,  in  particular:  that  gangs
    targeted young people who were unaware of what they were being involved
    in; that it was difficult to extricate oneself from again;  gangs  were
    well-connected and exchange information about  individuals;  and  there
    were difficulties accessing state protection. The Grounds also note the
    expert's research into press reports of the trial  of  the  Appellant's
    cousin's killer in Germany.


16.  I have summarised  above  aspects  of  the  Judge's  findings.  In  the
    present context I note in particular that the Judge observed that  were
    the Appellant's account to be true, "a fear of drug  dealing  gangsters
    is plausible"; "it would be natural to keep one's head down rather than
    helping the police  investigate  a  killing";  "The  police  are  often
    connected with gangs" (paragraph 33).  These  generalised  observations
    essentially relate to the background country situation and  the  milieu
    in Albania in respect of drug gangs and the  limited  effectiveness  of
    the police. It is not suggested that such observations depart from  the
    expert's opinion. In my judgement it cannot sustainably be argued  that
    the Judge had regard to the Appellant's account in isolation  from  the
    country situation. Indeed - and again as recognised in the Grounds - he
    drew on  the  expert's  report  in  evaluating  the  circumstances  H's
    killing:   "The   expert   mentions..."   (paragraph   35).   In   such
    circumstances, neither can it be said that the Judge  'overlooked'  the
    expert.


17.  I can detect nothing in the Decision that suggests that the  Judge  was
    unaware of, or otherwise misconceived, the general country situation in
    so far as it pertains to the Appellant's narrative account.


18.  Moreover, and perhaps  more  pertinently,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    Judge's reasons for disbelieving the Appellant did not  relate  in  any
    way to the notion that his  account  was  not  credible  when  measured
    against the country situation.  In  particular,  the  Judge  identified
    difficulties  with  the  Appellant's  chronology,  and  otherwise  with
    internal inconsistencies in the evidence.


19.  It seems to me that ultimately this Ground  of  challenge  invites  re-
    evaluation of the  Appellant's  narrative  with  reference  to  broadly
    consistent elements of the expert  report.  This  is  in  substance  to
    reopen and reargue the facts of the case I am not  persuaded  that  any
    material error of law is identified in Ground 1.


20.  Ground 2 pleads that the Judge failed to apply the correct standard  of
    proof. It is argued that this may be inferred from the Judge's apparent
    requirement  that  the  Appellant  provide   "levels   and   types   of
    corroborative evidence... to prove his claim conclusively  rather  than
    to the standard of reasonable likelihood" (paragraph 6 of the Grounds).
    This  submission  is  illustrated  by  reference  to  passages  in  the
    Decision.


21.  It is plain on the face of the Decision that  the  Judge  appropriately
    directed himself that the burden of proof was on the Appellant, and  in
    respect of protection the standard of proof was "reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood" (paragraph 8). Having given the Grounds of  Appeal  and  Ms
    Harper's submissions careful consideration, I  am  not  persuaded  that
    anything in the passages  identified,  or  otherwise,  is  such  as  to
    conclude that the Judge disregarded his self-direction.


22.  In particular:

         (i) The Judge's  observation  that  documents  in  respect  of  the
         decline of the Appellant's father's business were not  evidence  of
         bankruptcy (paragraph 37) is wholly rational. Similarly,  there  is
         nothing inaccurate in the Judge's observation at  paragraph  60  to
         similar effect: "When a business ceases to trade, it is  not  proof
         that no new businesses set up.  It  is  not  proof  of  poverty  or
         bankruptcy." I do not accept that it  can  be  implied  from  these
         observations that the Judge was thereby setting as  a  prerequisite
         to establishing the truth of this aspect of  the  Appellant's  case
         that he provide other documents such  as  a  bankruptcy  order  (or
         similar). In my judgement the Judge's observations in this regard -
         uncontroversial in the  abstract  -  were  merely  aspects  of  the
         overall analysis of the Appellant's case, within the  framework  of
         the appropriately applied standard of proof.

         (ii) In my judgement similar observations are to be made in respect
         of the Judge noting the absence of supporting documents in  respect
         of the "trial outcome in Germany" (paragraph  35).  The  Judge  was
         correct to say that there was no such evidence. It does not  follow
         that that he required such evidence  as  a  matter  of  course,  or
         otherwise  considered  the  absence  of   such   evidence   to   be
         determinative of the Appellant's case or  credibility.  The  Judge,
         appropriately and accurately, in substance observes that there  may
         be reasons  for  the  killing  of  the  Appellant's  cousin  wholly
         unrelated to involvement in  drugs  and  drug  gangs.  Absent  more
         detail on the point, necessarily and sustainably, the fact  of  the
         Appellant's cousin's killing in Germany  is  of  little  weight  in
         establishing the credibility of the  Appellant's  overall  account.
         The Judge's observations in this regard do not reliably indicate  a
         departure from the applicable standard of proof.

         (iii) I do not accept the submission that the Judge's consideration
         of the Appellant's 'confession' to forging his  father's  signature
         in relation to his visa application was to "establish an impossible
         standard" (Grounds at  paragraph  9).  The  Judge  was  correct  to
         observe that either  way  this  was  damaging  to  the  Appellant's
         credibility: if the confession were  true,  he  was  confessing  to
         practising deception; if the confession were not true, not only was
         he lying to the Tribunal in making the  confession,  but  the  fact
         that his father had indicated  consent  in  relation  to  his  visa
         application   significantly   undermined   his   account   of   his
         relationship with his father. (There is a potently damaging further
         issue in this regard not identified by the Judge with regard to the
         notion that the Appellant was not in school but running  with  drug
         gangs; see further below. Because it did not feature in the Judge's
         analysis and was not otherwise discussed, I have disregard it in my
         consideration of 'error of law'.) I do accept that there  is  scope
         for criticising the Judge in his comment that the confession "shows
         that his entire documentary evidence bundle is unreliable and  that
         he is unreliable witness of truth" (paragraph 46).  However,  I  do
         not think that this  is  indicative  of  a  misapplication  of  the
         standard of proof - which is the ground being pleaded.  Further  in
         this context, it seems to me that  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  the
         appeal as regards the Appellant's narrative  account  is  otherwise
         more than adequately cogent and sustainable, such that I would  not
         be minded to set aside the decision on the  basis  of  this  single
         hyperbolic sentence.


23.  The reality of the case is that  the  Appellant's  personal  supporting
    documentary evidence - as distinct from supporting documentary evidence
    by way of background or country information - at best only went so  far
    as to establish that his father was in financial difficulties, that the
    Appellant had a kidney problem, and that his cousin had been killed  in
    Germany. The evidence  did  not  go  much  beyond  these  basic  facts.
    Objectively it was not sufficient to establish  the  Appellant's  claim
    for asylum on even the applicable standard  of  proof.  The  Judge  was
    entirely right to observe as much. Necessarily this threw the focus  of
    the case on the Appellant's oral  testimony.  At  best  the  supporting
    documents provided some corroboration for  peripheral  matters  in  his
    account: none of the documents assisted in establishing the core of the
    reasons that the Appellant claimed that he was at risk. The Judge dealt
    with the Appellant's narrative account adequately. I do  not  see  that
    observations to the effect that the supporting documentary evidence was
    limited in its probative value - and in some regards,  in  the  Judge's
    evaluation, in any event problematic - is tantamount to the  imposition
    by the Judge of  a  requirement  that  the  Appellant  provide  further
    documentary evidence, or evidence of a misapplication of  the  standard
    of proof. I reject the challenge in respect of Ground 2.


24.  Ground 3 pleads that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's claim with 'anxious scrutiny'. In the main part it seems to
    me that the way in which this was pleaded was to revisit the  substance
    of Grounds 1 and 2 under a different 'head', or otherwise to re-put the
    substance of the Appellant's case together with an assertion  that  the
    outcome should have been different.


25.  However, I do accept that there is some validity in  the  criticism  at
    paragraph 10e of the Grounds to the effect that the Judge's comments at
    paragraph 79 in the context of Article 8 that the Appellant's exclusion
    from  the  UK  was  "socially  desirable"  because  he  "has  shown  no
    resistance to being recruited by a  gang",  is  inconsistent  with  the
    substance  of  the  Judge's  findings  in  rejecting  the   claim   for
    protection. However, in my judgement it is clear that any error in this
    regard is in respect of the Article 8 analysis, and not the  evaluation
    of the protection claim.  Permission  to  appeal  was  not  granted  in
    respect of Article 8 - and indeed the Grounds of challenge  exclusively
    focus on protection.


26.  In all such circumstances I reject the challenge set out in  Ground  3.
    The Appellant's challenge in  this  regard  essentially  amounts  to  a
    disagreement, and does not identify any material error of law.


27.  As an aside, I note that on  the  face  of  the  visa  application  the
    Appellant included an indication that he was still at school: "With  my
    application I have a confirmation from my school that I will not attend
    my classes from 10 of October 2015 to 18 of October 2015" (question 79,
    Respondent's bundle at C 6). Further, when questioned about his earlier
    visa application during the screening interview, the Appellant appeared
    to confirm that he had been in education  at  this  time  (Respondent's
    bundle G14). This would appear to be inconsistent with the  Appellant's
    claim that he left school in May 2015 and thereafter worked for a drugs
    gang and  spent  some  time  sleeping  rough.  However,  this  was  not
    expressly identified in the RFRL or  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal:
    accordingly I make no findings or further comment. I  have  disregarded
    it for present purpose. I merely note  that  if  this  case  is  to  be
    considered further at some future point this is an issue that might yet
    need to be considered and addressed by the parties.


28.  In all the circumstances for the reasons given  I  find  no  basis  for
    impugning the Decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Appellant's
    challenge fails.


Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and accordingly stands.


30.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:                                 Date: 10 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
