
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01484/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2016                            |On 20 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    M M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, Wimbledon Solicitors (Merton
Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of MMN. It is linked to the appeal  of  ABMH,  whose
    error of law decision was also listed before me.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 17  January  1991.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 April 2010  with  a  valid  student
    visa which was renewed until  6  February  2012.   He  made  a  Tier  4
    application for further leave which was refused  and  on  25  September
    2012 he applied for leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  SA.  This  was
    granted in 2013 valid until 27 September 2015.

 3. However the appellant divorced on 7 March 2014 and he  made  an  asylum
    claim on 27 September 2015 on the basis of his sexual  orientation  and
    that he would be at risk on return to Pakistan due to his membership of
    a particular social group, i.e. gay men from Pakistan.

 4. The appellant also claimed to be in a same sex relationship with  ABMH,
    a national of India born on 11 June 1985, who made his own claim  which
    was linked to that of this appellant, MMN, and heard by the same  judge
    on the same day.

 5. In a decision dated 25  July  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears
    dismissed the  appeal.   He  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  sexual
    orientation and at [86] rejected his claim to be a homosexual or  in  a
    same  sex  relationship  with  ABMH.   He  made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant at [70] through to [86].

 6. An application  for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
    in time on 11 August  2016,  essentiality  on  three  different  bases:
    firstly, a failure  to  take  account  of  material  evidence  or  make
    findings on matters in dispute; secondly a  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings of fact and thirdly, on the basis that  the  judge
    had materially misdirected himself in law.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 22 August 2016 for the following reasons:

         "3.      However the relatively brief content of  the  findings  at
             paragraphs 70-86 on the face of it discloses - particularly at
             paragraphs 76-77 - an arguable  lack  of  adequate  reasoning.
             This taken with the point  as  to  application  of  the  lower
             standard of proof argued at paragraph 6  renders  the  grounds
             arguable."

     Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Selwood on behalf of  MMN,  made  detailed
    and clear  submissions  in  support  of  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He
    submitted that the judge had failed to take account of the  appellant's
    evidence that he had had a relationship with a man  called  Zeeshan  in
    Pakistan as a result of which he was persecuted.  No consideration  was
    given to this relationship as to whether the appellant had  experienced
    past persecution and whether he would be at risk on return as a result.
      The focus of the judge was the relationship  that  the  appellant  is
    currently in.

 9. It was submitted that the judge had further at [73] failed  to  address
    the inconsistency identified in the  asylum  refusal  at  paragraph  38
    which was the fact that in his interview the appellant makes  reference
    to his wife as his partner rather than ABMH  But  the  judge  makes  no
    findings on this. Mr Sellwood pointed out that it  is  clear  when  one
    considers these questions in  the  asylum  interview  in  context,  the
    appellant was being asked at that  part  of  the  interview  about  his
    former wife and not about his partner, and  that  is  why  clearly  the
    reference was made to his former wife rather than his partner.

10. Mr Sellwood further submitted that there was no consideration given  to
    what happened when the appellant was detained at the police station and
    how he came to be released. There was no reference  to  the  background
    evidence at page 11 of the appellant's bundle as to the  prevalence  of
    bribery of the Pakistani police and that this  was  how  the  appellant
    came to be released by people that his father knew.

11. In relation to the fact that in  his  asylum  interview  the  appellant
    stated that he intended returning to  Pakistan  and  whether  this  was
    consistent with him being gay and at risk there, Mr Sellwood  submitted
    that the Appellant made this statement in September 2013  when  he  was
    still married albeit with problems, and he was not in the  relationship
    with his partner as he is now.  Whilst he knew his  partner  before  he
    married his wife, it was only after his divorce was concluded that  the
    relationship commenced in early 2015.

12. In relation to the second ground of challenge and the failure  to  give
    reasons, reference was made to [77] of the judge's  decision  where  he
    says:

         "I do not accept his explanation of why it was only in August  2015
that he                realised he should not return to Pakistan."

13. No reasons are given as to why the judge did not accept his explanation
    as to why it was only in August 2015 that the appellant said  he  would
    not return.

14. At [84] the judge rejected the photographic evidence on the basis there
    are no photographs of the  appellant  and  his  partner  together  with
    friends and he went on to find in relation to Mr Hydera which he relied
    upon [79] that "The photographs show only them and there is a feel that
    they were staged for the purpose of furthering the  application  rather
    than recording the relationship".

15. Mr Sellwood pointed out that no reasons were given as to why the  judge
    took that view. He further submitted that the judge's approach  to  the
    two additional witnesses was  problematic.   I  shall  deal  with  that
    aspect in relation to ABMH claim.

16. In relation to the third ground, the material misdirection in  law,  Mr
    Sellwood accepted that at [6]  of  his  decision  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself as to the  real  risk  test  but  submitted  that  the
    language that  follows  thereafter  is  inconsistent  with  the  proper
    application of such a test.  For example, at [63]  the  judge  rejected
    the appellant's evidence on the basis that it was  "hardly  compelling"
    which is to apply far too high a standard of proof.

17. Mr Sellwood  submitted  that  there  were  also  issues  of  procedural
    unfairness in that the judge took against the appellant in relation  to
    points that had not previously been taken  by  the  respondent  in  her
    refusal letter, nor it appeared that they were  put  to  the  appellant
    during the hearing either in cross-examination or by the judge himself.



18. At [83] the judge found that there was no evidence that  the  appellant
    had entered into a relationship with ABMH in February 2014, which fails
    to take account of the fact that there was evidence in the form of oral
    evidence  from  both  the  appellant  and  his  partner  and  from  two
    independent witnesses.

19. At [85] the judge relied  on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not
    produced the divorce petition "because it might have  set  out  matters
    that the appellant now relies on such as lack of sexual interest on his
    part".

20. I accept Mr Sellwood's submission that this is an entirely  speculative
    finding. Moreover it was not put to the appellant for  him  to  comment
    on.

21. Mr Selwood finally submitted that whilst it was not  a  straightforward
    task to make findings of fact or credibility in respect of  individuals
    from other cultures, and that the learned judge  noted  that  at  [70],
    having done that at [82]  he  went  on  to  make  a  finding  that  was
    unsustainable on the basis that it focused solely on the  demeanour  of
    the appellant and his partner where the judge stated: "I observed  them
    when they were in the hearing room together which was for  an  extended
    period and I could see no mutuality of support and reassurance  of  one
    for the other."

22. In his response, Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 reply and submitted in
    short that the grounds and submissions were  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to make.   The
    judge was not obliged to give reasons for  every  finding.   The  judge
    rejected the appellant's evidence that he was gay  and  does  so  quite
    emphatically and that was a finding that was open to  him.   The  judge
    was not oblivious to the fact that there were two  appeals  before  him
    and the questions and answers in the interview at [189] to  [198]  were
    very vague when they are supposed to relate to people who claim to know
    each other and be in a relationship. He submitted that the  conclusions
    of the judge are sustainable and that the reasoning was adequate.

Decision

23. I find for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal that the  judge
    did err materially in law in dismissing the appeal.  In  particular,  I
    find an absence  of  proper  or  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's  central  claim  to  be  gay  and  to  be  in  a  same  sex
    relationship with ABMH.  This was particularly the case given that  the
    judge had the  benefit  of  hearing  evidence  from  both  individuals,
    evidence  which  was  supported  by  two  further  witnesses  and  also
    photographic  evidence.   The  judge  further  failed  to  assess   the
    credibility of the claim in the light of  the  background  evidence  as
    well as the evidence specific  to  these  two  appeals.   Moreover,  in
    finding that the appellant is not gay the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    findings in respect of his evidence as to the appellant's  relationship
    in Pakistan as a consequence of which he was detained and  ill-treated.
    It was incumbent on the judge, in my view, to determine that aspect  of
    his claim in order to properly consider the appellant's claim based  on
    his sexual orientation and his current relationship with ABMH.

24. In light of my findings I remit the appeal for a de novo hearing before
    a different First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pears.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     20 October 2016




                           _______________________

                                 DIRECTIONS
                           _______________________

1. The appeal is remitted back for a hearing de novo at York  House  Hearing
Centre.

2. An Urdu interpreter is required.

3. The appeal is to be listed for 2 hours and linked to the case of  ABMH  -
AA/00259/2016 and should be heard by the same First tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     20 October 2016

