
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01835/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2021                       |On 1 June 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           KISSITA PADOUE LUSUKAMU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr Dimnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Gould ('the Judge'), who in a  decision  promulgated
        on 13 October 2020 dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo
        (DRC), who on  1  October  2019  made  a  further  application  for
        international protection on the basis  of  his  actual  or  imputed
        political which was refused by the Secretary of State.
     3. The Judge noted an earlier decision of another judge of the  First-
        tier Tribunal, Judge Foudy, promulgated  on  11  February  2010  in
        which it was found the appellant's claim to have deserted from  the
        army of the DRC lacked credibility for the reasons set out  at  [19
        (a) - (d)] of that decision. It was also found that  the  appellant
        had not established an entitlement  to  a  grant  of  international
        protection.
     4. The Judge correctly took as the starting point in the  appeal  that
        earlier  decision  pursuant  to  the  Devaseelan  principles.   The
        appellant again sought to rely upon an alleged  risk  arising  from
        desertion of the army and the DRC but also, in addition, to his sur
        place activities in the United Kingdom. The Judge sets out findings
        in relation to both matters between [23  -  25]  in  the  following
        terms:


        Desertion from the Army


        23.  I am unable to place any weight on  the  documents  served  in
             support of the claim desertion for the following reasons:  (a)
             the documents are copies and without the original documents it
             is difficult to assess them adequately;  (b)  the  Appellant's
             explanation as  to  how  he  received  these  documents  lacks
             credibility - the warrant appears to have passed  through  the
             hands of various people but the Appellant was unable  to  name
             any of them,  provide  their  phone  numbers  or  provide  the
             envelope in which the warrant  was  sent;  (c)  the  Appellant
             could not provide any reasonable explanation  to  address  why
             the National Intelligence  Agency  would  wait  several  years
             before  attempting  firstly  to  request  his  attendance  and
             secondly to issue a warrant for his arrest and such a delay in
             locating a  person  accused  of  flagrant  insubordination  is
             inconsistent with his claimed fear and (d) the warrant  refers
             to the Appellant's desertion in 2003,  which  is  inconsistent
             with a search order served by the  Appellant  at  his  earlier
             appeal upon which is claimed desertion  was  dated  2009  -see
             Paragraph 19 (d) IJ Foudy  Determination.  By  reason  of  the
             foregoing analysis I am satisfied that the  appellant's  claim
             that he deserted from  the  army  and  he  is  wanted  is  not
             credible and I reject this submission.


        Sur place activities



        24.  The Appellant gave evidence that he was a member  of  RCK  and
             CRC, both organisations are anti-DRC government and by  reason
             of his membership and role he was at risk on return. I  reject
             this submission for  the  following  reasons  (a)  although  a
             witness statement was served in  support  of  this  ground  of
             appeal, no witness  was  called  to  support  the  Appellant's
             claimed role and activities; (b) despite the  movement  having
             an international presence and head office in Paris from  which
             I infer  it  is  well  organised  the  Appellant  produced  no
             documentation from  meetings  or  literature  to  support  his
             claimed role; (c) despite the Appellant's claim  that  he  had
             joined the protest marches he produced no photographs or video
             footage to support such a claim; (d) the Appellant claimed  he
             had joined protest marches in London but provided  no  details
             as to dates and when asked where the marches had  taken  place
             he said he didn't know; (e). Although the Appellant claims  to
             have been politically active within the RCK and CRC  there  is
             no reference to the date he joined either  in  the  letter  at
             Annex D of the Respondent's bundle nor  on  either  membership
             card and (f) if the Appellant had been a member of the RCK and
             CRC for four years and had the profile he claimed to have,  it
             is inexplicable that the  authorities  in  the  DRC  have  not
             sought his arrest with more vigour and that the documents from
             the National  Intelligence  Agency  make  no  mention  of  his
             claimed political affiliation. The inference I draw  from  the
             evidence is  that  the  Appellant  has  invented  a  political
             affiliation to boost his claim for protection, and even if his
             claim is  manufactured,  there  is  no  digital  footprint  to
             support the proposition that the authorities  would  have  any
             knowledge of him, and therefore interest in him,  upon  return
             to the DRC.




        25.  For the reasons set out I  dismiss  the  submission  that  the
             Appellant is entitled to protection as a refugee  in  reliance
             on the same findings of fact I dismiss the submission that  he
             is in need of humanitarian protection.



     5. The Judge also dismissed the appeal pursuant to Article 8  ECHR  on
        the  basis  any   interference   with   a   protected   right   was
        proportionate. Within  that  section  of  the  decision  the  Judge
        referred to the appellant's claim that he had lost contact with his
        family in the DRC, finding at [27 - 28]:


        27.  In common with the findings of IJ Foudy  I  am  satisfied  the
             Appellant  is  not  a  credible  witness  and  I  reject   his
             submission that he has  lost  contact  with  his  family.  The
             Appellant gave evidence that he contacted the Red Cross in the
             United Kingdom to  assist  in  his  attempts  to  contact  his
             family. I am satisfied this not  a  genuine  attempt  to  seek
             assistance because the  Appellant  provided  no  date  of  his
             request, no documentation in support and no evidence  that  he
             had made his own enquiries, for example. Furthermore, when the
             Appellant  was  asked  in  cross-examination  to  clarify  his
             approach to the Red Cross it transpired that he  had  no  more
             than a conversation whilst collecting food.


        28.  If the Appellant is correct, he retains a network of  contacts
             within  the  DRC  because  two  letters  from   the   National
             Intelligence Agency in DRC reached him and therefore  he  will
             have support on his return.


     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal alleging  the  Judge  had
        erred in law by refusing to adjourn the hearing conducted  via  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  Cloud  Video  Platform  ("CVP"),  in  drawing
        inferences, making errors in relation to the evidence given without
        giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  address  the   Judge's
        concerns, and in failing to take  into  account  the  evidence  the
        appellant had provided by way of a letter  from  the  CRC  together
        with his membership card from CRC and RCK,  for  the  reasons  more
        fully  set  out  in  the  grounds  attached  to   the   appellant's
        application for permission to appeal.
     7. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal the operative part of the grant  being  in  the  following
        terms:


        3.   In the criminal courts witnesses regularly give evidence via a
             video link and credibility is assessed by  judges  and  juries
             taking all factors  into  account  and  working  to  a  higher
             standard of proof than the Tribunal. By itself the hearing  by
             remote means was not an error. Not all of the complaints about
             the questions and answers have much merit, but if it is  right
             that the solicitor did not ask  for  the  envelope  then  that
             might arguably affect the decision overall. Similarly,  it  is
             surprising that the Appellant would not know where he went  to
             in London as it is not clear how he would have known where  to
             go, but the documentation is arguable.



Error of law


     8. The Judge records the adjournment application being made on the day
        by the appellant's barrister, Mr Emu-Ezeoke, for the hearing to  be
        relisted as a face-to-face hearing on the basis the appellant would
        not receive a fair hearing via CVP. The Judge gives  ample  reasons
        at [5] why that application  was  rejected,  particularly  that  no
        reasonable argument had been put forward as to why the Judge  would
        not be in a position to  assess  credibility  if  the  hearing  was
        conducted remotely. The Judge also records being satisfied that  it
        was in the best interests to proceed using CVP but that all matters
        will be kept under review. There is nothing in the determination or
        material provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  suggest  that  the
        appellant did not receive  a  fair  hearing  or  that  the  Judge's
        adverse credibility findings were in any way adversely affected  by
        proceeding by this means. It is also of note that Judge Foudy,  who
        also found the appellant lacked credibility,  did  so  following  a
        face-to-face hearing.
     9. Not only does this ground as pleaded  fail  to  establish  arguable
        legal error, there is also nothing from Mr  Emu-Ezeoke  to  support
        the appellant's contention that he did not receive a  fair  hearing
        on the day.
    10. The lack of evidence from those representing the appellant is  also
        relevant to the appellant's claim that the Judge erred in  relation
        to the envelope in which the warrant was sent  to  him  in  finding
        that the appellant had said "I forgot to give it to my  solicitor."
        when he claims what he actually said was that his solicitor did not
        ask him for it.
    11. The appellant was  represented  by  a  firm  of  solicitors,  Chris
        Solicitors, who would have been aware of the  directions  given  in
        this case relating to the need for the appellant to  file  all  the
        documentary evidence he was seeking to rely upon by  the  specified
        date. The Reply to an IAC Notice of Hearing dated  13  March  2020,
        completed by the solicitors, indicates  that  they  were  ready  to
        proceed. Casework directions were sent to the parties and there  is
        no evidence that the appellant did not file all the evidence he was
        seeking to rely upon. There  is  nothing  from  the  solicitors  to
        support the appellant's claim that a particular piece  of  evidence
        was not requested by them.
    12. The appellant has produced insufficient  evidence  to  support  his
        claim that what he said was different from  that  recorded  by  the
        Judge as recorded in the determination.
    13. The Judge was entitled to weigh up the evidence and  consider  what
        findings could be properly made in light of the  same.  Proceedings
        before the First-tier are by their nature adversarial in which  the
        Judge was entitled to later consider the material  provided,  which
        would have included the submissions made by the advocates, and make
        the findings recorded in  the  determination.  What  the  appellant
        appears to be complaining of is the fact  that  having  arrived  at
        those findings the Judge failed to return to the appellant to  give
        him an opportunity to comment upon the  same.  There  is  no  legal
        requirement upon the Judge to have done so. There is no  breach  of
        the principle of fairness in the Judge  proceeding  in  the  normal
        manner. The appellant was represented,  filed  witness  statements,
        was cross-examined and re-examined, and had ample  opportunity  for
        all the evidence he was seeking to rely upon to have been provided.
        In particular, the appellant  in  Ground  2  refers  to  the  Judge
        referring to the warrant claiming the appellant's desertion was  in
        2003 which was inconsistent with  the  Search  Order  claiming  the
        desertion was 2009, arguing that was never put either to him or  to
        the Judge by the Presenting Officer, but such a  claim  is  without
        merit, as that is also a finding made by Judge Foudy who found  the
        difference in dates to be  of  concern  warranting,  in  part,  the
        adverse credibility findings. The appellant was  fully  aware  this
        was an issue and could have called evidence to adequately deal with
        the same (if it existed) but did not.
    14. The appellant also claims the Judge failed  to  take  into  account
        documentary evidence in Ground 3, but the Judge clearly  refers  to
        the membership cards provided when noting omissions from  the  same
        in the body of the determination.
    15. I find the appellant's challenge to the determination without merit
        as it fails to establish any legal error by the Judge  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    16. The Judge's findings are supported by adequate reasons.  The  Judge
        clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny and it has not been shown the findings  made  are  outside
        the range of  those  reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence. Two judges of the First-tier Tribunal have  made  adverse
        findings in relation to the claim and  the  weight  that  could  be
        given to any documentation the appellant produced. It was of no use
        to the Judge if the appellant had evidence that stayed at home when
        there had been a clear direction for all evidence being relied upon
        to be produced at the hearing.
    17. Whilst the appellant may not like the Judge's findings and seeks to
        be granted permission to re-argue his case,  the  grounds  fail  to
        establish it is appropriate in all the circumstances to enable  him
        to do so.

Decision

    18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated 18 May 2021
