
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/01085/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2017                          |On 04 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                               mr Guben Hadera
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Appellant  claims  to  be  a  national  of  Eritrea.  He   sought
    international  protection  but  his  application  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent and he appealed. Following a hearing at  Bradford  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal N M K Lawrence, in a decision promulgated on 23
    March 2017, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant's sought permission to appeal which was initially refused
    on 27 July 2017 but a renewed application to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on  14  September  2017.  Her
    reasons for granting permission to appeal are as follows:-

         "The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the decision of J
         FtT N M K Lawrence to dismiss his appeal.

         It is arguable that the Judge did not make findings in  respect  of
         the Appellant's parents and the evidence relating  to  them  having
         been deported in 2000 to Eritrea. Although the Judge  rejected  the
         Appellant's credibility, it is not  clear  what  he  made  of  this
         aspect of his evidence, in the light of the background evidence.

         The Appellant's case was not advanced on the basis that he has been
         arbitrarily denied the right to return to Ethiopia as an Ethiopian.
         His case is that  he  is  not  Ethiopian,  but  Eritrean  and  that
         probably explains why the Judge did not engage with the  issues  in
         ST  [2011]  UKUT  00252,  however  permission  is  granted  on  all
         grounds".

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. The Tribunal had previously given directions in this  appeal  regarding
    potential missing  documentation.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  I
    confirmed with both representatives the  material  I  had  and  it  was
    agreed that all necessary documentation was before me.

 5. Mr Jacobs and Ms Ahmad agreed that the first issue in this  appeal  was
    whether the Appellant was an Eritrean national and it was accepted that
    were he not to be he would not be at risk upon return to that country.

 6. Mr Jacobs went on to expand the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.
    In particular the absence of any findings in respect of the Appellant's
    parents and the evidence relating to them having been deported in  2000
    to Eritrea.

 7. Although Ms Ahmad accepted that there were no findings  on  this  issue
    she argued that nonetheless considering the totality  of  the  evidence
    and the findings made that the absence of such  a  finding  was  not  a
    material one.

 8. That is not a submission that I accept.

 9. No findings had been made by the Judge as to whether he  accepted  that
    the Appellant's  parents  likely  voted  in  the  1992  referendum  and
    consequently were deported to Eritrea  in  2000.  These  were  relevant
    findings  that  required  to  be  made  and  resulted  in  the  Judge's
    assessment of the Appellant's nationality failing to consider  relevant
    background material that was before him in relation to  the  effect  of
    the Appellant's parents' deportation during the  relevant  period.  The
    relevant background evidence in relation to this is cited at  paragraph
    9  of  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  where  there  are
    references to materials within the Respondent's own Country Information
    Report which had been drawn to the Judge's attention.

10. Mr Jacobs accepted that were I to find that this ground  was  made  out
    and  that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred,   as   submitted,   then
    consideration of his other grounds of appeal would become  a  redundant
    exercise on the basis that the decision was so infected by the  absence
    of these findings that a fresh hearing was required.

11. I accept that that is the position.  The  decision  cannot  stand.  The
    Appellant has been denied a fair hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Judge has failed to make findings on material that was  before  him
    which needed to be made to ensure that the decision was safe.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge N M K Lawrence.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 29 December 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard







