
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01649/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January and 27 February 2020   |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               S R E REZAEIAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     on 16 January, Ms  N  Loughran,  of  Loughran  &  Co,
Solicitors,
      and on 27 February Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Loughran & Co

For the Respondent:    on 16 January, Mr M Clark,
      and on  27  February,  Mr  A  Govan;  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                    Officers


                                DETERMINATION

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Doyle,  promulgated
    on 8 August 2019.

 2. The appellant's  grounds,  1  -  8,  are  set  out  in  detail  in  his
    application dated 22 August 2019.

 3. Having heard the submissions of Ms Loughran for  the  appellant  on  16
    January 2020, I took the view that  none  of  grounds  1  -  5,  or  7,
    disclosed any material error, for two reasons, confirmed in an error of
    law decision dated 20 January 2020, as follows.

 4. Grounds 1 is failure to consider medical and psychiatric reports, 2  is
    failure to make findings on past torture, and 3 is  failure  to  assess
    the credibility of torture claims. These are  all  at  best  complaints
    about absence of more specific findings which were not required.  Judge
    Doyle accepted that the appellant as a convert from Islam to the  Bahai
    faith would be entitled to protection against return to Iran.  That  is
    as favourable an outcome as could result from the  evidence  which  was
    allegedly neglected.

 5. Secondly, the crux of the case was whether the appellant is  a  citizen
    of India who may return there.  There was strong  presumptive  evidence
    and a previous judicial  determination  to  that  effect.   Unless  the
    appellant raised at least a realistic doubt about that issue, his  past
    history in Iran was irrelevant.

 6. Ground 4  alleges  failure  to  consider  witness  evidence  about  the
    appellant's nationality, but the thrust of the witness evidence was  to
    establish the appellant's  faith  not  his  nationality.    The  ground
    founds on one of the nine witnesses saying that he knew  the  appellant
    to be Iranian and had seen him in Iran, but that  leads  nowhere.   The
    respondent accepts that the appellant had  Iranian  citizenship.   This
    ground discloses no "unresolved contradiction".

 7. Ground 5  does  not  show  error  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's representations to the Indian consulate.   The  absence  of
    specific mention of the quotation in the grounds does not detract  from
    the judge's observation that the appellant made  strenuous  efforts  to
    show that he is Iranian; but the fact that has been (and may remain)  a
    citizen in the eyes of the Iranian authorities is irrelevant, if he has
    regularly obtained Indian  citizenship,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Indian
    authorities.

 8. Ground 7 is based at part (i) on failure to consider evidence of Indian
    citizenship law, said to suggest that the appellant had not  spent  the
    time in India necessary for naturalisation.  That was not supported  by
    expert evidence of the law of citizenship in India.  Sketchy references
    to the underlying foreign law do  not  come  close  to  displacing  the
    presumption arising from production of a passport validly issued by the
    Indian authorities.  Part (ii) is based on the Iranian authorities  not
    recognising  dual  citizenship,  but  if  the  appellant   has   Indian
    citizenship, that is another irrelevancy.

 9. Ground 6 is "failure to consider key evidence on identity and place  of
    birth", specified as "failing to reconcile  the  'genuineness'  of  the
    Indian passport in one name and place  of  birth  with  the  voluminous
    Iranian documents issued  in  another  name  and  place  of  birth  ...
    accepted by the Home Office as  genuine",  leading  to  "irreconcilable
    findings of fact", and  culminating  in  the  assertion  that  the  FtT
    "failed  to  record  accurately  and   consistently   the   appellant's
    evidence".

10. Ground 8 is "failure to follow ... Devaseelan ... when evidence in  the
    second appeal is significantly different from the first appeal".   This
    raises the same issue in another legal category.

11. For reasons explained in my error of law decision, the case was  listed
    again in the UT for further consideration of grounds 6 and 8.

12. The remaining issue was put in  this  way.   The  respondent's  refusal
    decision noted at  [34],  referring  back  to  the  respondent's  first
    decision, that the  appellant  had  "numerous  passports  in  different
    nationalities" (he had been returned  to  the  UK  from  France  on  23
    January 2011 after attempting to travel to Canada  on  a  forged  Greek
    passport).  Although it was accepted at [73] that an  Iranian  passport
    and shenasnameh produced by the appellant were genuine,  that  led  the
    respondent only to accept that he was once  an  Iranian  citizen.   His
    account that his Indian passport was anything but a document  genuinely
    obtained was not accepted, for reasons given  at  [74]  -  [92].   (The
    respondent at [92] gives the documents "little weight to show that  you
    are still an Iranian national"; but as explained above, that appears to
    be beside the point.)  In his grounds at section 3 d of his  notice  of
    appeal to the FtT, the appellant maintained that he would be at risk on
    political and religious grounds on return to Iran,  but  he  raised  no
    specific  dispute  about  return  to  India.   On  the   evidence   and
    submissions put to the FtT, is its resolution of the matter at [12 j  -
    v] of the FtT's decision legally adequate? - and if not, what follows?

13. In compliance with directions made in the error of law decision,  there
    were filed for  the  appellant  a  bundle  of  relevant  materials  and
    additional evidence, and detailed written submissions.  In  brief,  the
    appellant invites the UT to set aside the decision of the  FtT  and  to
    remake the decision, finding  that  the  appellant  is  not  an  Indian
    national and is entitled to protection as a refugee from Iran.

14. In a letter dated 26 February 2020 the respondent concedes that grounds
    6 and 8 disclose error by making no finding on  the  appellant's  claim
    that he obtained a  genuinely  issued  Indian  passport  by  fraudulent
    means, and by failing to recognise  the  implication  of  its  findings
    [based on the respondent's concessions] that  the  appellant's  Iranian
    documents are genuine and that he held the identity now claimed,  which
    was a material shift from the determination in 2010 (which found him to
    be Reza Sayyed, an Indian national).

15. The respondent goes on to comment  that  the  Indian  passport  with  a
    different place of birth does not appear to have been before  the  FtT,
    so that the judge cannot be criticised for failing to consider it.   It
    is  acknowledged,  however,  that  the  evidence  went  "further   than
    establishing that all the appellant has confirmed since 2010 is that he
    was born in Iran" (as the FtT had thought).

16. As to remaking the decision, the respondent does not concede  that  the
    appellant "does not hold status in  India";  refers  to  the  appellant
    finding himself twice in the UK using an Indian  passport,  and  having
    been found also using a false Greek  passport;  observes  that  he  has
    provided only limited evidence about his history as a refugee in India,
    has consistently used deception and false documentation, and has a very
    poor immigration history; and submits that he can be found to have been
    acting in bad faith, and that "the UT can still dismiss this appeal".

17. So far as the long process of his claim in the  UK  is  concerned,  the
    appellant is the author of his own  misfortune.   Nothing  is  certain,
    other than that he has practised extensive deceit.  His excuse that  he
    has been constrained to do so by the need to escape from persecution is
    highly dubious  in  relation  to  his  representations  to  the  Indian
    authorities and his decision to leave that country for the UK.   It  is
    of even less force in relation to his  attempt  to  leave  the  UK  for
    Canada in a false Greek identity.  Even if he had good reason to  leave
    Iran, many years ago, his present claim rewards him  for  unjustifiable
    deception.

18. The appellant has, however, established a reasonable likelihood that he
    is a Bahai convert who cannot safely be returned to Iran, his  original
    country of nationality.  Protection might only be withheld on the basis
    that he  is  genuinely  a  citizen  of  India.   It  is  accepted  that
    documentation of his Iranian  origins  is  genuine,  to  the  necessary
    standard.   His  Indian  documentation  is  partly  but  not   entirely
    consistent with his Iranian documentation.  The date of  birth  remains
    the same, and an appellant may vary his name.  However,  his  place  of
    birth and the name of his mother are different and irreconcilable.   It
    cannot be held that his Indian citizenship, although genuinely  issued,
    was legitimately obtained.   It  does  not  form  a  proper  basis  for
    returning him to India.

19. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The appeal, as  brought  to  the
    FtT, is allowed.

20. I thank representatives on both sides for their assistance in resolving
    this rather unusual case.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

20 January 2020
UT Judge Macleman

