
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01598/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 September 2019                  |On 23 September 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asonovic, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Egypt who applied for asylum in September
2016. He claims to be at risk in Egypt because of his support for former
President Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood.  He has given an account of,
amongst other things, being subject to an attack by gangs in Egypt and of
threatening letters being sent to him.  He states that in November 2016 he
was informed of a warrant for his detention in Egypt.

Following the rejection of his application for asylum by the respondent,
the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal was
heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright.  The decision of Judge Wright
was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard and the appeal was
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, where it was heard - and dismissed -
by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baldwin. It is the decision of Judge
Baldwin (hereafter "the judge") promulgated on 25 June 2019, that is now
being appealed.

The judge did not find the appellant credible.  Several reasons were given
for finding the appellant not credible, one of which was that the appellant
had not mentioned at his screening interview that he had been accused of
committing an offence in Egypt of supporting a terrorist group.  At
paragraph 26 of the decision the judge stated:

"Against that backdrop, the documents also have to be considered in the
context of the evidence as a whole, including the fact that his claim that
he has been charged with supporting a terrorist group and fighting law
enforcement flies in the face of the answer he gave at screening to
question 5.3 concerning whether he had ever been accused of an offence."
(Emphasis added)

It was common ground between the parties that the judge erred by finding it
damaging to the appellant's credibility that he did not mention the arrest
warrant at his screening interview on 26 September 2016 given that,
according to the appellant's account, the warrant for his arrest was issued
after the screening interview took place, in November 2016.

The issue in contention was whether the error was material. Ms Everett
argued that the judge gave numerous sustainable reasons for finding the
appellant not credible and that, reading the decision is a whole, it is
clear the judge would have reached the same outcome if this error had not
been made. Ms Asonovic argued that the other reasons given by the judge
contained material errors themselves and therefore that the decision cannot
stand.

I am not persuaded by Ms Asonovic's arguments concerning the other findings
in the decision. However, it is not necessary for me to set out my reasons
because I am of the view that the error in paragraph 26 of the decision is
material such that the decision cannot stand and will need to be made
afresh.

The materiality of the error arises from the judge placing significant
weight on the failure to mention the arrest warrant at the screening
interview. This is apparent from the strong language used by the judge in
describing the (assumed) discrepancy ("flies in the face of..."), as well
as the significance any judge could be expected to attach to an appellant
failing to raise such a central and core part of his case in the screening
interview. I accept (and am sympathetic to) Ms Everett's argument that the
judge has given other reasons which are cogent and clear for rejecting the
appellant's account. However, the error goes to the heart of the
credibility assessment and I do not accept that the same outcome would
necessarily have been reached in its absence.

Given that the judge has made a material error of law that relates to the
assessment of the appellant's credibility, the appeal will need to be
considered afresh with no findings of fact preserved.

Ms Everett was neutral on whether the remaking of the decision should take
place in the Upper Tribunal or First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Asonovic argued
that the case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Given the extent of further fact-finding that will be required, having
regard to paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of the Immigration
and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, I
agree with Ms Asonovic that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside on the basis that it
contains a material error of law and the appeal is remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 20 September 2019             |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

