
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01380/2016





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st June 2017                        |On 12th July 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     m.n.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant: Sentinel Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan dismissing
      her appeal.


   2. She is a national of Albania born in 1994. She made a claim for
      protection.

   3. She claimed her husband, who is also Albanian, had gone to Greece for
      work.  In December 2014 she joined him in Thessalonica. Shortly after
      her arrival he lost his job but found work in Athens. He travelled
      onwards and she remained in Thessalonica. She borrowed money from
      another Albanian who promised her employment. He then said he would
      take her to a place of work and they travel by bus together. They went
      to a house where he raped her. She was detained and several of his
      friends also raped her. After eight days she managed to escape as the
      door was left unlocked. She then caught a bus to Athens and located
      her husband. She did not tell him what had happened. She discovered
      she was pregnant.

   4. Her husband lost his job and in April 2015 they decided to fly to
      Belgium where her husband began work. In Belgium he met someone he
      knew from Thessalonica. They told him that his wife had been working
      as a prostitute in Greece. He confronted her and then telephoned their
      respective families, repeating this.

   5. Both families threatened her harm. She subsequently left Belgium and
      travelled by lorry, entering the United Kingdom illegally. She claims
      that a few days later she made a claim for protection, citing both
      families as threats. She also said she was afraid of the man she had
      borrowed money from. In September 2015 she gave birth to a daughter.

   6. The respondent referred her claim to the competent authority. It
      concluded, in January 2016, that on the balance of probabilities her
      account was not credible and she was not a victim of trafficking.

   7. Shortly after this the respondent refused her claim to protection on
      credibility grounds, concluding she did not face a real risk on
      return. In the alternative, if her claim were true there was
      sufficiency of protection for her within her home country from any
      threats from family or former traffickers. The respondent concluded it
      was reasonable to expect her to relocate if there were any localised
      problems. On the basis her child was illegitimate the respondent
      referred to the availability of government shelters and NGO
      assistance.

The First tier Tribunal

   8. The parties were represented. The judge heard from the appellant and
      had the benefit of an expert report. The judge accepted her claim as
      credible. The judge concluded that it was reasonably likely she was
      the victim of trafficking. The judge then went on to consider the risk
      on return. The judge concluded she could not return to her home area
      of Matt in northern Albania and the fear of her family and the
      trafficker who originated in the same area. The judge also found a
      lack of police presence in the remote area she was from.


   9. The judge considered relocation to a more densely populated area, such
      as Tirana. The expert report expressed concern about the level of
      State protection. Nevertheless, the judge concluded it would be
      adequate in the larger areas. The judge accepted she was from an
      impoverished background in northern Albania and that she and her
      family are uneducated. The judge concluded that her family were not in
      a position to influence the Albanian authorities to either trace or
      take action against her.

  10. The judge found that the appellant enjoyed good health. She had been
      under the care of a psychologist and was discharged in mid-October
      2016. The judge acknowledged that individuals with mental illness
      could not reasonably live alone but that the appellant was not so
      vulnerable. The judge commented on her ability to care for her
      daughter with the apparent approval of the UK authorities.

  11. The judge accepted she might face questioning about her child.
      Although no father is identified on her birth certificate, on the face
      of it, she would not be perceived as illegitimate. The judge also
      found she could avail of the shelters that existed and could remain
      there for up to 2 years. Leaving sheltered accommodation the judge
      accepted she would face significant challenges, including financial
      hardship and isolation.

The Upper Tribunal


  12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge erred in concluding relocation was reasonable, bearing in mind
      her circumstances and the risk of being trafficked or facing a lack of
      sufficient protection.

  13. The respondent opposed the appeal by way of a rule 24 response,
      contending there was no error in the decision and that the judge had
      considered all of the evidence including the expert report and the
      country guidance decision. The respondent contended it was open to the
      judge to make the findings he did.

  14. At hearing, the appellant's representative pointed out that the
      appellant had been attending a psychologist and that she had been the
      victim of a sexual assault. The judge had concluded she could not
      return to her home area. It was submitted that in suggesting she could
      relocate the judge was imposing to high a threshold. It was argued
      that the judge had adopted the wrong approach towards her mental
      health by emphasising she was no longer receiving treatment from a
      psychologist. It was also submitted that the judge was speculating
      about the return of the appellant's child to her. It was submitted
      that she was vulnerable and would face difficulties establishing
      herself. It was suggested if an error of law is found the appeal
      should be remitted for a rehearing in the First Tier Tribunal.
      Primarily this was because of the fact sensitive nature of the issues
      arising.

  15. In response, the presenting officer relied upon the rule 24 response.
      He agreed with the suggestion that if an error was found the matter
      should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration

  16. I have read the decision as a whole. The judge pointed out the lower
      standard of proof for a protection claim from that applicable before
      the Competent Authority. The judge, unlike the competent authority and
      the respondent, accepted the appellant's claim. The reasons for doing
      so are set out at paragraph 59 to 66. The conclusion was that her
      account was consistent and credible. The judge found her credibility
      was not damaged by failure to claim in safe countries. This was  open
      to the judge and has not been challenged by the respondent.


  17. Having reached these conclusions the judge then considered her return
      to Albania. The judge evaluated the risk in her home area. The judge
      gave reasons as to why she could not relocate there. Those reasons are
      sustainable.

  18.  At paragraph 73 the judge went on to consider the question of
      relocation to a larger area, such as Tirana. The judge referred to the
      expert report on this and the question of sufficiency of protection.
      The judge had regard to factors specific to the appellant. These
      included her family background and her accepted limited level of
      education. The judge had regard to her mental state and concluded she
      was not suffering from any significant mental health issues. The judge
      gave reasons for this conclusion. In particular, reference was made to
      the absence of appropriate medication or ongoing treatment. The
      appellant had complained of feeling low in mood and of suffering from
      nightmares but the judge had concluded she had made a good recovery.
      These were conclusions open to the judge on the evidence.


  19. The judge then considered the appellant's child. The judge
      acknowledged the likelihood of her being questioned about the child's
      father. The judge acknowledged that no father was named on her birth
      certificate. However, the appellant was married and her daughter bears
      the family name. The judge acknowledged that things would be hard
      after the appellant left the protection of the shelter. The judge
      acknowledged social stigma and isolation.

  20. The appellant had indicated that after making her claim her child was
      placed in care for several days and then returned to her. The judge
      made the point that in returning the child the UK authorities must
      have concluded she had the necessary skills and the child would not be
      at risk. This is a reasonable deduction. The judge went on to point
      out that those parenting skills and her resilience could be
      transferred when she began a new life in Albania.


  21. Reading the decision in its entirety the judge has carefully
      considered the evidence and made findings that were open to him. The
      decision is balanced, most notably by the judge accepting the
      underlying claim. This was in the face of its rejection on credibility
      points by the competent authority and adopted by the respondent. The
      judge had considered the case law and the expert report and evaluated
      the individual issues arising. I find no material error of law
      demonstrated. Rather, the arguments advanced amount to no more than a
      disagreement with the conclusions made by the judge on the issue of
      relocation and sufficiency of protection. It has not been demonstrated
      that those conclusions materially erred in law. Consequently, Judge
      Monaghan's decision, dismissing the appeal, shall stand.

Decision.


No material error in the decision of First-tier Judge Monaghan has been
established. That decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.


Deputy Judge Farrelly                                        10th July 2017

