
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01839/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 August 2017                         |On 09 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    [M k]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Umoh of Duncan Lewis & Co, Solicitors (Harrow
Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of  6
    February 2017 refusing his asylum and human rights claim.
2.   The appellant had  first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002.   He
    claimed asylum on the basis that he feared persecution as a Pashtun, as
    a member of the Hezb-e-Islami Party, the fact that his brother who  was
    missing was a Commander in the Hezb-e-Islami Party  and  the  appellant
    himself was an ordinary soldier in that party and as a  consequence  he
    feared them because they were looking for him.  His  asylum  claim  was
    refused in March 2004 and  a  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed  on  5
    November of that year.

3.   The appellant made  further  representations  in  2007  and  2008.   He
    claimed to fear persecution on grounds  of  imputed  political  opinion
    with Hezb-e-Islami and at the hands of Jamiat-i Islami and because  his
    elder brother, Haji Qayuim, was a Commander of Hezb-e-Islami.  He  also
    claimed that his other brother was arrested in 1999, taken to the front
    line but returned after two months having been injured.   He  said  the
    Taliban had told his father that he and his brother were  traitors  and
    that the Taliban wanted revenge.  Further representations were  refused
    in July 2008.  Subsequently it seems the appellant was removed from the
    United Kingdom but returned some time in  January  2009.   He  made  an
    asylum claim in June 2011 which was refused and he did not appeal.   In
    September 2012 he expressed a wish to apply for  a  facilitated  return
    scheme and signed a disclaimer and said he wanted to leave  the  United
    Kingdom as soon as possible.  On 23 October 2012  a  deportation  order
    was made and he was deported to Afghanistan on 19 November 2012.  On  4
    August 2016 he was encountered in Belgium and identified  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who had previously been deported and was sent back to the
    United Kingdom.  He then made the current asylum claim.  He claims that
    his brother was a Commander of the Hezb-e-Islami Party and his life was
    in danger from the Government and the Taliban.  He claimed  that  after
    he returned to Afghanistan in November 2012 he spent two or three  days
    in Logar and then the Taliban came to his home and took  him  away  and
    beat him.  He claimed that his brothers had  both  been  taken  by  the
    Taliban and they now wanted information  from  the  appellant  and  his
    brothers, also weapons that his brothers had.  The Taliban accused  him
    of selling weapons and bringing the money to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    passing Taliban secrets to the UK Government.  He said he was tortured.
     He tried to escape but was beaten unconscious and was found  the  next
    day by villagers and received medical treatment from a private doctor.

4.   The judge noted that the  appellant's  claim  to  be  in  fear  of  the
    Taliban was advanced on the same basis as that which led to the refusal
    of the asylum claim in November 2004.  He claimed that the Taliban were
    against him because they wished to know the whereabouts of weapons that
    his brothers  had,  and  that  the  Afghanistan  security  forces  were
    accusing him of selling arms to the Taliban, and so both entities  were
    after him.  The judge noted that in interview the appellant  was  asked
    the names of his brothers and gave  them  as  Haji  Qayuim  and  Hassan
    Ullah.  In an earlier interview he had  given  his  brothers  names  as
    Hassan Ullah Khan and Shareef Khan.  He had not explained  why  he  had
    never mentioned Haji Qayuim in the earlier  interview  or  why  he  had
    provided a different name for his brother, nor  had  he  explained  who
    Shareef Khan was.
5.   The judge said at paragraph 23 of his determination that he  found  the
    appellant not to be a credible witness.  He went  on  to  set  out  his
    reasoning for this.   He  said  at  paragraph  25  that  following  the
    decision in Devaseelan his starting point was the facts that  had  been
    outlined above in the determination.  No fresh evidence  had  been  put
    forward concerning the appellant's involvement  with  Hezb-e-Islami  or
    his brother's role, and those matters had  been  adjudicated  upon  and
    those facts still stood.  The judge did not believe the account of  the
    November 2012 attack.  The judge in 2004 had rejected his claim to be a
    member of Hezb-e-Islami and found  that  his  evidence  showed  he  was
    forced to fight for the Taliban in common with other villagers  and  as
    the background evidence showed.  The forced conscription had lasted for
    about a  month  and  this  was  a  short-lived  rank  and  file  forced
    conscription.  Such conscripts were released since January 2002.

6.   The  judge  had  accepted  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant's older brother was a fighter as the appellant described.  He
    found that there was no risk of the appellant returning  to  Kabul  and
    his family lived there and he originated from there.  He had been found
    not to be able to account for why the 2002 statement that he  made  did
    not mention any involvement with Hezb-e-Islami or say  that  he  was  a
    member.  He also had no idea of the political objectives of that group.



7.   The judge went on to consider the November  2012  incident.   He  noted
    that the appellant had not  explained  why  the  Taliban  were  showing
    interest in him in November 2012 when his brothers disappeared thirteen
    years ago at the hands of  the  Taliban.   If  they  had  captured  his
    brothers it made no sense why they would target the  appellant  or  ask
    him about weapons.  He commented that  the  evidence  was  inconsistent
    with the objective evidence as the Taliban had no interest in  ordinary
    citizens who played a low-level role in the past such as the appellant,
    and he said this was confirmed by the appellant's expert Mr Foxley.

8.   Nor did he find credible the appellant's claim that  the  Taliban  were
    looking for  the  weapons  as  the  2004  decision  recorded  that  the
    appellant had surrendered his weapon to the Taliban and was  forced  to
    fight for them.  He was now claiming that he had only submitted one  of
    the weapons.  They were said to be interested in other weapons, but  he
    found that to be lacking in credibility as he had  never  mentioned  it
    before in any of his previous claims.

9.   The judge noted that in letters sent from prison  while  the  appellant
    was in detention he said he ran away from Afghanistan previously mainly
    because he was suspected of spying and did not mention in  the  letters
    anything in relation to his brother's disappearance or  his  membership
    of the Hezb-e-Islami Group or the surrendering of weapons.  In the same
    letters from prison he also claimed the Taliban burnt his home  but  he
    had not put that evidence in to the judge  in  2004,  nor  before  this
    judge.  There was no  mention  in  the  letters  of  any  problems  the
    appellant's brother was having with the Taliban before  2012.   He  now
    claimed that he was dumped outside his house, having earlier said  that
    it had been burned, and also said he lived with his brother-in-law  and
    his wife in their house.  Nor did the judge find credible his claim  to
    have been taken and beaten by the Taliban and left for dead, as if  his
    account was to be believed they would  kill  him  on  return  and  they
    therefore would not have left him.

10.  The judge considered that  the  appellant's  account  was  inconsistent
    with the three Rule 35 reports to support his claim of torture  at  the
    hands of the Taliban in 2012.   It  was  not  clear,  the  judge  said,
    whether all three Rule 35 reports were  available  to  the  appellant's
    medical expert, Dr Beeks.  The judge also noted that Dr Beeks  had  not
    all the relevant documentation including  a  copy  of  the  March  2004
    refusal or the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision of 5 November  2004
    or interviews from 2011 and 2016.  Also the medical evidence upon which
    the doctor relied was not provided to the judge at the hearing.  It was
    noted from one of the detention reviews carried out by  the  respondent
    that the appellant had claimed that after he was deported  in  November
    2012 the Taliban Army captured him in the district of  Logar  and  took
    him away 5 kilometres from town.  He had not claimed to have been taken
    5 kilometres from the town in his evidence before the judge.

11.  The judge also noted further inconsistencies in  that  in  his  account
    given to the doctor who examined him in detention the appellant did not
    mention he was unable to walk unaided for several weeks, or that he was
    tortured for two days and dumped on the side  of  the  road.   Nor  was
    there any mention in Dr Beeks' report  of  the  appellant  having  been
    tortured for two days or having to walk unsupported.  In fact, Dr Beeks
    had noted the appellant woke up the same day he was  attacked  and  was
    taken to the local doctor.  There was also mention in his latest asylum
    interview that he tried to escape the Taliban while riding along  on  a
    motorbike, in contrast to the Rule 35 report where he said he was  held
    by them for two days when they tried to  recruit  him  and  because  he
    refused they beat him.  This also contrasted with  his  later  evidence
    that he left his brother-in-law's house after two or three  days.   The
    mention of recruitment had not been raised in his interview or  in  his
    evidence before the judge.   In  his  evidence-in-chief  the  appellant
    denied saying he was held by the Taliban for two days  but  claimed  he
    told the doctor he was taken after two days.  The judge did not  accept
    this explanation as he had signed  the  Rule  35  report  and  had  not
    clarified that aspect of the record previously.  He told the doctor  he
    was tortured because he took money to the United Kingdom and because of
    this when he returned to Afghanistan they captured him and in the  Rule
    35 report he did not make it clear why he was  tortured.   He  did  not
    tell the doctor his brother was a member of Hezb-e-Islami.

12.  In the Rule 35 report  of  30  December  2016  the  appellant  gave  an
    entirely different and inconsistent account of his capture,  the  judge
    said.  He claimed that the Taliban caught him in the village on  return
    to Afghanistan and he thought the people in the village had  told  them
    and the police about his whereabouts because he had been in  opposition
    to the Taliban.  He had not provided any  explanation  as  to  why  the
    Taliban would be interested in him after such a long passage  of  time.
    He gave different accounts to the doctor and in interview  and  to  the
    detention doctor.  There was no mention of him being taken  away  on  a
    motorbike and trying to escape on the bike as he stated in his evidence-
    in-chief.  He made no mention of the Taliban trying to recruit  him  or
    that they wanted to know about the weapons his brother had or  that  he
    had sold the weapons and taken the money to  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    provided photographs of the scars in his bundle of documents,  but  the
    copies provided to the judge were blanks  with  dark  rectangles.   His
    representative was not able to  provide  original  photographs  at  the
    hearing, but undertook to provide them subsequently, but at the date of
    writing the determination no photographs had been forthcoming.

13.  The judge also noted that the appellant told Dr Beeks he  was  detained
    in Iran for a month in prison and also in Turkey where he  was  beaten,
    and the doctor had failed to investigate further his  claims  of  being
    beaten in Turkey and had relied entirely on his account where  he  said
    there were no scars remaining from this beating.  This meant the  judge
    could not be sure whether the appellant had  received  injuries  during
    the claimed beating or not.  She also  noted  a  contrast  between  the
    appellant having said he had cut his right arm with a blade while still
    in detention in Dungavel and Dr Beeks recording that he made no attempt
    at suicide, although she did note the self-harm.  As Dr Beeks  had  not
    explored other potential causes of his injuries in childhood or  during
    his long journey, or the nature of the beating he  received  in  Turkey
    the judge gave little weight to her conclusions regarding the scars  or
    the causing of the scars because other obvious and potential causes had
    not been eliminated by Dr Beeks.

14.  With regard to the expert evidence of  Mr  Foxley  and  concerning  the
    appellant's mental health she noted what Dr Beeks said in her report of
    8 March 2017, but the judge had not  been  supplied  with  the  medical
    report dated 6 March 2017 to which Mr Foxley referred.  Mr  Foxley  had
    not been supplied with Dr Beeks'  report  and  the  appellant  had  not
    referred to any of these medical aspects of his health in his evidence-
    in-chief, including the self-harm he claimed occurred in prison.  There
    was no evidence that the appellant suffered from  depression  or  post-
    traumatic stress disorder other than  the  conclusions  reached  by  Dr
    Beeks.  Nor had he mentioned mental health issues in  his  most  recent
    asylum interview or his evidence-in-chief or further representations.

15.  The judge considered that  Mr  Foxley's  report  did  not  support  the
    appellant's claim and was inconsistent with the  core  aspects  of  the
    claim.  Mr Foxley had been provided with  only  one  witness  statement
    from the appellant and the judge stated at paragraph 59 that Mr  Foxley
    was not shown the 2004 determination, but subsequently at paragraph  63
    the judge referred  to  Mr  Foxley  having  had  the  determination  of
    November 2004.

16.  Mr Foxley  had  been  unable  to  trace  the  appellant's  brother  but
    suspected him to be a small-scale local fighter.  Mr Foxley  also  said
    that the Taliban's ability to target and track the appellant would  now
    be greatly reduced, though  if  he  had  been  targeted,  detained  and
    tortured by them in the past it was plausible that he might  remain  at
    risk, but the greatest risk to him was in his home area.  This risk was
    based on the assumption that the appellant's account of being  involved
    in Hezb-e-Islami and the grievances with weapons were true,  which  the
    judge considered surprising, as Mr  Foxley  had  the  determination  of
    November 2004 where the appellant  was  not  believed.   The  appellant
    relied on the letters he claimed to have received from the Taliban  and
    a letter from the  village  elders.   The  judge  considered  that  the
    contents of the letters bore no resemblance to  the  documents  he  had
    identified in the interview,  one  being  from  the  National  Security
    saying he had been selling arms and one from the Taliban saying he  had
    been saying anti-Taliban things.  There was  no  explanation  from  the
    appellant's brother-in-law as to why he went  to  the  elders  and  was
    supported by  them  as  in  the  letters.   Mr  Foxley  had  noted  the
    difficulties associated with documents from  Afghanistan  and  had  not
    been asked to determine if they were  authentic.   The  judge  did  not
    believe the letters were sent by the Taliban.  The  letters  were  also
    inconsistent with the evidence given by Mr Foxley that the  Taliban  no
    longer had control over a Government regime since  they  were  rejected
    from power in 2001.  Their ability to target and  track  the  appellant
    would be greatly reduced.  He would only be at risk from them if he had
    been targeted previously and the judge had rejected that aspect of  his
    claim.

17.  The judge noted that the appellant said he could not  return  to  Logar
    or Kabul.  The judge took account of the relevant country  guidance  in
    AK, noting that the appellant said he had no family left in Logar or in
    Afghanistan.  The judge noted the appellant had been in touch with  his
    brother-in-law who had been helping him by sending him letters.  He had
    not provided any evidence to show his brother-in-law and the brother-in-
    law's wife could not  support  him  on  return.   The  judge  said  the
    appellant had not mentioned in his evidence that he could not return to
    Kabul.  It was noted that he had  returned  twice  to  Afghanistan  and
    travelled back to the United Kingdom.  He had been able to  fund  these
    significantly costly trips with the assistance of  his  brother-in-law.
    In the 2004 determination the judge had noted that  the  appellant  had
    his father and other relatives in Kabul who had assisted the  appellant
    before he travelled to the United Kingdom.  He claimed his parents  had
    died but had provided  no  evidence  of  this.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant could be assisted by his family and in particular his brother-
    in-law, to resettle.  He noted what was said by Mr Foxley about risk on
    return to Kabul and concluded that the appellant,  notwithstanding  the
    changed situation there, could  return  to  Kabul  if  he  wished.   In
    conclusion the appellant was found to lack credibility and  the  appeal
    was dismissed.

18.  The appellant sought permission to appeal this decision  arguing  first
    that  the  judge  had  misdirected   himself   on   material   matters,
    particularly with regard to the  materiality  of  the  two  independent
    expert  reports,  he  had  made  adverse  credibility  findings  before
    considering the appeal, placed  excessive  weight  on  consistency  and
    failed to take proper account of the appellant's  PTSD  when  assessing
    credibility.  It was further argued that the judge had not sufficiently
    reasoned why little weight was attached to Mr Foxley's report and  also
    with regard to Dr Beeks' report.  Reference was also  made  to  factual
    errors including the identity of the documents available to  Mr  Foxley
    and the fact that legible  copies  of  the  photographs  were  in  fact
    provided to the court by hand on the  second  day  after  the  hearing.
    Permission was granted on all grounds.
19.  In her submissions Ms Umoh relied upon and  developed  the  points  set
    out in the grounds.   She  argued  that  with  regard  to  the  judge's
    paragraph 32 where  he  referred  to  the  appellant's  evidence  being
    inconsistent with objective evidence, the Taliban had  no  interest  in
    ordinary citizens who played a low key role in the past, the  appellant
    had said why they were interested in him  because  of  his  involvement
    with the weapons.  Also the expert had said that if a person had been a
    target in the past they could be again.  The judge had  also  erred  at
    paragraph 33.  Throughout  his  evidence  the  appellant  had  said  he
    returned one weapon and they were chasing him for the weapons which had
    been retained by his brothers.  He had referred to  his  brother-in-law
    with whom he had stayed, rather than his brother, as the judge had said
    at paragraph 34.  It was also  denied  that  the  judge  was  right  to
    describe the appellant's  account  of  how  he  tried  to  escape  when
    captured by the Taliban as being inconsistent in material  respects  as
    the judge had done at paragraph 36.  The judge had  not  explained  how
    having all the Rule 35 reports might have assisted Dr Beeks  in  coming
    to her conclusions.  The photographs to which  the  judge  referred  at
    paragraph 48 had in fact been provided two days after the hearing.   It
    was also wrong to describe the appellant as being inconsistent  as  the
    judge had done at paragraph 38.  The matter had simply  been  expressed
    in different terms.  The judge had exaggerated the appellant's evidence
    as set out and  considered  at  paragraph  45.   It  was  explained  at
    paragraph 7 of the appellant's statement and also at paragraph 15.  The
    judge had referred to Dr Beeks failing to investigate  the  appellant's
    claim of having been beaten in Turkey and with regard  to  him  cutting
    himself.  This was an error  however  as  the  appellant  had  had  his
    suicidal thoughts when he was in Leeds but not in Dungavel, so  it  was
    not the same incident.  The  judge  had  given  little  weight  to  the
    medical evidence in paragraphs 50 and 51, but the expert  had  followed
    the Istanbul Protocol  in  assessing  the  appellant  and  the  judge's
    failure to attach weight to the report was an error.  In  addition  the
    judge had erred at paragraph 53 in concluding that the reference  to  a
    medical report of 6 March 2017 and one of 8 March 2017 were  different.
    In fact it was a typographical error and it was the same report.   This
    was clearly the case as no other medical report had been provided.   It
    was not a reason for non-reliance on the report.  There were references
    to the Istanbul Protocol within Dr Beeks' report and it  was  also  set
    out in an Appendix.  The judge had also erred in fact at  paragraph  76
    with regard to the appellant not mentioning in  his  evidence  that  he
    could not return to Kabul.  In fact there were references to this to be
    found, for example at paragraph 10 of the appellant's  statement.   The
    judge had not considered changes in the appellant's circumstances since
    2004 in placing the reliance that he did  on  the  2004  determination.
    The determination was unsafe and should be set aside.

20.  In his submissions Mr Jarvis argued  that  even  if  there  were  minor
    errors by the judge they were no more than peripheral  matters  and  it
    was necessary to consider  the  claim  overall,  bearing  in  mind  the
    significant volume of evidence the judge  had  had  to  consider.   The
    context of the appellant's immigration history was also  of  relevance.
    The judge had not failed to comply with the Devaseelan guidelines.  The
    decision was lawful even if there were a couple of errors  with  regard
    to such matters as the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    person in Afghanistan,  i.e.  whether  brother  or  brother-in-law  and
    whether the doctor had taken into account the  Istanbul  Protocol.   It
    was clear, for example, from paragraph 40(4) of Devaseelan  that  facts
    personal to the appellant which were not brought to  the  attention  of
    the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant to the issues before
    him, should be treated by the  second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest
    circumspection.  The judge had not treated  the  decision  in  2004  as
    being final.  Paragraph 25 of the determination  set  out  the  correct
    test.  No further compelling evidence had been produced.  The judge had
    considered all the post-2004 evidence.  Reliance was placed on what was
    said in HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 at paragraphs 14 to  16  with
    reference to the decision in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  It was clear
    that no rule of law had been  laid  down  as  to  the  order  in  which
    judicial fact-finders had to approach the evidential  materials  before
    them.  It could not properly be said that the judge had  sidelined  the
    expert evidence but he had engaged with the evidence of  both  experts,
    had described their limitations and commented on what could  have  been
    said.  It was relevant to note that although the appellant  claimed  to
    have been ill-treated by the Taliban  he  had  undertaken  a  long  and
    hazardous  journey  and  had  been  ill-treated  in  Iran  and  Turkey.
    Reliance was also placed on  MO  (Algeria)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1276  at
    paragraphs 16 and 17 where,  among  other  things,  it  was  said  that
    provided the medical evidence was considered  in  the  context  of  the
    consideration of the credibility of the  appellant,  no  error  of  law
    would be disclosed, and the fact that there were inconsistencies, maybe
    medically explicable, did not deprive the fact-finding Tribunal of  the
    right to rely upon such inconsistencies provided the Tribunal took into
    account the medical view.

21.  With regard to the points made by Ms  Umoh,  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge had made lawful findings.  It was relevant to note  that  it  was
    implausible for the Taliban  to  wait  thirteen  years  to  pursue  the
    appellant and that went back  to  the  initial  claim  which  had  been
    rejected by the AIT.  It was clear that the judge  had  understood  the
    expert's report and it was clear from the expert's evidence  as  quoted
    at paragraph 62 of the judge's decision that the greatest risk of being
    targeted would be on return to his home area.   The  expert's  evidence
    also was that the Taliban no  longer  had  control  over  a  Government
    regime since their ejection from power in 2001  and  their  ability  to
    target and track the appellant would be greatly reduced.  The judge had
    not accepted that the appellant had been targeted previously and it was
    only on that basis that he would be at risk from the Taliban.  If there
    was an error about whether it was the appellant's brother or brother-in-
    law as referred to at paragraph 34, that did not go to the core of  the
    claim as the core had already been rejected with regard to any  adverse
    interest.  Also with regard  to  paragraph  36  and  the  inconsistency
    identified by the judge, that was a matter which it was appropriate  to
    highlight.  It was open to the judge at paragraph 71 not to accept that
    the appellant departed after two days because he claimed to the doctors
    in detention that he was detained and tortured for two days.

22.  With regard to the medical report, it was  unclear  what  evidence  had
    been disclosed to Dr Beeks.  The judge had lawful reasons  with  regard
    to the weight he attached to her evidence.  Whether or not  photographs
    were handed in in time did not really take the case any further as  the
    judge was not an expert on  scarring  and  had  to  assess  the  expert
    evidence.

23.  With regard to Ms Umoh's arguments about paragraphs 38 to 40 and 41  to
    43, again, if the expert was asked to comment on the  claim  then  they
    had to be given all of the relevant material, so if they were not given
    all the material, historically that was relevant and it was  not  known
    whether it would make a difference to what they said.  The  observation
    at paragraph 38 was perfectly permissible since the appellant  had  not
    claimed at the hearing that he was taken 5 kilometres  from  the  town.
    The judge had not exaggerated the findings.   Even  if  the  judge  had
    erred with  regard  to  the  doctor's  consideration  of  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, this was peripheral and reasons had been given for  the  lack
    of weight attached to her evidence.  The judge  had  made  findings  in
    paragraph  56  with  regard  to  the   alleged   medical   difficulties
    experienced  by  the  appellant.   He  had  obtained  private   medical
    treatment in Afghanistan.

24.  With regard to return to Kabul, the appellant had said he could not  go
    there, but as the judge pointed out in 2004 his historical evidence was
    that  the  family  were  living  in  Kabul  and  his  movements  across
    continents had been funded by his  family.   The  judge  made  a  sound
    decision about the presence of family in Kabul.  The core of the  claim
    had been rejected historically and by the judge after the hearing.  The
    change of circumstances in Kabul was addressed at paragraph 85 and  the
    country guidance had been applied.  The appeal should be dismissed.

25.  By way  of  reply  Ms  Umoh  argued  that  with  regard  to  Kabul  the
    appellant's brother-in-law was still in Logar and  had  never  been  in
    Kabul.  The appellant's father and uncle had been there but  had  died.
    This was relevant to his ability to return to Kabul.   With  regard  to
    the factual errors it was not accepted that these were peripheral,  but
    for example, concerning the 2012 incident, were important.  With regard
    to the Devaseelan issue the judge  had  failed  to  treat  the  earlier
    decision appropriately but treated it as final and it was necessary  to
    consider the change of circumstances in 2012 and the  evidence  of  the
    two experts.  The judge had erred in sidelining the medical evidence in
    contrast to what was required to be done as set out in the guidance  in
    MO (Algeria).  It was clearly material that the  judge  considered  the
    doctor had not taken account of the Istanbul Protocol.  Paragraph 17 of
    HH (Ethiopia) was not applicable here.  Good reasons had not been given
    for disagreeing with the medical evidence.   There  was  a  failure  to
    consider  the  new  material,  in  contravention  of   the   Devaseelan
    guidelines.  There were crucial misunderstandings  and  factual  errors
    which went to the core of the claim.

26.  It was common ground that if I found an error of law  then  the  matter
    should be remitted for a full rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

27.  I reserved my determination.

28.  It is clear that the essence of the appellant's claim  to  be  at  risk
    from the Taliban and from the authorities, is as it was  in  2004  when
    there was an unsuccessful appeal.  The judge at the  2004  hearing  was
    clear that the appellant was not  a  member  of  the  Taliban  and  had
    experienced no more than forced conscription for a period  of  a  month
    and the evidence was that  such  conscripts  had  been  released  since
    January 2002 and he was reasonably likely to be seen as being innocent,
    even if his involvement came to light.  The  judge  was  not  persuaded
    that the appellant was a member of Hezb-e-Islami.  He accepted that the
    appellant's older brother was a fighter as described by the  appellant.
    He did not accept there was any risk in  Kabul  where  the  appellant's
    father and  members  of  his  family  still  were  and  from  where  he
    originated and where he seemed to have other uncles.   He  was  not  in
    conflict with any powerful warlord and had not shown any other basis to
    show risk on return.

29.  Ms Umoh placed emphasis on the events of 2012 and the medical  and  the
    country experts' reports  as  being  matters  of  difference  from  the
    previous situation which she argued were not properly considered by the
    judge in contravention of the Devaseelan guidelines which  require  the
    first Adjudicator's determination to be the  starting  point  but  that
    facts happening subsequently can always be taken into  account  by  the
    second Adjudicator and that facts personal to the appellant which  were
    not brought to the attention of the first  Adjudicator,  although  they
    were relevant to the issues before him or her should be treated by  the
    second Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection.

30.  At paragraph  25  the  judge  noted  that  following  the  decision  in
    Devaseelan his starting point was the findings in that determination in
    2004 and commented that no fresh  evidence  had  been  put  before  him
    regarding  the  appellant's  involvement  with  Hezb-e-Islami  or   his
    brother's role.  He found that those facts still stood.

31.  As regards the Mibanga point, I consider that though the  structure  of
    the judge's determination could have been clearer,  the  conclusion  in
    essence is set out at paragraph 24 of the decision is not a  conclusion
    arrived at prior to consideration of the evidence and other issues, but
    rather a statement of  the  views  that  the  judge  arrived  at  as  a
    consequence of considering those matters.  After paragraph 24 there  is
    a very detailed assessment of the evidence and it  cannot  properly  be
    said that the judge had  pre-judged  the  issue.   It  is  a  matter  I
    consider of structuring the  determination  rather  than  pre-judgment.
    That is clear from the detail of the consideration given to the medical
    and country expert evidence as well as the judge's  evaluation  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim to have been ill-treated on return
    in 2012.

32.  It is relevant to bear in mind, as the judge did, the findings  of  the
    judge in 2004 that I have noted above.  It is also relevant to bear  in
    mind the point emphasised by Mr Jarvis  as  to  the  inherent  lack  of
    credibility of the claim with regard to the  events  that  occurred  in
    2012 that might be said to  exist  in  the  Taliban  taking  no  action
    against the appellant previously, although of course  it  needs  to  be
    borne in mind that he was in the United Kingdom and  elsewhere  outside
    Afghanistan for significant periods of time during that period.  It  is
    also not irrelevant to bear in mind the point noted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 22 as to the different names given by the appellant  for  his
    brothers.

33.  A point made by Ms Umoh was that the judge  had  erred  factually  with
    regard to the appellant saying he had surrendered his  weapon  and  yet
    the Taliban were said to be pursuing him because they  wanted  weapons.
    Her argument was that the appellant had simply surrendered a weapon and
    there were other weapons which the Taliban were interested in.   It  is
    relevant to note however that as quoted  at  page  5  of  the  decision
    letter and the appellant's evidence at the appeal hearing  in  2004  he
    stated that he "surrendered to the Taliban his weapons and  was  forced
    to fight for them".  It is a clearly a use of the  plural  rather  than
    the singular.  It is relevant also to bear in mind that  as  the  judge
    noted at paragraph 33 the appellant  had  not  previously  referred  to
    having  only  submitted  one  of  the  weapons  before  and  they  were
    interested now in other weapons, although he did  not  have  any  other
    weapons.  Failure to mention this in  previous  claims  for  asylum  or
    representations was clearly a point of relevance.  It is also  relevant
    to bear in mind that as the judge noted it lacked credibility that  the
    Taliban if  they  had  such  a  significant  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant would not have left him alive if they had taken him and  ill-
    treated him in 2012.  Thus as noted in the refusal letter and relied on
    by the judge, at his interview the appellant said the Taliban beat  him
    unconscious and left him in a field outside the back of  his  home  for
    the villagers to find him, whereas in the Rule 35 report he  said  that
    he was held for two days by the Taliban who tried to  recruit  him  but
    refused and after that they beat him.

34.  It was also relevant to note that it was unclear exactly what  evidence
    was made available to Dr Beeks.  It is clear  that  she  had  not  been
    given a copy of the respondent's refusal of 2 March 2004 or the  First-
    tier Judge's decision.

35.  As Mr Jarvis pointed out, it is ultimately a peripheral  issue  whether
    or not the photographs of the scars were provided in time for the judge
    to refer to them in his determination.  The judge is not an  expert  on
    scarring and it is clear, at least from the determination, that he  did
    not see those photographs, even if they  had  been  handed  in  to  the
    hearing centre.

36.  It is also relevant to bear in mind the judge's  point  that  Dr  Beeks
    did not investigate how  the  appellant  was  beaten  in  Turkey  while
    detained there and this is clearly relevant to what the doctor  had  to
    say about the scarring on the appellant, the judge concluding that  she
    had relied entirely on the appellant's account when he said there  were
    no scars remaining from  his  beating  in  Turkey.   I  consider  these
    findings were open to the judge.  Although the judge clearly  erred  in
    considering that Dr Beeks had  not  taken  into  account  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, as there are several references to it throughout  her  report
    and it is annexed to the report, nevertheless I consider that  he  gave
    her evidence detailed and careful consideration in the context  of  the
    claim as a whole and came to conclusions on it which were open to  him.



37.  Likewise with the evidence  of  Mr  Foxley,  the  judge  gave  detailed
    consideration to that evidence.  He noted that the greatest risk to the
    appellant was said to be on return to his home area but that  this  was
    based, perhaps not surprisingly, on Mr Foxley assuming that the account
    given by the appellant was true.  It is the case as noted at  paragraph
    63 that Mr Foxley had the November 2004 determination in front of  him,
    and does not appear to have factored that into his assessment, but I do
    not consider his report can be said to be flawed and indeed  the  judge
    did not say that it was simply  because  he  did  not  take  that  into
    account.

38.  I should say in passing also that I see no materiality to  any  mistake
    made by the judge as between the appellant's brother or  brother-in-law
    at paragraph 34.  There is no essential materiality  to  that.   It  is
    relevant to note what was said by Mr Foxley about  an  absence  on  the
    part of the Taliban of interest in ordinary citizens who have played  a
    low-level role in the past.

39.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that the judge did not  err
    as claimed.  She set out and properly applied the  relevant  Devaseelan
    guidance to the claim, and gave appropriate consideration to the events
    of 2012 and the medical report and the country expert report.   Clearly
    it was a matter of significance that the appellant had been disbelieved
    in 2004 and in essence he had provided  no  evidence  to  indicate  any
    material change from the claim that had been  put  forward  then  other
    than those three pieces of evidence,  i.e.  the  two  reports  and  the
    events of 2012  which  the  judge  considered  carefully  and  came  to
    appropriate findings on.  It was also in my  view  fully  open  to  the
    judge to conclude as he did about risk on return.   The  appellant  had
    not provided evidence to show his brother-in-law  and  wife  could  not
    support him on return.  He had been able to fund his travels twice back
    from Afghanistan to Europe with family support.  The  judge  took  into
    account the changed situation in Kabul as noted at paragraph 81 of  the
    determination, and concluded that the  appellant  could  return  there.
    Again, the background evidence was taken into account in coming to this
    conclusion.  The judge took proper account of the country  guidance  in
    AK, in particular at paragraph 85.

Notice of Decision

40.  In conclusion therefore I consider that it has not been shown that  the
    judge erred in law in any material respect in his determination and  as
    a consequence that decision dismissing the appellant's appeal stands.

Signed [pic]           Date 06 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


Signed [pic]      Date 06 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen










