
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01706/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 12 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                               mr kasrul alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Uddin, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  20  September  1985.
    He appealed against the decision of the respondent  refusing  to  grant
    him asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Geraint  Jones  QC  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in a decision dated 26  March  2019.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found the following in his decision.

2.   The appellant's claim was based  on  his  membership  of  a  particular
    social group in that he  is  bisexual.   The  appellant  came  to  this
    country on 28 October 2008 as a working holidaymaker  and  remained  in
    this country without permission until 29 December 2010.   It  was  only
    after he was arrested that he claimed asylum some ten years later.  The
    judge noted that in the appellant's witness statement dated 27 December
    2017 where he alleges that he supported vulnerable third gender and gay
    people in Bangladesh and that brought him to the adverse attention of a
    group of students and he was attacked by them for  this  support.   The
    appellant's claim  in  his  27  December  2017  witness  statement  the
    appellant said he was a gay rights  activist.   The  judge  found  that
    however the appellant's evidence morphed  into  the  appellant's  claim
    that he was a transgender person himself.

3.   The judge relied on Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and he took that against  the  appellant's
    credibility.  He did not place reliance on documents  provided  by  the
    appellant at pages 12 to 17 of his bundle of documents  to  corroborate
    his account that his family has disowned him.  The judge did not  place
    any reliance on the letter that the  appellant  provided  that  he  had
    harassed his mother and father, and even if such a complaint  had  been
    made, the judge noted, the police did not take any action.   The  judge
    then considered background evidence that false documents  are  easy  to
    obtain in Bangladesh.  The judge found that he has no hesitation in his
    conclusion that the appellant is a would-be economic migrant  who  told
    lies in a bid to remain resident in this country.

4.   The judge stated that in December 2017 the  appellant  did  not  adduce
    any  documents  to  support  his  claim  and  whatever   documents   he
    subsequently has provided are purely to  support  his  embellished  and
    metamorphosed assertions.  He found that the translations of the report
    are nonsensical, ungrammatical and lacking appropriate syntax, which he
    would not expect in an official document.  The judge  also  found  that
    the appellant's claim that he has lived on the charity of others  since
    2011 not credible and found that the appellant has been working in this
    country.  He found  the  appellant  not  credible  and  said  that  the
    appellant's narrative was a tissue of lies  regarding  the  appellant's
    alleged bisexuality.

5.   The grounds of appeal state  the  following.   The  primary  ground  of
    appeal is that the judge did not take into account the medical evidence
    which was in the bundle of documents.  There are also suggestions  that
    the judge was biased in some of the utterances  that  he  made  in  his
    decision, such as that "When that visa expired the appellant  chose  to
    flout and abuse the immigration laws of this country by remaining as an
    illegal overstayer".  First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson in a decision
    dated 24 April 2019 said that it is arguable that  the  judge  did  not
    make any reference to the appellant's medical  condition  and  that  if
    that is the case and if it is found to be material then maybe the  rest
    of the findings are unsafe.

6.   At the hearing I heard submissions from both Mr Uddin and Mr  Tufan  in
    the error of law submissions.

7.   Mr Uddin in his submissions took me  to  the  evidence  in  the  bundle
    which states that the appellant had referred himself to the doctor  who
    showed that the appellant showed signs of PTSD.  He also referred me to
    the letters provided and said  that  the  appellant  should  have  been
    considered a vulnerable witness according  to  the  Joint  Presidential
    Directions and quoted me some case law.  I asked him how would that  be
    a material error that the medical  evidence  had  not  been  considered
    given the Judge's findings that  the  appellant  is  not  bisexual,  he
    pointed me to paragraph 10 the decision where the judge stated that  it
    is very noticeable that at the interview  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant metamorphosed and was upgraded.  This is explicable  only  on
    one of two bases: either the appellant's memory of what had  transpired
    whilst he was in Bangladesh was very much better than it had been  when
    he prepared his statement dated 27 December 2017; or  he  has  embarked
    upon deliberate embellishment with a view to beefing up the basis  upon
    which he puts his claim.  Mr Uddin argued that  the  other  explanation
    could have been the appellant's mental state.

8.   Mr Tufan accepted that the  judge  has  not  referred  to  the  medical
    evidence in his decision and said that the medical documents show  that
    there has been merely a referral.  The judge took into account  Section
    8 issues and relied on the judge's decision in his findings  about  how
    the appellant's claim has metamorphosed.  He did  not  find  that  this
    would have been material to the eventual decision.

9.   In respect of Article 3 and Article 8 Mr Tufan  argued  that  case  law
    suggests that an appellant who has been in this country unlawfully  and
    with a medical history that he has demonstrated would  not  succeed  in
    any event.

Findings

10.  I have considered the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Geraint
    Jones QC with great care.  I have considered the  submissions  made  by
    both parties. I accept that the judge has not made any reference to the
    medical evidence in his decision.  That is not to say that he  did  not
    consider the documents that were before him and  the  medical  evidence
    was amongst those documents.  The judge found that  the  appellant  was
    not credible and gave cogent reasons for his findings.  The appellant's
    evidence,  the  judge's  noted  was  inconsistent.  The  most  relevant
    inconsistency being that the appellant at first in his statement  dated
    27 December 2017 said that he was a gay rights  activist  and  that  he
    sympathised with gay rights but did not claim to be a gay  or  bisexual
    himself.  It was only later that the  appellant's  claim  changed  into
    that he is a bisexual and that he has sex both with men and women.  The
    medical evidence is no more than a referral to a  doctor  on  what  the
    doctor has been told by the appellant about his condition.  No  medical
    report was provided. Therefore a differently constituted Tribunal would
    not come to  a  different  conclusion  based  on  the  limited  medical
    evidence.

11.  The judge also did not find the appellant credible under Section 8  and
    he was entitled to do so given that the appellant's claim that he  fled
    Bangladesh due to many fears, including political  ones,  and  that  he
    would not claim asylum earlier.  This  was  a  finding  the  Judge  was
    entitled to make on the evidence before him.

12. At paragraph 10 of  the  decision,  that  the  judge  states  that  the
    appellant's evidence that he is a bisexual  can  be  explained  by  two
    hypotheses: one, that he had a much better memory when he prepared  his
    statement on 27 December 2017, or he has deliberately  embellished  his
    claim.  The judge said that the appellant had deliberately  embellished
    his claim to procure the outcome which he desires.  Mr  Uddin  stressed
    that the medical evidence might have persuaded the judge  otherwise  in
    that the medical evidence explains the inconsistency. I  still  do  not
    accept that this would have explained why the appellant would say  that
    he is a supporter of bisexual people when he was in Bangladesh and then
    say that he is actually a bisexual himself.


13. The judge was entitled to place the weight he deemed appropriate on the
    documents provided by the appellant.  I have considered  the  documents
    because Mr Uddin took me to them at the hearing and I find  that  there
    is no document which would established any point  of  law  which  would
    impact as to the correctness of the decision.  It may be an  error  for
    the judge not to have referenced the medical documents in his decision,
    but in I find that it is not  a  material  error  because  the  medical
    documents in themselves do  not  explain  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence.  It  is  also  not  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    reference every piece of evidence produced by the appellant.

14. It is clear  from  the  decision  that  the  judge  did  not  find  the
    appellant's claim credible and gave cogent  reasons  for  his  findings
    that the appellant is a not a bisexual and is an economic  migrant  who
    only claimed asylum after he was arrested. On the evidence before  him,
    there is no perversity in the conclusions that the judge  reached.  The
    grounds of appeal are a quarrel with the decision of the judge and have
    no merit.



Notice of Decision

16.  I find that there is no material error of law in this  decision,  real,
    actual, perceived or embryonic and the  judge  came  to  a  sustainable
    conclusion on the evidence before him.  Appeal dismissed.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 10th day of June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 10th day of June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




