
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01561/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                     |On 13 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                  MOAZ [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                    DECISIONS, REASONS AND DIRECTIONS (P)

    1. The appellant, a national of Ethiopia,  has  appealed  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated
       9.5.19, dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of
       31.1.19 rejecting his claim for international protection.

    2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-
       tier Tribunal on 16.7.19, on the basis that it was arguable that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in having found  that  the
       appellant's case was "on all fours" with the Country Guidance  of  MB
       (OLF and MTA-risk) [2007] Ethiopia UKAIT 00030 in relation  to  being
       of  Oromo   ethnicity  and  an  OLF  sympathiser  who,  following   a
       demonstration in March 2016 had been arrested, detained, and released
       on payment of a bribe, the judge nevertheless  concluded  that  there
       had been political changes in Ethiopia  highlighted  in  the  country
       background information relied on by the respondent. Despite an expert
       evidence suggesting that it was "too soon" to determine  whether  the
       recent changes were for the better and whether it was  safe  for  the
       appellant to return, the judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that
       because of those changes the appellant  was  no  longer  at  risk  on
       return.

    3. The appeal had been originally listed for hearing at Field  House  on
       27.3.20, a date which had to be vacated as a result of  the  COVID-19
       pandemic. On 26.3.20 the Upper Tribunal issued  directions  proposing
       that the error of law issue should be decided on the papers without a
       hearing and provided for further written submissions.

    4. The respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 28.8.19,  suggest  that  the
       grounds amount to a mere disagreement and that having considered  the
       expert report and the background material the judge was  entitled  to
       find that the situation in Ethiopia had changed so that the appellant
       was no longer at risk on return.

    5.  On  5.5.20,  the   Tribunal   received   the   appellant's   undated
       submissions/skeleton argument, highlighting that the  sole  issue  is
       whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to depart from the
       Country Guidance of MB in relation to risk on return.  Reference  was
       made to the Court of Appeal decision in SG  (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
       212, which  held  that  there  needed  to  be  "very  strong  grounds
       supported by cogent evidence" to justify  departure  from  a  Country
       Guidance case. It is submitted that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal does  not  identify  any  such  strong  grounds  and  cogent
       evidence and that none such was available to the First-tier Tribunal.



    6. In response,  after  the  expiry  of  the  time  limits  set  in  the
       directions issued by the Upper Tribunal, the respondent concedes that
       in light of SG (Iraq) the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to provide
       adequate reasons for departing from MB. The  respondent  invites  the
       Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
       in the process preserving the factual findings that  the  appellant's
       account of arrest and detention before leaving Ethiopia is  accepted,
       and preserving the negative credibility findings at [11] to  [12]  of
       the impugned decision that the appellant's claim to have  engaged  in
       sur place activities was  not truthful (there being no  challenge  to
       this finding in the grounds of application for permission to appeal).



    7. The respondent submits that as the only issue is risk on  return  and
       given that the Country Guidance  is  now  13  years  old,  the  Upper
       Tribunal is invited to consider if this appeal is a suitable  vehicle
       for fresh country guidance.

    8. The appellant's response received by email on 26.5.20 was  to  invite
       the Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal outright. In the  alternative,
       the appellant agrees that this case is suitable as a vehicle for  new
       Country Guidance and should be linked with the case  of  AAR,  appeal
       reference  PA/04592/2019,  which  is  awaiting  hearing  on   similar
       grounds.

    9. Having made enquiries with those responsible in the Upper Tribunal, I
       am satisfied that this case  is  most  unlikely  to  be  accepted  as
       suitable  for  Country  Guidance.  I  also  understand  that   whilst
       considerable work by all parties involved in AAR has taken place over
       several months,  because  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  that  case  is
       unlikely to be resolved before several further months  have  elapsed.
       In the circumstances, I consider that I should deal  with  this  case
       here and now.

   10. On the appellant's written submissions  and  the  concession  of  the
       respondent, I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
       departing from the  Country  Guidance  without  having  "very  strong
       grounds supported by cogent evidence  to  do,"  and,  in  any  event,
       failing to provide adequate cogent reasons for doing so.  This  is  a
       clear error of law, obviously material to the outcome of the  appeal.
       It follows that the decision cannot stand and must be  set  aside.  I
       consider it appropriate to remake the decision in the appeal  in  the
       Upper Tribunal on the basis of the evidence, findings of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, and concessions made more recently by the  respondent,
       as set out above. In doing so, I preserve the factual findings of the
       First-tier Tribunal namely, the appellant's  account  of  arrest  and
       detention before leaving Ethiopia. I  also  preserving  the  negative
       credibility findings at [11] to [12] of the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, finding that there is no truth to his  claims  of  sur
       place OLF activity.

   11. Nevertheless, on the concession of the respondent and on the findings
       of fact of the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied  that  this  is  a
       case in  which  the  appellant  falls  squarely  within  the  Country
       Guidance risk criteria of MB. The appellant  is  conceded  to  be  an
       Ethiopian national of Omoro ethnicity who was arrested  and  detained
       by  the  Ethiopian  authorities  on  the  basis  of  being   an   OLF
       sympathiser. The judge fully accepted those facts. There being before
       the Tribunal no country background evidence sufficient to  amount  to
       "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence,"  to  depart  from
       the Country Guidance, the Tribunal has no alternative but  to  remake
       the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum  grounds  on  the
       basis that the appellant will face a realm  risk  of  persecution  on
       return to  Ethiopia  on  grounds  of  his  OLF  sympathy  and  having
       previously come to the adverse attention of the authorities.

   12. In the circumstances, it  is  not  necessary  to  address  the  other
       avenues to international protection or human rights.

       Decision

   13. For the reasons set out out above, I find  that  the  making  of  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

       I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision in  the  appeal  by  allowing  the
                    appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.


                    Signed   DMW Pickup
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 29 June 2020
