
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01339/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                |Decisions and Reasons            |
|                                 |Promulgated:                     |
|On 5 April 2019                  |On 29 April 2019                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      O
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms S Aziz (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     I  shall  refer  to  the  appellant  in  these  proceedings  as  "the
claimant".  I  shall  refer  to  the  respondent  in  these  proceedings  as
"Secretary of State". On 17 January 2018 the Secretary  of  State  issued  a
decision  refusing  to  grant  the  claimant  international  protection.  He
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) and in a  decision  which
it sent to the parties on 14 March 2018, following a hearing of 27  February
2018, the tribunal dismissed his appeal. The  claimant  obtained  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on 27 February 2019  I  decided  to  set
aside the tribunal's decision because I had concluded that it  had  made  an
error of law. However, I preserved certain of its findings  and  conclusions
which I shall set out below. When setting aside the  tribunal's  decision  I
directed that it should be remade by the  Upper  Tribunal  after  a  further
hearing. That hearing took place at Bradford on 5 April 2019.  What  follows
is a setting out of  the  relevant  background  circumstances  and  previous
history and an explanation as to how I have remade the decision  and  why  I
have done so in the terms that I have.

2.    The claimant, who was born on 25  December  1984,  is  a  national  of
Nigeria. He came to the United Kingdom (UK) on 9 September 2009  with  valid
leave as a student which had been granted up to 31 December 2011.  Prior  to
that date he had married a person present and settled in the  UK  and  then,
on 6 December 2011, he had applied for leave to remain on the basis of  that
marriage. That application was not successful  and,  ultimately,  an  appeal
against the decision not to grant leave on that  basis  was  dismissed.  The
claimant became "appeal rights exhausted" on 26 October 2015. The claim  for
international protection which led to the dismissal of  his  appeal  by  the
tribunal and, ultimately, to this appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  was
made on 26 July 2017.

3.    As to the account underpinning the  claim  for  asylum,  the  claimant
says that he grew up in Lagos as an only child. His father  passed  away  in
2010. Prior to the unfortunate passing of  his  father,  there  had  been  a
dispute over some land. The claimant, in seeking  international  protection,
had asserted that if he were to be returned to Nigeria he  would  be  harmed
by various family members  as  a  result  of  that  dispute,  and  that  the
authorities in Nigeria would not be able to protect him. That was the  first
strand to his claim. The second was to the effect that  he  is  a  bi-sexual
person and at risk in consequence of that. He says that he had realised  his
sexuality in 2001 and that he had informed his mother about it in 2003.  She
had told someone else and, subsequently, word had  spread  to  other  people
including people at a church his mother attended. People  were  disapproving
and would avoid him. He had had two different gay relationships in  Nigeria.
After he had come to the UK he had been urged  by  his  mother  to  marry  a
female. That was because his mother had thought if  he  did  that  it  would
prevent her receiving abuse from family and friends. So, says the  claimant,
he did as he had been asked. However, there came a time  when  she  went  to
visit members of her family in London and then arrived back  at  the  family
home earlier than had been planned.  Having  done  so,  she  discovered  him
having a liaison with a male. In consequence of what she had seen, she  left
the family home and filed for divorce. That relationship is now at  an  end.
There then came a time when he had confided  in  a  family  friend  who  was
living in London, about his sexuality. However, that family friend  informed
other family members and, as a result of that,  the  claimant  has  received
threats emanating from persons in Nigeria within  his  family  and  who  now
know him to be gay. In particular, he says he  has  received  a  threatening
email from a cousin. Accordingly, he asserts  that  he  will  be  harmed  by
family members if returned to his home area of Nigeria. He also asserts,  in
any event, that if he is returned to Nigeria he will live openly  as  a  gay
person and that that will put his life at risk. He says  that  he  has  been
living openly as a gay/ bisexual person in the  UK,  has  had  a  number  of
relationships predominantly of a casual or  short-term  nature,  has  joined
the organisation called Stonewall and has been using gay dating websites.

4.    The tribunal did not believe the claimant about the land dispute.  Nor
did it  believe  him  about  his  sexuality.  So,  it  decided  he  had  not
demonstrated entitlement to international protection.  It  also  decided  he
did not meet the requirements of any of  what  might  be  described  as  the
Article 8 ECHR related Immigration Rules. As  indicated,  I  have  preserved
the adverse findings concerning the land dispute. As to that,  the  tribunal
had said this:

    "56. The appellant has also relied on an account of fearing  harm  from
    relatives following a dispute over land which has been ongoing for many
    years. I note that some of the land has been taken by relatives and the
    remainder sold by his mother who has now  gone  to  live  in  Zimbabwe.
    There is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant's  father  was
    poisoned.  I  note  that  he  has  not  provided  his  father's   death
    certificate or any other details to show how his father died.

    57. The appellant stated that his mother is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe.  I
    was not provided with any information to show that she is now  resident
    there or a citizen of that country. The issue of the appellant's  right
    to Zimbabwean citizenship was not explored by either party.

    58. My conclusion is that there is  no  outstanding  dispute  remaining
    over the land which belonged to the appellant's father. His mother  has
    obtained money from some of the proceeds  and  the  appellant  has  not
    indicated that he has at any time in the past or  will  in  the  future
    claim land that has been taken by his family. I attach little weight to
    the email the appellant has provided. It is unclear  why  his  relative
    would send an email at this time when the appellant has been absent for
    so many years. My conclusion is that the appellant has provided this as
    a means to try and strengthen his asylum claim".

5.    As to what I have described as the Article  8  Immigration  Rules  the
tribunal said this:

    "60. The appellant does not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to his family life in this country. His  marriage  has  broken
    down irretrievably by his own account and he has no children  here.  He
    cannot meet the requirements in  relation  to  his  private  life  with
    reference to Paragraph 276 ADE. I conclude there will be  obstacles  to
    his integration in Nigeria given the amount of time he has lived  here.
    However, I would not regard these as very significant obstacles. He has
    received tertiary  education  and  has  worked  in  the  past.  He  has
    excellent language skills in  English  and  he  is  familiar  with  the
    culture of Nigeria having lived there until the age  of  twenty-two.  I
    reject his claims to be without family support and note that his mother
    has supported him in the past".

6.    So, those findings represented my starting point when I set  about  my
task of remaking the decision. In remaking the decision, I have  taken  into
account all of the documentation which was  before  me.  That  included  the
original Home Office bundle which had  been  before  the  tribunal  when  it
heard the appeal, the claimant's bundle for the  benefit  of  that  tribunal
and an additional bundle which had been provided for  the  purposes  of  the
hearing concerned with the remaking of the decision.  Included  amongst  all
of that were two witness statements of the claimant which had been  made  on
21 February 2018 and 1 April 2019, the record of the claimant's  substantive
asylum interview, a detailed decision letter produced by  the  Secretary  of
State on 17  January  2018,  some  background  country  material  concerning
Nigeria, some photographs provided by the  claimant  and  some  printed  out
emails provided by him. At the remaking hearing I viewed some footage  which
had been stored on a USB stick by the claimant concerning his attendance  at
the Hull Gay Pride event in 2018. In remaking the decision, I have  reminded
myself  of  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable   in   cases   where
international protection is sought. That  standard  of  proof  is  sometimes
referred to as the "real risk" test. I have reminded myself  that  I  should
be cautious in rejecting as incredible an account offered by an anxious  and
experienced  asylum  seeker.  In  reaching  views  as  to   the   claimant's
credibility, which in truth I must  do  in  order  to  properly  decide  the
appeal, I have considered all of the  evidence  together  as  one  composite
whole.

7.    The primary issue which I  have  to  decide  is  whether  or  not  the
claimant is gay or bisexual. In deciding that discrete but,  in  this  case,
highly important issue, I have taken full account  of  the  documentation  I
have referred to above together with what  was  said  at  the  oral  hearing
before me, including the claimant's oral evidence, and a  skeleton  argument
which Ms Aziz helpfully provided to me on the morning of the hearing.

8.    I have concluded that, even to the lower standard  of  proof  set  out
above, I am not able to accept that the claimant is either gay or  bisexual.
I set out my reasons for reaching that view below.

9.    The claimant says that he married a female person  whilst  in  the  UK
because his mother had wanted him to do so. At the oral hearing he  told  me
that she had not asked him to marry whilst he was still in  Nigeria  because
at that point he was young. I do not believe him about all this. I think  if
the claimant is of the sexuality he says he is, given that he  had  come  to
the UK, he would feel liberated (bearing in mind the much greater  tolerance
than in Nigeria) and would have wanted to lead the sort of open life he  now
says he will, in fact, lead even if he is returned to Nigeria.  His  claimed
sexuality does not preclude marriage to a female but I do not  believe  that
he would have married a female person simply because his mother  had  wanted
him to.

10.   The claimant was, in my judgment, very  vague  in  his  oral  evidence
when he was asked about previous relationships and liaisons he had had  with
males in the UK. He provided the first names only of three claimed such  men
but was not able to go into any significant  detail  as  to  the  nature  of
those relationships. Had the claimant had genuine gay relationships even  of
a relatively short and casual nature, I believe  that  he  would  have  been
able to give more detailed and more concrete evidence  about  them  than  he
did.

11.   The claimant has not produced any letters or witness  statements  from
any persons said to have had any sort of  gay  relationship  with  him.  Nor
were any witnesses called  on  his  behalf  at  the  remaking  hearing.  The
claimant has been in the UK since 2007. He told me that he  had  been  using
gay websites and had been attending clubs  where  he  would  meet  potential
partners. Against that background I believe that if  he  had  been  pursuing
gay relationships as claimed then some evidence  from  persons  he  had  had
such liaisons with would have been provided.

12.   The claimant says that the threats from  Nigeria  commenced  after  he
had confided in a family friend about his sexuality. I  asked  him,  at  the
remaking hearing, why he decided to confide in  that  friend  and  he  said,
essentially, that he did not wish to lie to him and did not think  he  would
be anything other than discrete. But the claimant asserts that if he has  to
return to Nigeria he will face death or serious ill-treatment at  the  hands
of family  members  due  to  his  sexuality  and  might  well  face  similar
treatment at the hands of the general populace. Against  the  background  of
such a stark risk I do not believe that he would have made such a  sensitive
and potentially dangerous disclosure to a family friend. It  is  simply  not
credible that he would take such a risk.

13.   The claimant, despite the length of time he has been in  the  UK,  did
not make his claim for international protection until  July  2017.  That  is
despite the fact that on his own account,  he  had  realised  his  sexuality
prior to coming to the UK and despite the fact that on his own  account,  he
had started to receive email threats from family members  in  Nigeria  (such
as his cousin Felix) at some point in 2015. His extensive delay in  claiming
is, in my judgment, something which is inconsistent with  his  claimed  fear
of return and, therefore, something which damages his credibility.

14.   The claimant has provided some evidence which  he  says  supports  his
claims regarding his sexuality. I have considered  that  evidence  alongside
all of the other  evidence  prior  to  reaching  my  conclusion  as  to  his
sexuality. As to that evidence, there are some photographs said to show  him
at a Gay Pride event and there was the footage which I viewed  at  an  early
stage during the remaking hearing, said to show him at a Gay Pride event  in
Hull in 2018. His oral evidence was to the effect that he had attended  five
Gay Pride  events  though  he  initially  said  "about  five"  prior  to  my
clarifying with him whether he actually meant five or not.  Mr  Diwnycz  did
not seek to challenge the claimant's assertions that he  has  attended  such
events and I accept that he has. But  that  does  not  mean  he  is  gay  or
bisexual. As I understand it anyone of any  sexual  persuasion  is  able  to
attend such  events.  There  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  otherwise.  The
claimant  has  provided  evidence  indicating  that  he  receives   standard
communications from Stonewall. I am prepared to accept that he is  a  member
of Stonewall and, indeed, Mr Diwnycz did not seek to  challenge  him  as  to
that either. But all of that evidence  has  limited  probative  value  given
that anyone can join such an organisation. Indeed,  that  sort  of  evidence
could easily be obtained by a  person  seeking  to  bolster  a  false  claim
regarding sexuality. Whilst there is a letter from the Chair  of  Hull  LGBT
Forum in which the author states his belief that the claimant is a gay  man,
that letter is very brief and does not explain how  the  author  arrived  at
that view. Accordingly, the benefit the claimant gains  from  such  evidence
is limited.

15.   The claimant has produced an email said  to  emanate  from  his  first
cousin Felix. He has provided a copy of the email at page 17 of  the  bundle
prepared for  the  remaking  hearing.  It  contains  homophobic  abuse.  The
claimant told me, in his oral evidence, that Felix had been able  to  obtain
his then email address because he (that is the claimant) had been  in  touch
with his family in Nigeria because one family  member  had  wanted  to  gain
admission to Bradford University.  As  I  understand  it,  the  claimant  is
saying that his family thought he might have been able to assist with  that.
However, I think if the claimant had been receiving long-term  threats  from
Felix or other family members, which is what he in effect claims,  he  would
have been reluctant to disclose his email address to any family member.  The
email, in any event, stands in isolation as evidence of the claimed  threats
from Nigeria and I do not find this evidence to be at all weighty.

16.   In light of the above I have concluded that I am not  able  to  accept
the claimant's contentions regarding his  sexuality.  That  takes  away  the
sole remaining basis upon which he claims to be  entitled  to  international
protection. As to article 8 of the ECHR, it has not been  argued  before  me
or in the skeleton argument provided to me that the claimant  meets  any  of
the requirements of what  might  be  described  as  the  article  8  related
Immigration Rules. Nor have I been offered any meaningful explanation as  to
how he might succeed under article 8 outside the Rules.  I  suppose,  had  I
accepted his sexuality and the claimed history of relationships, such  might
have been the basis for something of an argument to be mounted on the  basis
of private life. But I have not accepted that. Accordingly, in remaking  the
decision, I have decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and has been  set  aside.  In  remaking  the  decision,  I  dismiss  the
claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of 17 January  2018
refusing to grant him international protection.


Signed:                                 Dated: 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



Anonymity

I grant the claimant anonymity. Accordingly, no report of these  proceedings
shall name or otherwise identify the claimant or any member of  his  family.
This applies to all parties to the  proceedings.  Any  breach  may  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Dated: 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



To the Respondent
Fee award

Since no fee has been paid and no fee is in any event payable, there can  be
no fee award.


Signed:                                              Dated: 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

