
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/01694/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Wednesday 17 January 2018         |On  Tuesday 30 January 2018          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    P A M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose, OISC representative, IAS
(Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is appropriate to make  an  order.   Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mathews promulgated on 11 July  2017  ("the  Decision").  By  the
    Decision  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 29 September 2015 refusing  his  protection
    and human rights claim.  The appeal to this Tribunal  relates  only  to
    the protection claim although given the basis of the protection  claim,
    any error may be relevant also to the human rights claim.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Iran.  He claims  to  have  arrived  in
    the UK on 17 June 2015.  He claimed asylum on the following  day.   His
    claim for asylum as now  made  is  based  on  his  homosexuality.   The
    credibility of his claimed sexuality was not accepted by the Respondent
    and was rejected by the Judge.  The adverse credibility findings are at
    the heart of the appeal to this Tribunal.

3.    The Appellant was involved in a road traffic accident in Iran when  he
    was aged ten years.  As a result he suffered a brain injury.   This  is
    said  to  continue  to  impact  on  his  cognitive  abilities  and,  in
    particular, impairs his memory.  The Appellant relied at the hearing on
    the report  of  Dr  Tim  Shore,  clinical  psychologist.   The  Judge's
    treatment of that report and the Appellant's evidence in light of  what
    is said in that report are the foundation for the  Appellant's  grounds
    one and two.  The third ground focuses on other evidence  which  it  is
    said the Judge either failed to take into account or failed properly to
    assess.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro
    on 6 October 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-
         "2.      The grounds in essence assert that  the  judge  failed  to
         have due regard to medical evidence before him  which  resulted  in
         unfairness  to  the  appellant   in   assessing   the   appellant's
         credibility and failed to make any or adequate findings on material
         matters.
         3. The grounds raise arguable errors of law."

5.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

6.    Mrs Johnrose drew my  attention  to  what  is  said  at  [17]  of  the
    Decision and following concerning the medical evidence:-
         "[17]    I begin by considering the medical evidence before  me  in
         the report of Dr Tim Shore, clinical psychologist.   I  accept  the
         findings in that report of cognitive  deficit  that  remains  as  a
         consequence of a head injury from a road traffic accident when  the
         appellant was 10 years of age.
         [18]     I  note  the  potential  impact  of  that  injury  on  the
         appellant's ability to answer questions and retain information, but
         I note too that the appellant  had  no  significant  difficulty  in
         providing  a  detailed  and  chronologically   structured   witness
         statement, and in conducting  a  full  asylum  interview.   On  the
         appellant's own account he was also able to run a  shop,  undertake
         banking obligations and stock ordering for his own business.   More
         recently he was able to live independently in the  UK,  as  he  had
         done previously in Iran.  I keep all of those matters in mind  when
         evaluating the appellant's evidence."

7.    Mrs Johnrose rightly accepted that the Judge there  has  in  mind  the
    medical evidence.  However, her first point is that the Judge  was  not
    entitled to seek to undermine that  evidence  by  reason  of  the  full
    witness statement and answers at interview.   I  note  first  that  the
    Appellant is legally represented and therefore the structured  approach
    in that statement is likely to be attributable at least to some  extent
    to the efforts of the Appellant's representatives.  In any event,  says
    Mrs Johnrose, the Appellant  indicated  throughout  his  statement  and
    answers during the asylum  interview  that  he  was  unable  to  answer
    questions  about  such  things  as  dates  because  of  his   cognitive
    impairment.

8.    Whilst  I  accept  what  Mrs  Johnrose  says  about  what  the  asylum
    interview answers in particular show, any error in  that  regard  might
    not be material given what is said later in the  same  paragraph  about
    the Appellant's ability to manage to run a business in Iran and live an
    independent  life  in  the  UK.   However,  Mrs  Johnrose  directed  my
    attention to the content of the report of Dr Shore.  At page [3] of the
    report, Dr Shore says this:-
         "[M] reported several examples  of  memory  difficulties  impacting
         upon  his  daily  functioning,  such  as  misplacing   objects   or
         forgetting appointments.   He  reported  particular  problems  when
         attempting to complete functional activities in the local area, due
         to forgetting the purpose of journeys and easily becoming  confused
         when attempting to navigate the local area....
         [M] conveyed an ability to complete essential tasks for independent
         living,  such  as  personal  care   and   meal   preparation,   but
         difficulties with attempting to structure his own time  and  follow
         goal-directed behaviour.  [M]  showed  me  evidence  of  trying  to
         utilise strategies to support his  functioning,  such  as  sticking
         post-it  note  reminders  to  his  bedroom  wall.   However,  these
         appeared  quite  haphazard  in  nature  and  not  to   be   working
         effectively.  [M] thought his difficulties had become  worse  since
         moving to the UK, but that he had  always  had  problems  with  his
         memory since his brain injury.  He confirmed he had not  been  able
         to meet the same standards as  his  peers  at  school  and  achieve
         typical educational milestones."

    At page [4] he continues as follows:-
         "Due to the young age at which he  experienced  his  injury,  [M]'s
         cognitive difficulties will not be manifesting for the first  time.
         He may have developed ways of adapting his lifestyle to  compensate
         for his acquired difficulties whilst growing up in Iran.   However,
         moving to the UK has required him to  adapt  to  new  routines  and
         activities, placing extra demands upon his cognitive resources.  It
         is likely that the combination of living in an unfamiliar  culture,
         together with  the  stress  of  being  away  from  his  family  and
         uncertainty surrounding  his  future,  have  served  to  exacerbate
         existing cognitive difficulties."

9.    As is evident from what is there said, the Appellant  has  found  ways
    of coping with his cognitive impairment.  As such, the conclusion which
    the Judge sought to draw from the Appellant's ability to cope with day-
    to-day living is not one which necessarily undermines the report of  Dr
    Shore as to the Appellant's ability to remember things like dates.

10.   In  Dr  Shore's  opinion,  in  spite  of  the  Appellant's  day-to-day
    functioning, the Appellant "appears to have deficits in his ability  to
    retain  new  information  and  shows  signs  of  executive  functioning
    impairment".  Although  Dr  Shore  points  to  an  improvement  in  the
    Appellant's functional ability, which Dr Shore attributes to  the  help
    which the Appellant's partner has been giving him, he opines as follows
    in relation to the impact of the Appellant's cognitive deficit  on  his
    presentation at the hearing:-
         "Of relevance for the upcoming court hearing, it is  my  view  that
         [M] will find the process of formal questioning challenging from  a
         cognitive perspective.  During our meetings, I experienced some  of
         his responses as quite tangential.  Whilst this may  in  part  have
         been due to factors involved with translation,  my  impression  was
         also that information was not being sufficiently retained to  allow
         a full and relevant answer to a question.  [M] is likely to benefit
         from simply-phrased brief questions and for these to be repeated if
         required.  He may also not accurately recall answers he has given a
         short time before, which could serve to create an undue  impression
         of inconsistency in  his  responses.   Anxiety  he  experiences  in
         relation to the court process is likely to exacerbate his cognitive
         difficulties."

11.   The  crucial  issue  for  the  Judge  to  determine  was  whether  the
    Appellant is credible in relation to his claimed  homosexuality.   That
    relied at least in part on the credibility of a relationship which  the
    Appellant claimed he had formed in the UK with [S].   At  [24]  of  the
    Decision, in the course of his credibility  findings,  the  Judge  said
    this:-
         "[24]    I observe that when asked the length of relationship  with
         [S], the appellant was unclear, saying it had been for 9, 10 or  11
         months or thereabouts.  [S] said that it had been for 5 months.   I
         find  those  lines  of  evidence  to  be   significant   in   their
         divergence...."

    When making that finding, the Judge takes no account of what is said in
    the medical report about the Appellant's cognitive  difficulties  which
    no doubt impacted on his ability to  remember how long he had been in a
    relationship with [S].  It was of course open to the Judge to  rely  on
    the difference between the answers given by the Appellant and  [S]  but
    in so doing the Judge appears to have ignored the  evidence  about  the
    Appellant's inability to remember  information,  particularly  what  is
    said by Dr Shore in the extract to which I  refer  at  [10]  above.   I
    accept therefore that there is an error  in  the  Judge's  approach  in
    relation to that finding.

12.   However, such error may not be material if the Judge was  entitled  to
    reach the overall adverse credibility finding based on other  evidence.
    Mrs Johnrose fairly accepted, for example, that the Judge was  entitled
    to take into account what is said at [20] of the Decision that,  during
    the Appellant's  screening  interview,  no  mention  was  made  of  his
    homosexuality and the Appellant said that he had relationships with two
    girls.  The Judge was not bound to accept the  Appellant's  explanation
    for this discrepancy.

13.   There are however two further matters which impact on the  credibility
    findings.   The first is that the Judge failed to have  regard  to  the
    Respondent's policy concerning late disclosure of sexuality claims when
    holding against the Appellant his failure to state this  claim  earlier
    (see [22] of the Decision).   The Judge was  specifically  referred  to
    this policy in submissions  but  has  failed  to  mention  it.   It  is
    accepted in the Appellant's grounds that the policy is directed at  the
    Respondent's  caseworkers.   Nonetheless,  the  Appellant   says   that
    extracts from that policy such as "Caseworkers must not therefore  make
    an adverse credibility finding merely because the claimant did not rely
    on LGB grounds on the first occasion in which they claimed persecution"
    is relevant to the way in which the Judge should approach the delay  in
    raising such a claim.  However, that does once again raise the question
    whether the Judge  had  other  well-founded  reasons  for  finding  the
    Appellant not to be credible.

14.   The second matter on which the Appellant relies is that the  Judge  at
    [24] of the Decision has misunderstood  the  evidence.   Following  the
    Judge's finding based on the length of the relationship to which I have
    already referred, the Judge also held against the  Appellant  the  fact
    that he did not know and had not  asked  about  the  reason  for  [S]'s
    asylum claim, saying this:-
         "[24]    ... The appellant was also unable to recall the nature  of
         [S]'s asylum claim which I again find to be surprising given that I
         am told  that  he  also  seeks  protection  on  the  basis  of  his
         sexuality.  I note the implicit suggestion  that  two  men  had  an
         intimate relationship, both sought protection due to sexuality, yet
         the appellant was not aware of that fact and did not  ask  why  his
         partner was seeking asylum."

15.   Mrs Johnrose drew my  attention  however  to  what  was  said  in  the
    Appellant's oral evidence as follows:-
         "[25]    Did he tell you about his asylum claim?
         At beginning no.  My English wasn't good enough.  Eventually yes.
         [26]     Did he tell you why he was seeking asylum?
         Told me but I can't really remember.  It wasn't important to me  if
         he had a visa or not..."

    As she pointed out, that does not bear out what the  Judge  says  about
    the Appellant not having asked about the claim.  It  does  support  the
    Judge's finding that the Appellant was unable to recall the  nature  of
    the claim but of course that  then  raises  the  question  whether  the
    Appellant should have been expected to recall it given the difficulties
    he has with his memory.

16.   The far greater problem with the Decision is  raised  however  in  the
    Appellant's ground three.  The Judge heard evidence also from [S].  The
    only reference to that evidence is at [25] of the  Decision  where  the
    Judge refers to [S]'s inability to recall details  of  his  first  date
    with the Appellant.  As the Appellant points out, there  is  though  no
    finding by the Judge whether he finds [S]  to  be  generally  credible.
    What is said at [25] of the Decision suggests not.

17.   That then raises  the  second  point  under  the  third  ground  which
    concerns the Judge's failure to record all of  the  evidence  given  by
    [S].  [S] answered twenty-five questions in all.  There is reference at
    [24] to the answer he gave concerning the length of relationship and at
    [25] to his inability to recall details of the  first  date.   However,
    there is also reference in that  questioning  to  the  conduct  of  the
    relationship (how often they meet etc) and details about  each  other's
    friends and whether they are aware that the Appellant and [S] are in  a
    relationship.  That evidence had  some  relevance  to  the  credibility
    issue but is not considered.  Although I accept that  the  Judge  would
    not (and probably should not) reach a finding whether [S]'s claim to be
    homosexual is credible given that he has his own claim outstanding, the
    Judge was still bound to say what he made of [S]'s evidence insofar  as
    that impacts on the Appellant's claim.

18.   There was also evidence from  the  college  which  [S]  attends  which
    refers to [S]'s sexual orientation  having  given  rise  to  homophobic
    comments against him.  Whilst, as I have already  recorded,  I  do  not
    accept the submission that it was for the Judge to make a finding about
    [S]'s sexuality, the evidence in that regard still had  some  relevance
    to the Appellant's claim and therefore should at least have been  taken
    into account when considering the credibility of that claim.

19.   Although not mentioned in the grounds, there is also reference to  the
    relationship between the Appellant and [S] in Dr  Shore's  report.   Dr
    Shore records that the Appellant appears more positive as a  result  of
    that relationship, which Dr Shore refers to as a close one.  He  refers
    to [S] as the Appellant's partner.  Of course, that does not in  itself
    mean that the Appellant's claim must be accepted as what is said by  Dr
    Shore is based only on what the Appellant has told him.  It  is  though
    capable of corroborating the claim and  should  have  been  taken  into
    account.

20.   Taken individually, none of the above issues  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.  However, taken together as a whole, I am persuaded  that
    the errors made amount to a failure to consider all the evidence in the
    round when reaching the adverse credibility findings.   Accordingly,  I
    set aside the Decision.

21.   I indicated at the end  of  the  hearing  that  I  accepted  that  the
    Decision discloses material errors of  law  as  contended  for  by  the
    Appellant.  Both representatives accepted that it was  appropriate  for
    the appeal to be remitted.  Since the errors go to  the  heart  of  the
    credibility findings against the Appellant, I agree that  this  is  the
    appropriate course.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Mathews
promulgated on 11 July 2017 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 29 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
