
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01170/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Teams)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 15th July 2021                |On the 3rd August 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

      FFHR                                                         Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  who  was  born  in  1984.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State made on 8 July 2019 refusing her claim for asylum. The  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly), in a decision promulgated  on  15  October
    2020, dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent accepted that an order for the  appellant's  arrest  for
    involvement with the LTTE  was  a  genuine  document  [11].  The  judge
    records that the Secretary of State also accepts that the appellant  is
    at Article 3 ECHR risk if returned to Sri Lanka [12]. Accordingly,  she
    has been granted restricted leave to remain for renewable periods of  6
    months. The  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  turned  on  the
    respondent's decision to refuse to exclude the appellant  from  refugee
    protection by the operation of Article 1(f) of the Refugee Convention:

         'The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         (a) He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
         against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn
         up to make provision in respect of such crimes;

         (b) He has committed a  serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
         country of refuge prior to his  admission  to  that  country  as  a
         refugee;

         (c) He has been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
         principles of the United Nations.'

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the  appellant  challenges  the
    judge's decision on the ground that the judge acted unfairly by  making
    credibility findings against the appellant  having  accepted  that  the
    appellant would not give  oral  evidence  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing because the respondent agreed that her account of  past  events
    in Sri Lanka was accurate. At [24] Judge Kelly stated:

         "24. As I have previously noted, the  primary  facts  that  I  have
         endeavoured to summarise at paragraphs 2 to 11 (above) are  not  in
         dispute. Moreover, the appellant has provided a detailed  statement
         explaining the extent of her knowledge of the wider  activities  of
         the LTTE, as well as her motivation and  intention  in  undertaking
         work on its behalf. Following my initial introductions, I therefore
         granted her request to be excused from further  attendance  at  the
         hearing so  that  she  could  attend  to  various  pressing  family
         matters. Mr Jagadesham  thereafter  elaborated  upon  his  skeleton
         argument (above),  whilst  Mr  Mullarkey  simply  relied  upon  the
         explanatory letter of his colleague, Mr Spence, to which he said he
         had nothing to add."

 4.  At [2], Judge Kelly recorded that:

         "2.  It  is  inaccurate  to  suggest,  as  does  Mr  Jagadesham  at
         paragraph 47 of his Skeleton Argument, that  the  "the  Appellant's
         credibility is not  in  dispute".  On  the  contrary,  the  dispute
         concerning her  motivation  and  intentions  in  carrying  out  her
         admitted actions, is what lies at the very heart  of  this  appeal.
         What is not now in dispute, however, is the account  that  she  has
         given of her actions and of the events  that  led  to  her  seeking
         asylum in the UK. These may be conveniently summarised as follows."

    The appellant submits that she would have given evidence had  she  been
    aware that the judge would make findings regarding the mens rea for her
    actions in Sri Lanka and that she has, in consequence,  been  denied  a
    fair hearing of her appeal.

 5. In my opinion, the judge has not erred in law. As Judge  Kelly  himself
    makes clear at [2],  the  appellant's  'motivation  and  intentions  in
    carrying out her admitted actions, is what lies at the  very  heart  of
    this appeal.' Indeed, counsel's own skeleton argument dated  14  August
    2020 states at [4] that one of only two issues in the  appeal  was  the
    determination of what the appellant knew and intended  by  her  actions
    and whether those actions 'would in  fact  further  the  commission  of
    claimed war crimes/crimes  against  humanity.'  It  is,  with  respect,
    showing wisdom after the event now to complain that the  appellant  has
    been treated unfairly. I am satisfied that the appellant's mens rea had
    not been agreed by the parties prior to the hearing and remained a live
    issue, as Judge Kelly acknowledges in the  opening  paragraphs  of  his
    decision. Given that it was obvious from  the  outset  that  the  judge
    would be making findings regarding the mens rea element  of  Article  1
    (F), had the appellant wished to be heard on that aspect of the  appeal
    she should have remained at the hearing and been cross examined. It was
    her choice that she did not do so and not any error on the part of  the
    judge.

 6. The Upper Tribunal also has the benefit of a transcript of the  hearing
    before Judge Kelly. The transcripts reinforces my view that  the  judge
    has not fallen into legal error. At  page  6,  Judge  Kelly  tells  the
    appellant:

         '... your appeal is going to turn on very  technical  matters,  all
         based on it being accepted about what you say you did or did not do
         in Sri Lanka...' [my emphasis]

    Earlier, at page 4 the judge had told the appellant:

         'It is now accepted, for the purpose of this hearing,  the  account
         that you gave when you first claimed asylum. That is now accepted.'
         [my emphasis]

    The judge has  made  it  clear  that  what  had  been  agreed  was  the
    appellant's account of past events in Sri Lanka; he makes no mention of
    the appellant's intentions. In my opinion, the expression 'what you say
    you did or did not do' does not obviously include 'what you intended to
    do' and indicates  that  the  question  of  the  appellant's  mens  rea
    remained at large and for the judge to determine.

 7. Ground 2 complains that  the  judge  failed  to  refer  (i)  to  expert
    evidence which indicated that the appellant had been a 'lone  operator'
    and 'extremely low-level member of the LLTE'; (ii) the appellant's  own
    evidence as to how she had been recruited;  (iii)  the  length  of  the
    appellant's service with the LTTE and  any  opportunities  she  had  to
    leave the organisation.  Consequently,  he  did  not  take  account  of
    evidence  of  those  important  factors  in  determining  whether   the
    appellant had contributed 'substantially' to war crimes/crimes  against
    humanity.

 8. In his thorough and careful analysis at [25] et seq, Judge Kelly  notes
    that only circumstantial (as opposed to direct) evidence is before  the
    Tribunal as  regards  the  consequences  of  the  appellant's  admitted
    actions in Sri Lanka. He finds that one of the three  elements  of  the
    appellant's  actus  reus  (selling  unregistered  SIM  cards)  did  not
    substantially contribute to Article 1 F crimes but that  the  remaining
    elements  (surveillance  on  behalf  of  the  LTTE  and   storing   and
    distributing  weapons)  did   contribute   substantially.   The   judge
    explicitly stated at [23] that he had  'taken  all  the  documents  and
    statements [in the bundle of documents of the parties] into account  in
    reaching my conclusions'. He was not required, in respect of  each  and
    every finding,  to  specify  the  evidence  which  he  had  considered.
    Moreover, the grounds fail to show how the elements of the  appellant's
    evidence, including the expert report, which it is asserted  the  judge
    ignored might compel a different outcome to the his analysis.  Evidence
    that the appellant may have seen the LTTE as freedom fighters does  not
    mean that her actions could not have amounted to  Article  1  F  crimes
    whilst the 'low level, lone operator' nature  of  her  LTTE  activities
    plainly did not prevent her from engaging directly and effectively with
    other LTTE members by giving details of the movements of those whom the
    organisation wished to target for assassination and by storing  weapons
    for terrorist fighters.

 9. Ground 2 also asserts that the judge also failed to consider  that  the
    LTTE was engaged in legitimate military, non-terrorist  activities.  As
    he had no evidence as to which category of activity the acts  in  which
    the appellant had participated fell, it was not open to  the  judge  to
    find that Article 1 F was engaged.

10. That part of Ground 2 is without merit. It does  not  appear  that  the
    argument that the appellant had been involved only or predominantly  in
    legitimate military  activity  was  ever  advanced  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; the skeleton argument of 14 August 2020 makes no reference to
    the argument  and,  at  [39-41]  of  the  skeleton,  the  case  is  put
    summarised on the basis only that the appellant's contribution had  not
    been 'substantial' rather  than  that  the  activities  had  been  non-
    criminal in the context of Article 1 F.

11. The challenge to the judge's findings at [30] has,  on  first  reading,
    more merit. The judge refers here to a  letter  written  by  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Spence, and dated 19 November 2019:

         "30. I am therefore satisfied that  the  appellant's  intelligence-
         gathering made a  substantial  contribution  to  the  catalogue  of
         LTTE's Article  1F  crimes  that  are  listed  non-exhaustively  at
         paragraphs 13, 14, and 27 of  Mr  Spence's  letter,  and  that  the
         appellant knew and intended that it would do so."

    The appellant claimed to have become involved with the LTTE from August
    2006; several of the 'crimes that are listed non-exhaustively'  in  the
    letter  occurred  before  the  appellant  claims  to  have  joined  the
    organisation. The  argument  that  the  judge  has  attributed  to  the
    appellant crimes which  she  could  not,  given  the  chronology,  have
    committed  appears  to  have  some  force.  However,  a  more   careful
    examination indicates that the judge is not saying that  the  appellant
    contributed to all the crimes listed. The  point  which  the  judge  is
    making  is  that  intelligence-gathering  of  the  kind  in  which  the
    appellant engaged had led to LTTE crimes and that  the  appellant  knew
    that it did so. In other words, when she began gathering  intelligence,
    the appellant knew the use to which it would be  put  because  she  was
    aware of past crimes which had been enabled by that very activity. That
    she went ahead in that knowledge proves that she possessed the mens rea
    which is the judge's conclusion at [30].

12. The remaining grounds amount to nothing more than a  disagreement  with
    findings available to the judge on the evidence. It  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that the appellant's contribution  to  war  crimes/crimes
    against humanity had been 'substantial'. The appellant does  not  agree
    with that conclusion, but has failed to show that the judge's approach,
    application of the relevant  law  and  consideration  of  the  relevant
    evidence is wrong in law. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed




    Signed
    Date 26 July 2021
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


