
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01130/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th December 2016                |On 13th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     aa
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Callow dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant  him  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    leave on the basis of his human rights.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Taylor.   The  grounds  upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

          1) The judge erred in criticising  the  Appellant's  account  for
             being sparse in detail;

          2) The judge erred in his criticism of the implausibility of  the
             Appellant's account of his parents' execution;

          3) The judge failed to consider the subjective evidence regarding
             cultural norms in Iran;

          4) The judge erred in requiring corroborative evidence.

 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Respondent  which  all
    parties read and took into account before proceedings began.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I indicated that I found an  error  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside but that  my  reasons  would
    follow which I shall now give.

 5. In relation to the first ground Ms Radford for the Appellant took me to
    several passages in the Asylum Interview Record (AIR) which revealed an
    expanse of information which did not appear to be acknowledged  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Whilst  this  of  itself  is  of
    course not an error, the criticism of the account as being described as
    "bald and general allegations without much detail" is  in  my  judgment
    flawed.  Ms Radford set out that in the AIR the Appellant recounted the
    details of his account over the course of 144  questions  of  evidence.
    That account started in detail at AIR17 onwards wherein  the  Appellant
    described that he worked as an apprentice in  a  barber  shop  and  was
    witnessed spitting on a picture of the  Ayatollah  Khomeini  which  the
    Appellant says he was attempting to clean  but  was  witnessed  by  the
    Etelaat agent and ran away.  The interview goes into  detail  regarding
    the account but it cannot be criticised for lack of detail  because  in
    such interviews the Appellant will traditionally answer the question as
    put to him and no criticism was raised in the refusal letter  that  the
    Appellant was vague or evasive in his answers.  Further still I bear in
    mind the guidance of the Vice President  in  the  decision  of  Kalidas
    (agreed facts - best practice) Tanzania [2012]  UKUT  327  (IAC)  which
    states as follows in the  third  judicial  head  note  in  relation  to
    witness statements in asylum appeals:

         "Any further statement should not be a rehash what has already been
         said.  It should be directed to the remaining live issues."

 6. In that light and without  direct  reference  to  any  passage  of  the
    interview or the AIR or the  witness  statement  as  being  lacking  in
    detail and thus not requiring further expansion, the general  assertion
    that the Appellant's  account  is  bald  and  without  much  detail  is
    unreasoned and inconsistent with the  evidence  I  was  taken  to.   Ms
    Radford also highlighted that her solicitors had submitted  a  skeleton
    argument to the First-tier Tribunal  which  sets  out  the  Appellant's
    reliance on the AIR and witness  statement  and  points  out  that  the
    witness statement does not rehearse the account but adopts  the  Asylum
    Interview Record in full.  Thus I do find that the  Appellant  succeeds
    in his first ground in highlighting an error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 7. In relation to Ground 2  and  the  implausibility  of  the  Appellant's
    parents'  execution,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  states  as
    follows in this regard:

         "As to the dramatic consequences of the Appellant's parents,  which
         the Appellant claimed, despite hiding in a barn,  he  witnessed  in
         the city centre, carries no weight.  It is implausible."

 8. In respect of that finding the Appellant submits  that  whilst  it  was
    true that he was hiding in a barn the First-tier Tribunal has failed to
    consider that he gave evidence in his AIR at questions 60 to 62 and  79
    to 81 that his parents were executed at Piranshahr in the city  centre;
    and whilst he was hiding in a barn where there was livestock which  was
    in the countryside and was two and a half hours away by  car  from  the
    city centre, the Appellant stated  clearly  at  question  81  that  the
    shopkeeper helped him to get there (meaning  his  former  employer  who
    assisted him whilst he was in hiding).   In  this  regard  I  note  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in the decision of HK v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 when Neuberger LJ
    (as he then was) stated as follows at paragraph 29:

         "Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely  on
         in some asylum cases. Much of the evidence  will  be  referable  to
         societies with customs and circumstances which are  very  different
         from those of which the members of the fact-finding  tribunal  have
         any (even second-hand) experience. Indeed, it is  likely  that  the
         country which an asylum-seeker has left will be suffering from  the
         sort of problems  and  dislocations  with  which  the  overwhelming
         majority of residents of this country will be wholly unfamiliar."

 9. I also bear in mind the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Y  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 wherein
    Keene LJ stated as follows:

         "There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties as
         to the  legal  principles  applicable  to  the  approach  which  an
         Adjudicator, now known as an Immigration Judge should adopt towards
         issues of credibility.  The fundamental one is that  he  should  be
         cautious before finding an account  to  be  inherently  incredible,
         because there is considerable risk that he will be over  influenced
         by his own views on what is or is not plausible,  and  those  views
         will have inevitably been influenced by his own background in  this
         country and by the customs and ways of  our  own  society.   It  is
         therefore important that he should  seek  to  view  an  Appellant's
         account of events... in the context of conditions  in  the  country
         from which the Appellant comes.  The dangers were well described in
         an article by Sir Thomas Bingham, as he then was, ... in  Kasola  v
         SSHD 13190, the passage being taken  from  an  article  in  current
         legal problems.  Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

             'An English judge may have, or think that  he  has,  a  shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds broker or  a  Bristol  wholesaler,  or  a
             Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some  situation  which  is
             canvassed in the course of a case but he  may,  and  I  should
             think, feel very much more uncertain about  the  reactions  of
             any Nigerian merchant, or an  Indian  ship's  engineer,  or  a
             Yugoslav banker.  Or even, to take a more  homely  example,  a
             Sikh shopkeeper trading in Bradford.  No judge worth his  salt
             could possibly assume that  men  of  different  nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments  would
             act as he might think he would have done or even -  which  may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what  a
             reasonable man would have done'."

10. In that light I find that the judge has given an unreasoned finding  in
    respect of the implausibility of the Appellant witnessing his  parents'
    execution given that he stated in his interview that his employer  took
    him to the city centre where it  occurred,  which  the  judge  has  not
    grappled with in his criticism of the Appellant's account.

11. In respect of issue 3 and the cultural conditions in Iran the Appellant
    complains that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to have  regard  to
    questions 49 and 51 of the AIR, which demonstrate  that  the  Appellant
    was an obedient  son  of  his  parents  which  he  also  referenced  at
    paragraph 11 of his witness statement being from  an  Orthodox  Kurdish
    culture whereby if his father told him to do something he would  do  it
    unquestionably.  It is true that questions and answers 49 to 51  reveal
    the Appellant showing that he acted upon his father's instructions  and
    when asked why he answered "if he tells you something,  you  don't  ask
    what its about".  Thus in that  respect  the  judge's  finding  in  his
    decision at again paragraph 17 that the Appellant  would  know  of  his
    father's involvement with the PJAK does not grapple with this  evidence
    of obedience.  Furthermore, the Appellant complains that the  criticism
    that the Appellant could reasonably have been  expected  to  produce  a
    statement from his employer at paragraph 17 does not sit well with  the
    evidence reflected at paragraph 14 that the Appellant  was  in  contact
    with his former employer via Facebook and he had already asked him  for
    a statement for his appeal but awaiting its arrival at the date of that
    hearing.

12. In light of the above flaws in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's succinct
    conclusions at paragraph 17, which in truth form the  majority  of  the
    findings of fact that go to the core of the Appellant's claim,  I  find
    that the first three grounds are sufficient to reveal  material  errors
    of law such that the decision should be set aside.

13. Before concluding I should mention that Ms Radford also criticised  the
    findings  regarding  the  requirement  or  request  for   a   lack   of
    corroboration and also the notation of the Appellant's  date  of  birth
    which the Appellant states is 29th July 1999  or  in  Iranian  calendar
    format as 07/05/1378 (as reflected at AIR question 27). It was  alleged
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to note that at paragraph  13
    of the refusal the caseworker had apparently mistyped the correct  date
    of birth as 29/07/999  transformed  purportedly  into  27/09/1999.   Ms
    Radford further highlighted that the date in the screening interview at
    question 1.3 was pre-typed and there was no indication  of  its  source
    nor that it was verified by or put to the  Appellant.   Furthermore  Ms
    Radford criticised the First-tier Tribunal's statement at paragraph  16
    that the Appellant gave a different name or age or  date  of  birth  at
    when he was stopped in Dunkirk.  Ms Radford accepts that the  Appellant
    was fingerprinted which is mentioned at AIR question  140  and  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement but that no further  evidence  exists  in
    the papers that reveals more regarding  what  took  place  in  Dunkirk.
    Given my findings in relation to Grounds 1, 2 and 3 as stated  above  I
    do not propose to address these remaining points but I  have  set  them
    out merely to document the Appellant's complaint against  other  issues
    raised in the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision lest it be said that
    they were not raised sooner.

14. In conclusion, I set aside the decision and findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal in their entirety.

Notice of Decision

15. The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The  making  of  the
    previous decision involved an error on a point of law and is set aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

16. The Upper Tribunal draws to the attention of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the Respondent's bundle contains a copy of  the  Asylum  Interview
    Record; however, only alternate pages of the AIR were photocopied.   In
    any event, the Appellant's representatives had provided a complete copy
    of the AIR which can be seen at pages  11  to  53  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle in the First-tier Tribunal which remains on file.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity (as already  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant
and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

