
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 9 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                MR SHIR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1998.

2.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Khan  (the  Immigration  Judge)  to
    dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    international protection on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on
    human rights grounds.  Judge Khan's  decision  was  promulgated  on  15
    February 2016.

3.   On 29 February 2016 the appellant appealed the decision of the  FTT  to
    dismiss his appeal on the grounds that the Immigration Judge  had  been
    wrong not to adjourn the case to permit him to see  a  neurologist  and
    because it was alleged that the Immigration Judge  had  not  adequately
    considered, or considered at all, the objective evidence in support  of
    the appeal.

4.   On 10 March 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison  gave
    the appellant permission to appeal  because  she  found  that  the  two
    grounds identified in the previous paragraph were at least arguable.

5.   On 21 March 2016 the respondent in  her  Rule  24  response  asked  the
    Upper Tribunal to uphold the decision of the FTT.

Background

6.   The appellant is a Pashtu speaker who claims to be from Nanjarhar.   He
    is said to have arrived in the UK on 31 July 2012 and claimed asylum on
    28 August 2012.  The appellant  has  resided  with  a  cousin  (Mirwais
    Jabarkhyl) under the supervision of Social Services.

7.    The  appellant's  application  for  asylum  for   human   rights   and
    humanitarian protection in the UK was  refused  on  8  March  2013.   A
    subsequent appeal to the FTT was  dismissed  on  2  May  2013  but  the
    appellant was given leave to remain until he reached  17  years  and  6
    months of age under the UASC policy.  This expired on 1 July 2015.

8.   The appellant submitted an application for further leave to  remain  on
    26 June 2015.  This was considered by the respondent  on  18  September
    2015.  The  respondent  decided  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    discretionary leave to remain in  the  UK.   She  considered  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for the grant of humanitarian  protection  in
    line with paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and her asylum  claim
    was recorded as having been refused under paragraph 336 of HC  395  (as
    amended).  The  respondent  also  considered  whether  the  appellant's
    family and private life rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  would  be
    infringed but decided that the appellant was not entitled to  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of a private or family life here either.

9.   It was the decision on 18 September 2015 to  refuse  further  leave  to
    remain that formed the subject matter of the appeal to Judge Khan which
    came for hearing on 1 February 2016.  In his decision  Judge  Khan  did
    not accept the appellant's account had  concluded  that  the  appellant
    could safely return to Afghanistan having regard to recent authorities.



The Upper Tribunal Appeal Proceedings

10.  Detailed grounds of appeal were submitted on 29  February  2016.   They
    criticised  the  Immigration  Judge  on  a  number  of   grounds.    In
    particular, they contended that the Immigration Judge failed  to  grant
    an adjournment to allow the appellant to obtain expert evidence on  the
    extent to which he was suffering from headaches.  Secondly, it is  said
    that the Immigration Judge  had  failed  to  have  any  regard  to  the
    objective evidence.

11.  Judge Grant-Hutchison considered these grounds to be at least  arguable
    and gave permission to the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

12.  At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.   Ms  Easty
    submitted that her client's headaches had been referred to well  before
    the  hearing  took  place  in  front  of  the  Immigration  Judge.   In
    particular, the Social Services had referred to them in  the  past  and
    reference was made to them  in  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 55 where he set-out the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
    suffered from these since he was a child, having fallen  from  a  roof.
    It was clear that the appellant had suffered from headaches for a  long
    time.  When the case came for hearing on 1 February 2016 there had been
    an application for an adjournment already which had been  rejected.   I
    noted from the Tribunal file that the application  for  an  adjournment
    was made on 27 January 2016 but had been refused because there had been
    a recent pre-hearing review at which the appellant had  not  identified
    any need to obtain medical evidence.  Ms  Easty  said  her  instructing
    solicitors had been notified of the appointment (with a neurologist) on
    5 January 2016.  She said that the headaches went to the issue  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability as a young adult in  a  violent  country.   I
    noted that a pre-trial hearing had taken place on 18 January  2016  but
    that no reference had been made to the need to obtain such evidence  at
    that hearing.  Ms Easty said that  her  client  had  been  to  see  the
    neurologist and a report had been obtained but, she understood, it  had
    not been served.  The headaches in question were described  by  her  as
    "debilitating migraines" which were sufficient to  make  her  client  a
    vulnerable individual.

13.  Ms Easty went on to criticise the Immigration Judge's decision  on  the
    separate ground that  it  did  not  refer  at  all  to  the  background
    material.  She referred me to paragraph 48, which contained  a  summary
    of the findings, and paragraph 63.  The case  was  put  forward  by  Ms
    Easty on the basis that the principal international obligation  engaged
    was  Article  15  (c)  of  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the   Qualification
    Directive").  That article defines "serious harm" as:

         "(c)     serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."


14.  The suggestion that her  client  was  in  no  different  position  than
    others of his age was not accepted.  Extensive background evidence  had
    been referred to and expert  evidence  had  been  obtained  from  a  Mr
    Foxley.  That report (dated 9 July 2015) was difficult to find  in  the
    several hundred pages of documents relied on by the appellant.   I  was
    informed that it was produced before the FTT on the day of the hearing,
    as it had only been posted to the FTT on 28 January 2016. This  was  in
    breach of directions that had been made for the bundle to be filed  by,
    I understand, no later than 5 days before the hearing. The bundle in my
    possession is date-stamped as having been received by Hatton  Cross  on
    1st February 2016.  I was particularly referred to paragraphs 16 et seq
    of Mr Foxley's report.  It was said  to  deal  with  the  deteriorating
    security  situation  in  Afghanistan  since  2012.   My  attention  was
    particularly drawn to the security situation in  Nanjarhar  and  Kabul.
    Ms  Easty  understood  that  the  respondent  proposed  to  remove  the
    appellant to the latter.   These  places  were  no  longer  safe.   She
    accepted that the Immigration Judge and  the  respondent  had  not  had
    adequate time to consider the documents, although her predecessor (Miss
    Capel) had submitted a detailed skeleton argument. I was provided  with
    a copy of that skeleton argument, which was unsigned  and  undated.  Ms
    Easty could not assist me as  to  when  it  had  been  filed  with  the
    Tribunal.  Nevertheless, by the end of the hearing before the  FTT  all
    the documents which were in the bundle (which had not all been received
    by the Tribunal in time for the start of the hearing)  were  copied  to
    the Immigration Judge.  Footnote 1 of the grounds  of  appeal  explains
    this in detail.  Ms Easty said that the background  evidence  supported
    her client's claim and demonstrated that on return to  Afghanistan  and
    in particular on return to Nanjarhar or Kabul he would be made  subject
    to indiscriminate violence.  Her client's claim exceeded the  threshold
    set by  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   Given  his
    vulnerable situation he would not be safe in Afghanistan.  There  would
    be a substantial risk on return therefore.  No finding had been made by
    the Immigration Judge on internal flight.

15.  I then heard from Mr Clarke. He submitted that  the  evidence  did  not
    exceed the threshold required to demonstrate that the appellant was  at
    serious  and  individual  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  from   an
    international or internal security situation.  However, he acknowledged
    that the Immigration Judge had not dealt fully with all  the  evidence,
    especially the background evidence.

16.  Mr Clarke then dealt  with  the  two  principal  complaints  about  the
    decision of the FTT.  He said that there had been a failure on the part
    of the appellant's representatives to prepare properly for the hearing,
    despite the fact that there had  been  a  pre-trial  review  two  weeks
    before the substantive appeal.  The matter had been  ongoing  for  four
    years and the appellant had  been  interviewed,  had  provided  witness
    statements and previously appealed  to  Immigration  Judge  Lloyd.  The
    Immigration Judge found Judge  Lloyd's  findings  to  be  "sound"  (see
    paragraph 51 of the decision) and decided they were the starting  point
    for the assessment to be made by the FTT. As far as the late bundle was
    concerned,  this  had  been  entirely  the  fault  of  the  appellant's
    representatives but the documents were, in fact, before  the  FTT.   As
    far as the medical evidence was concerned, no medical report  had  been
    produced before either the FTT or the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Clarke  noted
    that no application had been made to adduce fresh evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The Immigration Judge had dealt fully with the failure
    to obtain up-to-date medical evidence and the  inconsistencies  in  the
    various explanations for the headaches.  No evidence was put before the
    Immigration Judge that the appellant actually suffered  from  migraines
    as opposed to headaches.  In any event the Immigration Judge had  dealt
    with the headaches at paragraph 29-30 of his decision.   It  seemed  to
    the Immigration Judge that the headaches became worse after asylum  was
    refused.  The case had been ongoing since 2012 and  the  appellant  had
    every opportunity to obtain expert evidence prior to the  hearing.   He
    clearly had not done so.  I was then referred by Mr Clarke to the  case
    of R (On the Application of Naziri) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC) and in particular paragraph  85  which
    defines that  "vulnerable  groups"  and  "vulnerable  people"  as  "...
    children, families, women  without  male  relative(s)  and  individuals
    whose permanent residential areas are insecure ..."  The appellant  did
    not fall within any of these categories and had been amply able to deal
    with the proceedings.  It was a leap of faith to say that he was within
    any vulnerable group.

17.  Secondly, although Mr Clarke  accepted  the  Immigration  Judge  should
    have dealt more fully with the objective evidence, it  was  clear  from
    the country guidance case of  AK  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  that  the
    appellant did not fall within an "at risk" category for the purposes of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The evidence here showed
    that the appellant was not at risk.   No  justification  for  departing
    from the guidance in the case of CG had been  shown.   The  Immigration
    Judge had dealt fully with the test in paragraph 16  of  his  decision.
    He had considered whether there  was  a  real  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence in practise in his decision but concluded that there was  not.
    It was submitted that the indiscriminate violence  complained  of  must
    seriously endanger non-combatants.  The evidence did not come close  to
    that here.  I was then referred to a document called EASO.  EASO stands
    for "European Asylum Support Office."  It was submitted that there  was
    quite a small population in Nanjarhar Province (by  reference  to  page
    107 paragraph 2.5.2  of  that  document).   In  particular,  the  total
    population was 1.5 million or so of which about 2,000 were  subject  to
    incidents of violence.   It  was  submitted  that  there  had  been  no
    breakdown of law and order so as to  cross  the  threshold  to  require
    international protection.  None of the areas relevant to the  appellant
    were areas of such high risk.   Therefore,  Mr  Clarke  submitted,  the
    error was not material to the outcome.

18.  Ms Easty then replied fully to the submissions made by Mr Clarke.   She
    said that the idea that a proper  analysis  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive could be dealt with by "breezing  through  it",
    as she accused Mr Clarke of doing,  was  insufficient.   After  lengthy
    argument a judge may conclude that 15(c) is  addressed  adequately  but
    only after lengthy argument.  The refusal letter did not  set  out  all
    the relevant evidence but was selective.  It is necessary  to  reach  a
    balanced decision having reviewed all the evidence.  There had been  an
    extreme deterioration  in  the  security  situation  in  the  parts  of
    Afghanistan to which the appellant might go in the last  month  or  so.
    Certainly, the situation  had  been  deteriorating  over  the  previous
    years.  The appellant was a vulnerable person.  I was invited to  allow
    his appeal because  there  had  been  an  obvious  error  in  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made in not  considered  the  objective  evidence
    properly or at  all.   The  ISIS  had  recently  taken  over  Nanjarhar
    Province and the situation was very grave.  A fresh  hearing  at  which
    fresh evidence could  be  given  if  necessary  supported  by  skeleton
    arguments and a  proper  consideration  of  the  expert  and  objective
    evidence was called for.  Ms Easty did not accept she had been given an
    adequate opportunity to address the issue of materiality at the hearing
    and considered it was necessary to hold a further hearing at which this
    could be done.  She said that her  submissions,  just  on  that  issue,
    would take up to two hours.  I noted that the  appellant's  appeal  had
    been listed with four other matters, many of which had been effective.

19.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law and if there  were  what  steps  should  be
    taken to rectify matters.   The  hearing  before  me  had  lasted  from
    11.45am to 13.12 approximately.

Discussion

20.  The appellant is an adult, having been born on  1  January  1998.   The
    Immigration Judge dealt with his claim  on  that  basis.   He  appeared
    through  experienced  Counsel  instructed  by  a  well-known  firm   of
    solicitors specialising in immigration work.  The case was subject to a
    pre-hearing review on 18 January 2016,  some  fortnight  prior  to  the
    substantive hearing.   The  appellant's  solicitors  were  required  to
    complete a reply notice indicating that they were ready in all respects
    for the substantive hearing which had already been allocated the date 1
    February 2016.  Shortly before the substantive hearing, but  after  the
    PHR, the appellant's representatives sought an adjournment of the  case
    in order  for  the  appellant  to  undergo  medical  examination  by  a
    neurologist.  It seems that the appointment was  not  for  medico-legal
    purposes but had been made by the appellant's GP  on  5  January  2016,
    according to Ms Easty.

21.  Against this background the appellant seeks to appeal the  decision  of
    the FTT to dismiss his appeal against a refusal of his  application  of
    leave to remain on asylum, human  rights  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds, because it is said:

    (1)  The Immigration Judge ought  to  have  adjourned  the  case  until
         additional medical evidence was obtained;


    (2)  The Immigration Judge had not taken  adequate  cognisance  of  the
         objective evidence relating to Nanjarhar Province;


    (3)  It is said that the Immigration  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for his conclusion that the level of violence in  Nanjarhar
         did not reach the threshold  required  for  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Directive;


    (4)  That the Immigration Judge had not demonstrated that he considered
         the appellant's credibility "in the round" as he was required to do
         having regard to the country background evidence.


22.  The grounds of appeal are not included on the relevant  form  dated  29
    February 2016 but there is accompanying that  form  a  document  headed
    "appellant's application for an adjournment" which I assume is in  fact
    intended to be the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

23.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison  considered  that
    Ground  1  (the  Immigration  Judge's  finding  that  the   appellant's
    headaches were, "more to do with the  asylum  hearing  than  an  actual
    complaint") and Ground 2 (that the Immigration Judge had not  "engaged"
    with the  up-to-date  background  evidence  in  relation  to  Nanjarhar
    Province) were at least arguable.  There was no application  to  expand
    those grounds of appeal by amendment  at  the  hearing.   Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison did not expressly limit the scope for  argument  by  imposing
    conditions on those  grounds  which  could  or  could  not  be  argued.
    However, in reality, Grounds 3 and 4 do not add materially to grounds 1
    and 2.

Conclusions

24.  I turn to consider the merits of the arguments presented by  Ms  Easty.



25.  In relation to the submission that the appellant  ought  to  have  been
    given an adjournment to  complete  an  appointment  with  a  consultant
    neurologist, I have regard to the obligation on the FTT to decide cases
    fairly and justly having regard to the need to keep a lid on costs  and
    avoid unnecessary delay under Rule 2 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    2014.  That overriding objective also required the  parties  and  their
    representatives to cooperate with the Tribunal.  I observe  in  passing
    that the Upper Tribunal Rules  contain  a  similar  obligation  on  the
    parties and their representatives to cooperate with the Upper Tribunal.

26.  Unfortunately, the appellant's  representatives  fell  well  below  the
    standards expected of them by serving a substantial bundle of documents
    the Thursday before a hearing which was  due  to  start  the  following
    Monday (on 1 February 2016).  This was outside the directions that  had
    been given for a paginated and indexed bundle of all  documents  and  a
    schedule of essential passages no later  than  five  days  before  that
    hearing.  This is all the more surprising given that there had  been  a
    pre-trial hearing only two weeks previously.  I would also  observe  in
    passing that the bundle itself is extremely unwieldy.  It contains,  in
    some places, three  lots  of  numbering  and  no  clear  index  of  all
    documents.  It is confusing and difficult to follow.  Nevertheless, the
    Immigration Judge did his best to assimilate the documents in the  time
    available and it is not contended that all the material documents  were
    not in fact before him.

27.  The appellant had an appointment with a  treating  consultant  not  for
    the purposes of a  medico-legal  report.   The  Immigration  Judge  was
    entitled  to  take  the  view  that  it  was  not  contended  that  the
    appellant's headaches were likely to be  life-changing  or  to  have  a
    significant bearing on  his  long-term  health,  given  that  they  had
    continued for some time prior to the hearing.   The  Immigration  Judge
    dealt with this longstanding complaint in his  decision,  at  paragraph
    29, referring to the fact that the appellant  had  nightmares  and  had
    been scared on occasions.  It was his understanding that they had  come
    on since the appellant had left Afghanistan (see  paragraph  29).   The
    Immigration Judge clearly took account of the fact that  the  appellant
    had been referred to  a  neurologist  and  that  he  may  have  ongoing
    headaches (see paragraph 46 and paragraph 55). He also took account  of
    the appellant's claim to having suffered from headaches since he was  a
    child, well before he came to the UK.

28.  Exercising his case management powers as he was, the Immigration  Judge
    was entitled to refuse a very late adjournment in  circumstances  where
    the appellant's representatives had not acted with an  adequate  degree
    of expedition.  Additionally, it is not clear to me why  evidence  that
    the appellant has headaches is likely to have a significant bearing  on
    the outcome of  his  appeal  in  any  event.   For  these  reasons  the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to refuse the  adjournment  application.
    His unfortunate remark about the seriousness  of  the  headaches  being
    "more to do with the asylum hearing than the actual complaint" does not
    add anything to the submission that the Immigration Judge  should  have
    granted an adjournment, which I have rejected.

29.  The second, and much significant, contention is  that  the  Immigration
    Judge failed to consider properly the objective  evidence.   Mr  Clarke
    realistically  recognised  that  the  decision  had  not   demonstrated
    sufficiently that the Immigration Judge had weighed  up  the  objective
    evidence before reaching his decision.  However, it was submitted by Mr
    Clarke that he had in fact taken into account that evidence, as he said
    at various points in his decision, and that his  failure  to  refer  to
    specific passages was not a material error of law given the Immigration
    Judge's overall conclusions were ones he was entitled to come to having
    had regard to that background evidence.

30.  I note that the Immigration Judge correctly referred to the burden  and
    standard of proof in relation to asylum, human rights and  humanitarian
    protection and stated in paragraph 17 that he had  considered  all  the
    evidence in the case.  In paragraph 21 of  his  decision  he  correctly
    identified that the risk to  the  appellant  allegedly  came  from  the
    Taliban.  He found that the respondent and a previous Immigration Judge
    (Judge Lloyd) had thoroughly considered the appellant's  claims.    The
    Immigration Judge took into account the findings by Judge Lloyd who had
    fully considered the reasons given by the respondent  and  by  who,  in
    2013,  had  found  the  appellant's  account  "inconsistent"  with  the
    objective evidence.  The Immigration Judge said he took full account of
    all the submissions made, including those  contained  in  the  skeleton
    argument by Ms Capel.  This document also appears to have  been  handed
    in at the hearing and does not  contain  any  date.   Nevertheless,  it
    contains extensive reference to objective  evidence.   The  Immigration
    Judge made specific reference to it in paragraph 17 of his decision.

31.  There is no suggestion anywhere that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    consider all the documents.  Indeed, despite being burdened with a very
    substantial bundle at short  notice  he  expressly  said  that  he  had
    considered all the documents in paragraph 25 of his decision.  He  took
    full account of the fact that the appellant claimed to have an  imputed
    political opinion but found the  appellant's  account  incredible.   He
    noted that the appellant had  an  aunt  and  other  family  members  in
    Jalalabad.  The Immigration  Judge  completely  rejected  the  evidence
    given by the appellant and his  cousin  who  he  found  incredible  and
    inconsistent.   He  said  that  both  appeared   vague   and   evasive.
    Immigration Judge Lloyd's findings also informed  his  conclusion  that
    the appellant's family  were  in  fact  contactable.   The  appellant's
    evidence that he lacked family in  Afghanistan  was  described  by  the
    Immigration Judge as "made  up"  and  he  clearly  concluded  that  the
    appellant had a family support network in place in paragraph 52 of  his
    decision.  He considered  the  risk  on  return  to  the  appellant  at
    paragraph 58 but concluded there was no risk or  no  material  risk  in
    "the Province" by which he  meant  Nanjarhar.   The  Immigration  Judge
    concluded that the appellant was in no worse a position than  a  number
    of young people of his age and he did not accept that his headaches  or
    previous young age made him a  vulnerable  individual  in  a  way  that
    should be reflected in the outcome of the appeal.

32.  As I have already identified, the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  show
    that he looked at the objective evidence in  full.   Nevertheless,  the
    question before the Tribunal is whether the objective evidence  at  the
    date of the hearing was such as to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the
    Immigration Judge's conclusions were unsustainable.  The respondent had
    referred to the EASO report in an earlier edition in her  refusal  (see
    paragraph 13 of the refusal letter).  I note that the latest edition of
    the EASO report was yet another document handed in at the hearing  (see
    footnote 2 of the grounds of appeal).  I have already commented on  the
    difficulty faced by the Immigration Judge in assimilated and  collating
    such a  large  volume  of  material  which  was  so  poorly  presented.
    Nevertheless, I have concluded that the Immigration Judge did take into
    account the objective evidence and reached clear  conclusions  that  he
    was entitled to come to.  He fully considered both the submissions made
    including the submissions made by Ms Capel which  involved  looking  at
    the objective evidence in detail.  As Mr Clarke has submitted,  in  any
    event the evidence does not establish that the levels  of  violence  in
    Nanjarhar are such as to show that the appellant would be  at  risk  on
    return as at  the  date  of  the  hearing.   The  levels  of  violence,
    proportionate to the size of population, do not  appear  to  cross  the
    threshold where it may be said that the appellant would be at  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence.

33.  Ms Easty submitted that in addition to the one and  a  half  hours  for
    oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal she required  an  additional
    two hours to refer to extensive  passages  in  the  objective  evidence
    which went to the issue of "materiality."   She  made  this  submission
    after she had  concluded  her  main  submissions  which  were  said  to
    establish that the Immigration Judge had erred in law.   Having  regard
    to the fact that the grounds of appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  make
    extensive reference to the objective  evidence  as  does  the  skeleton
    argument submitted by her colleague Ms Capel and having regard  to  the
    need to manage cases efficiently and fairly I did not consider it to be
    in the interests of justice to allow Ms Easty  a  free  rein  over  the
    objective material.  Hers was one of four effective appeals in my  list
    that day and there had been no prior indication that her case  required
    a time estimate of three and a half hours.   Therefore,  exercising  my
    case management powers I limited the argument to a brief reply  to  the
    submissions made by Mr Clarke, Ms  Easty  already  having  had  a  full
    opportunity to address the Tribunal. I noted that  Ms  Easty  addressed
    the Tribunal for longer than the respondent.

34.  I note that the appellant's cousin with whom he has lived since he  has
    been in the UK referred to the possibility of the appellant  living  in
    Kabul in his witness statement (at paragraph 15) drawing  attention  to
    the fact that the appellant had  not  lived  on  his  own,  would  have
    nowhere to live and so forth.  However, the security situation in Kabul
    is not the thrust of the attack on the FTT before me (see  paragraph  7
    of the Grounds).  The FTT is said to have erred by not considering  the
    objective evidence relating to Nanjarhar.  I am satisfied  having  done
    so there was no material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  FTT
    despite the  inadequacies  of  the  decision  alluded  to  above.   The
    decision was underpinned by a number of  adverse  credibility  findings
    (see paragraph 55) and by the fact that the Immigration Judge  took  as
    his  starting  position  the  findings   of   the   earlier   tribunal.



Notice of Decision

I find there was no material error of law in the decision of  the  FTTT  and
this appeal is therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
