
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01156/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th February 2020                |On 16th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     UA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Aman Solicitors Advocates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and
    as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, UA  is  granted
    anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify him or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction  applies
    amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply  with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. It is common ground  between  the  parties  that  the  appellant  is  a
    national of Turkey and of Kurdish ethnicity.  His  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 26th January 2019  to  refuse  his  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  Housego  ("the  judge")  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 16th October 2019.


 3. The appellant claims the decision of the judge is vitiated by errors of
    law that were material to the outcome of  the  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  on  9th  January
    2019.


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego


 4. The background to the claim for international protection is  summarised
    at paragraph [3] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   At
    paragraph ]28], the judge noted the appellant attended the hearing  but
    did not give evidence.  The only  witness  to  give  evidence  was  the
    appellant's older sister.  At paragraphs [40] and [41] of his decision,
    the judge stated:


         "40. The appellant elected  not  to  give  evidence.  There  is  no
         medical evidence that he is unable to do so. A  vulnerable  witness
         direction could have been sought, but was not. This is a fee exempt
         appeal, and it was not said that lack of  funds  precluded  current
         psychiatric evidence.

         41.  It is therefore necessary to decide the appeal on the basis of
         the evidence that was produced. I do not draw any adverse inference
         from the absence of evidence from the appellant."

 5. The judge noted, at paragraph [43], that there was no evidence from the
    appellant's parents or from the appellant's eldest  brother  [A].   The
    judge noted, at paragraph [45],  that  the  witness  statement  of  the
    appellant's younger brother [M] was tendered on the day of the hearing.
    He claimed that he was having to move about to avoid detection  by  the
    authorities in Turkey, and that the police have visited the family home
    to ask after both him and the appellant.


 6. The  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant's  sister  is  referred  to  at
    paragraphs [46] and [47] of the decision.  The judge  noted,  at  [46],
    that "She knew only what she had been told since her brother arrived in
    the UK ...".   The judge noted that she had visited home  in  September
    2018 when she was about six months pregnant. She had stayed  for  about
    two months as her mother had broken her foot. Her evidence was that her
    younger brother, [M], was at home.  She said that she had  last  spoken
    to her brother [M], about four days ago and "... it was probably on the
    landline at her parents' home ...".


 7. At paragraph [49], The judge refers to  the  application  made  by  the
    appellant in April 2018 for a business visa, to come to  the  UK.   The
    appellant had disclosed in that application that he  had  travelled  to
    Germany as a tourist in March 2018.  The judge noted the appellant  had
    voluntarily travelled to Germany on his own passport,  passing  through
    immigration  control,  and  although  that  pre-dated  his  arrest  and
    detention, it did not support his claim of being fearful of the police.
     I pause to note at this stage that although the judge  refers  to  the
    visit to Germany as a visit that 'pre-dated'  the  appellant's  arrest,
    the appellant had claimed in interview that his problems in Turkey  had
    started on 1st May 2017 when he had been caught and taken to  a  police
    station  after  attending  'Yesil  Su  Parki  in  Gaziantep'.   He  had
    described in interview, a second encounter with the authorities when he
    had been caught leaving Nurdagi.  On that occasion he claimed  that  he
    was not taken to the police station but was given a 'good beating' just
    beside the road.  He had been with his brother and that had occurred in
    2016.   Both these events relied upon by the appellant as the  core  of
    his account, pre-date the visit to Germany.


 8. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [51]  to
    [59] of the decision.  At paragraph [51] of  his  decision,  the  judge
    noted the appellant has some mental health difficulties  but  concluded
    the rest of the appellant's account (and the  cause  of  them)  is  not
    reasonably likely to be true.  The judge stated at paragraph [51]  that
    "The existence of mental health problems is not enough  to  enable  the
    appeal to succeed.".  The judge rejected the appellant's claim that the
    application for a visa in April 2018 had been made by an agent  on  the
    appellant's behalf  for  asylum  reasons.  At  paragraph  [54]  of  his
    decision, the judge stated:


         "The evidence of his brother [M] of having  difficulties  with  the
         authorities is plainly untrue, given  the  clear  evidence  of  the
         appellant's sister. I discount the explanation  that  his  problems
         had been concealed from her throughout. There is no  evidence  from
         the appellant's parents (recently in the  UK)  or  from  his  elder
         brother [A], also in the UK and who knew more about  the  appellant
         (and presumably also about [M]) than his sister [AH], who knew only
         what others told her. Her evidence was of life lived peacefully  on
         a farm. I do not have evidence from the appellant to rely upon save
         the notes of interview and his written statement. While I  consider
         these, the written statement has limited weight in the  absence  of
         oral testimony (for the  absence  of  which  there  is  no  current
         medically evidenced foundation).

 9. The judge concluded at paragraph [55], that even to the lower  standard
    of proof and the fact that the appellant has mental health issues,  the
    appellant has not met the lower burden of proof  on  him  to  establish
    that he is at risk upon return.


    The appeal before me


10. The first ground of appeal is that the judge gives  inadequate  reasons
    in two respects.  First, for rejecting the evidence of the  appellant's
    sister and second, for the conclusion that the appellant would  not  be
    at risk upon return.  The appellant claims the judge  gives  inadequate
    reasons for the finding that it is not plausible that  the  appellant's
    sister was not told of her brother's problems.   It  is  said  that  it
    matters not whether the appellant's sister spoke to [M] over the  phone
    when she called her parents landline, or face-to-face.   The  appellant
    claims the judge failed to properly engage with the evidence and failed
    to give adequate reasons for rejecting that part of the evidence  given
    by the appellant's sister. It  is  said  that  the  error  is  material
    because that is the only reason given for rejecting the evidence of the
    appellant's brother [M].


11. This first ground of appeal is entirely misconceived.   Although  there
    is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions  on  the
    central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons need  not
    be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard  to
    the material accepted or rejected by the judge.


12. I was referred to the witness statement of the appellant's sister  [AH]
    dated 26th September 2019.  In that statement she confirms that she had
    attended many demonstrations in Turkey, and she refers  to  photographs
    of her and the appellant at a demonstration about  10  years  ago.  She
    confirms that since arriving in the  UK  in  September  2015,  she  has
    returned to Turkey once a year, every summer. She confirms that she  is
    aware of the appellant's claim for asylum, but she did  not  know  much
    about his application  and  found  out  that  the  appellant  had  been
    tortured.  Mr Saeed  confirmed  that  she  had  been  informed  by  the
    appellant. I  was  also  referred  to  the  witness  statement  of  the
    appellant's brother [M] dated 8th October 2019.  In  his  statement  he
    confirms that he does not have a fixed address and cannot live with his
    parents as he is wanted by the Turkish security forces. He claims  that
    he had to leave his address because after his brother  (the  appellant)
    left, he was detained three times and tortured. He claims that on  each
    occasion he was questioned about his brother.  He claims  that  he  and
    his brother (the appellant) were helping the HDP in the lead up to  the
    referendum in Turkey in April 2017. He refers to  an  incident  in  the
    first week of April 2017 when they were stopped at  a  checkpoint,  and
    the appellant was attacked by police officers, and he had had  to  take
    his brother to hospital as he was badly wounded.


13. As the judge correctly noted, the evidence of  the  appellant's  sister
    was that she knew only what she  had  been  told  since  the  appellant
    arrived in the UK.  At paragraph [45] of the decision the judge  refers
    to the witness statement of the appellant's younger brother  [M].   His
    evidence was that he was having to move about Turkey to avoid detection
    by the authorities and that the police visited home to ask  after  both
    him and the appellant. The judge found at paragraph [47], that the oral
    evidence of his  sister,  made  the  account  of  [M]  unreliable.  The
    evidence of his sister was that when  she  visited  home  in  September
    2018, [M] was at home and that she had been able to speak to him on the
    landline at her parents' home about four days before the  hearing.  Her
    account that [M] had been living at home  with  his  parents  when  she
    visited and stayed with them for two months in September 2018, and that
    she was able to speak to him on the landline at her parents' home about
    four days before the hearing, is entirely inconsistent with  the  claim
    made by [M] in his witness statement that he had to  leave  the  family
    home after his brother left and he cannot not  live  with  his  parents
    because he is wanted by the Turkish security forces.   It  was  plainly
    open to the Judge to conclude that the evidence  of  [M]  that  he  was
    moving about to avoid detection by the authorities in Turkey, and  that
    the police had visited the home to look for him and the appellant,  was
    in the circumstances, entirely unreliable.


14. The appellant claims the judge gives  inadequate  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  according  to  the  country
    guidance, having noted that the country guidance  is  somewhat  out  of
    date and having had regard to the changes  that  have  taken  place  in
    Turkey since 2004. Having rejected the appellant's account  of  events,
    as Mr Saeed accepted in his submissions before me, it was open  to  the
    judge to conclude that the appellant is not at risk upon return.


15. The second ground of appeal is that the judge made inadequate  findings
    regarding  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  sister  and  the
    appellant does not know whether the evidence of his sister was accepted
    in part or in full, and what weight is placed upon her evidence.  It is
    clear that the judge considered the evidence of the appellant's sister.
     The judge refers to her oral evidence at paragraphs [46] and  [47]  of
    the decision.  The judge noted, at paragraphs [46] and  [54]  that  she
    knew only what she had been told since her brother arrived in  the  UK.
    At paragraph [54] of his decision, the judge states that "The  evidence
    of his brother [M] of  having  difficulties  with  the  authorities  is
    plainly untrue, given the clear evidence of the  appellant's  sister.".
    Whilst a statement from a family member is capable of lending weight to
    a claim, the issue will always be whether, looked at in the  round,  it
    does lend weight to the claim.   Where there  was  a  conflict  in  the
    evidence, the judge clearly preferred the evidence of  the  appellant's
    sister who had attended the hearing and gave evidence,  but  the  judge
    was entitled to note at paragraph [54] in reaching  his  decision  that
    her evidence regarding the matters leading to the  appellant's  arrival
    in the UK, were based entirely upon what others told her.


16. The third ground of appeal is that the judge stated at  paragraph  [41]
    of the decision that he does not draw any  adverse inference  from  the
    absence of evidence from the appellant, whereas at  paragraph  [54]  of
    the decision, the judge states ".. I do  not  have  evidence  from  the
    appellant to rely upon save the notes  of  interview  and  his  written
    statement. While I consider these, the written  statement  has  limited
    weight in the absence of oral testimony (for the absence of which there
    is no current medically evidenced foundation).  Mr  Saeed  submits  the
    judge was wrong to attach little weight to the statement.   He  accepts
    there was no  medical  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  confirming  the
    appellant was unable to give evidence, but there  was  evidence  before
    the Tribunal confirming the appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD.  Mr
    Saeed referred to the letters from  Rose  Dekowski,  a  High  Intensity
    Therapist employed by Dorset Healthcare NHS Trust, dated 20th  December
    2018, 14th February 2019, and 3rd May 2019.  The  letters  confirm  the
    appellant's symptoms of PTSD are quite severe and that he is  receiving
    EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitisation  Reprocessing)  treatment.   In  her
    letter of 14th February 2019, Rose Dekowski had said that the appellant
    has multiple traumatic events with severe social problems and "He  does
    not feel safe in England and his brain cannot separate  the  past  from
    the  present.  His  constant  flashbacks  caused  by  day-to-day   life
    triggers, bring back memories from the past as real  as  if  they  were
    happening now in the present.".   She  had  expressed  the  opinion  in
    February 2019 that the appellant "... Seems  very  fragile  to  face  a
    hearing in March ...".  In the letter sent  by  Rose  Dekowski  to  the
    appellant on 3rd May 2019,  she  refers  to  the  "PHQ9  score",  which
    measures symptoms of depression and the "GAD7  score",  which  measures
    symptoms of anxiety, that had indicated  some  improvement,  but  noted
    that the appellant claimed the scores were not  accurate  as  his  mood
    depends on day-to-day events.  It was decided at the  time  that  there
    should be a break in the EMDR treatment,  because  the  appellant  felt
    unable to move on with therapy, and it was suggested that the treatment
    be continued after the hearing of his appeal.


17. Mr Saeed accepts  that  although  the  judge  does  not  refer  to  the
    diagnosis of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  the  judge  refers  at
    paragraph [12] of his  decision  to  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant and the case management of the appeal.  The judge  noted  the
    hearing of the appeal had previously been adjourned  in  February  2019
    and July 2019 to enable the therapy the appellant was receiving  to  be
    completed and for the appellant  to  obtain  a  report  concerning  his
    ability to give evidence.  Mr  Saeed  accepts  there  was  no  evidence
    before the  Tribunal  confirming  the  appellant  was  unable  to  give
    evidence and no psychiatric evidence regarding the appellant's  ability
    to provide a cogent account of events, which may have been relevant  to
    the credibility of the appellant's account of events.


18. It was in my judgement open to the judge to conclude at paragraph  [54]
    of the decision that little weight could be  attached  to  the  written
    statement of the appellant in the absence of any  oral  testimony,  the
    absence for which was not supported by any medical evidence.  It is not
    suggested by the appellant that the judge did not conduct  the  hearing
    properly or make reasonable adjustments to  accommodate  the  appellant
    during the hearing.   The  decision  must  be  read  as  a  whole.   At
    paragraphs [51], the judge notes the appellant has some  mental  health
    difficulties, but that is not enough to enable the appeal to succeed.


19. The judge referred, at paragraph [12] to the application  made  on  4th
    July 2019 to adjourn the hearing  on  the  grounds  the  appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD, but his therapist had failed to  confirm  that  he
    was fit to give evidence. That application was refused on 8th July 2019
    because  of  a  lack  of  medical  evidence  but  the  adjournment  was
    subsequently granted on 9th July 2019 with directions for a  report  to
    be provided  detailing  the  therapy  received  by  the  appellant  and
    concerning his ability to give evidence.  No such report  was  obtained
    or before First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego when the appeal  was  heard
    on 10th October 2019.  There was a reference in the letters  from  Rose
    Dekowski to a diagnosis of PTSD  but  no  evidence  from  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist as to how that diagnosis  was  reached  or  the  traumatic
    event triggering the condition.


20. In the end, it was for the judge to decide the appeal on  the  evidence
    before him.  The judge did not draw  any  adverse  inference  from  the
    absence of oral evidence from the appellant. The judge did  not  reject
    the appellant's account because he did  not  give  oral  evidence.   At
    paragraphs [39] to [40],  the  judge  refers  to  the  limited  medical
    evidence before him. The judge accepted the appellant has  some  mental
    health difficulties, but in view of the paucity of medical evidence  it
    was open to the judge to conclude that only  limited  weight  could  be
    attached to the evidence of the appellant as set out in  the  documents
    before him.  That is not to say that the judge attached 'no weight'  to
    that evidence.  The judge considered the evidence of the  appellant  in
    the round, together with all the other evidence  that  was  before  the
    Tribunal.  There was quite simply no evidence before  the  Tribunal  to
    establish that any discrepancies in the appellant's evidence  might  be
    attributed to the appellant's mental health.  The judge was entitled to
    attach little weight to the statement of the  appellant,  which  as  Mr
    Saeed accepts, did not address the respondent's  reasons  for  refusing
    his claim for international protection, but focused  upon  his  health.
    The judge properly noted that there was an absence of  current  medical
    evidence regarding  his  ability  to  give  evidence.   It  was  in  my
    judgement, open to the judge to attach little weight to the appellant's
    evidence for the reasons set out.


21. Finally, the appellant claims there was no  evidential  basis  for  the
    conclusion at paragraph [54]  of  the  decision  that  the  appellant's
    brother [A], who is also in the UK, "... knew more about the  appellant
    (and presumably also about [M]) than his sister  [AH],  who  only  knew
    what others told her.".  Mr Saeed accepts there was  no  evidence  from
    the appellant's brother [A] or the appellant's parents, as set  out  in
    paragraph [54] of the decision.  Whether [A] knew  any  more  than  his
    sister [AH], is entirely immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.


22. The decision of the judge must be read as a whole. In my judgement, the
    appellant disagrees with the findings and conclusions  reached  by  the
    judge as to the  appellant's  claim  for  international  protection  at
    paragraphs [51] to [56] of the  decision,  but  the  findings  are  not
    irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,  or  findings  that
    are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The  Judge  did  not  consider
    irrelevant factors, and the weight that he  attached  to  the  evidence
    either individually or cumulatively, was a matter for him.


23. In my judgement it was properly open to the Judge to dismiss the appeal
    for the reasons set out in his decision  promulgated  on  16th  October
    2019.  It follows that in  my  judgement  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego is not tainted by a material error  of  law  and
    the appeal is dismissed.


    Notice of Decision


24. The appeal is dismissed


25. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego stands.





    Signed   Date 28th February 2020


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








