
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01877/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 February 2021                  |On: 23 February 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     BI
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, instructed by Sterling Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and  all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing.
2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria  born  on  1  November  1988.  She
   first came to the United Kingdom in 2001 but was deported to  Nigeria  in
   2002 after committing credit card fraud. She returned to the UK  in  2006
   with her aunt and, other than a short visit to Nigeria in  2012  for  her
   father's funeral, claims  to  have  remained  since  that  time  in  this
   country. Since coming to the UK, she had two children with her on-and-off
   partner, WE, both daughters, N and S born on 18 December 2012 and 27 June
   2018 respectively.

3. The appellant made two unsuccessful applications  for  an  EEA  residence
   card as the extended family member of her aunt, who had dual Nigerian and
   Italian nationality, and was then issued with an EEA  residence  card  in
   October 2010. Her subsequent application for a permanent  residence  card
   was refused on 7 February 2016 and her appeal against that  decision  was
   dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 10 May 2017. The  appellant  then
   made two further, unsuccessful applications for EEA residence  cards  and
   then on 11 October 2017 she claimed asylum.

4. The appellant's claim was made on the basis of her  fear  of  the  Ogboni
   and Asigidi cults, of which her father was a senior member, and her  fear
   that her daughters would be subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM).
   The appellant claimed that her mother had died when she was young and she
   had been treated badly by her father who  took  her  to  disturbing  cult
   ceremonies. Her neighbour, seeing how badly she was treated, took her  to
   the UK in 2001 when she was 13 years of age,  but  she  was  returned  to
   Nigeria in 2003. Her aunt brought her to the UK again in 2006 as she  was
   also concerned about how her father was treating her. The appellant  said
   that she fell out with her aunt in  2010  when  she  met  WE  and  became
   pregnant. When she went to Nigeria in 2012 for her  father's  funeral  in
   Benin, members of the Ogboni and Asigidi cults  removed  his  tongue  and
   eyes and told her that she had been reincarnated from a princess/ a  man.
   Three days after the burial she was approached by members  of  the  cults
   demanding that she replace her father as he had agreed, or else she would
   be killed. She fled Benin as a result and went to stay with a  cousin  in
   Lagos, but the cult members came to look for her at  her  cousin's  house
   and she managed to escape. She then came back to the UK and was told that
   her cousin in Lagos had vanished. She feared that the  cults  would  kill
   her because she had refused to join  them  and  feared  that  they  would
   subject her daughters to FGM.

5. The respondent rejected the appellant's account of  her  father  being  a
   member of the Ogboni and  Asigidi  cults  and  rejected  her  claim  that
   members of the cults had threatened to kill her because  she  refused  to
   join them and threatened  to  subject  her  daughter  to  FGM,  owing  to
   inconsistencies in her account and the fact that she  had  not  mentioned
   that in her previous appeal. The respondent found that the appellant  did
   not have a subjective fear of persecution in Nigeria, but  that  even  if
   she did, it was not well-founded as there was a sufficiency of protection
   available to her  from  the  Nigerian  authorities  and  she  could  also
   relocate to another  part  of  the  country.  The  respondent  considered
   further that the appellant's removal  would  not  breach  her  Article  8
   rights, as there were no very significant obstacles to her integration in
   Nigeria and no exceptional circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the immigration rules. The respondent noted  that  there  was  no
   evidence of the children's contact with their father and no  evidence  of
   his claimed German residency and that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for
   the appellant and her daughters to return to Nigeria as a family unit.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  initially
   heard by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd  on  11  April  2019  and  was
   dismissed in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2019. Judge Lloyd did not
   find the appellant's claim to be credible and found that neither she  nor
   her daughters would be at risk  on  return  to  Nigeria  and  that  their
   removal would not breach their Article human rights. However, following a
   grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the judge's decision
   was set aside. Although the only error of law found by the Upper Tribunal
   Judge was in relation to the question of internal relocation,  the  whole
   decision was set aside and the matter  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be heard afresh.

7. The appeal then came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on  14
   January 2020 and was again  dismissed  on  all  grounds,  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 6 April 2020. As a preliminary point, the judge considered
   the respondent's objection to a new matter being raised, namely the  fact
   that the appellant's eldest child N had now lived in the UK  for  over  7
   years, since her  birth.  The  judge  refused  an  application  from  the
   appellant for an adjournment to prepare a skeleton argument on the  issue
   and concluded that it was a "new matter" for the purposes of  section  85
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  that  it  could
   not, therefore, be considered. The judge heard  from  the  appellant  and
   from WE. He rejected the appellant's account of being at risk  on  return
   to Nigeria in relation to cults and FGM and did not find her  account  to
   be credible. He  found  that  even  if  the  account  was  credible,  the
   appellant could access a sufficiency of protection and could also  safely
   relocate to another part of Nigeria. The judge  found  further  that  the
   appellant's removal to Nigeria would not breach her Article 8  rights  or
   the rights of her children.

8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
   following grounds: that there had been procedural unfairness in the judge
   determining that the appellant's daughter's 7 year residence  in  the  UK
   was a new matter and denying her the opportunity to rely upon that;  that
   the judge had erred by  failing  to  consider  matters  accepted  by  the
   respondent, including the plausibility of the appellant's  claim  of  her
   father's membership of the Ogboni cult and the expectation that she would
   inherit her father's membership of the cult and the prevalence of FGM  in
   the area; that the judge had failed to consider  other  material  matters
   and evidence including background evidence relating to  the  question  of
   protection from the authorities, the correct test for internal relocation
   and the reasons for the appellant's delay in making her asylum claim; and
   that the judge had failed to take account of the  fact  that  the  eldest
   child had been in the UK for over 7 years.

9. Permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
   judge's approach to the eldest child becoming 7 years of age  as  a  'new
   matter' in terms of the Article 8 assessment, although the other  grounds
   were not excluded. The respondent, in her rule 24 response, conceded  the
   error of law in relation to the judge's Article 8 assessment but resisted
   the grounds relating to the asylum claim.
Hearing and Submissions

10. The matter  then  came  before  me.  Mr  McVeety  advised  me  that  the
   appellant and her daughters had since been granted discretionary leave on
   the basis of the eldest child  having  lived  in  the  UK  for  7  years,
   although it was noted that the appellant had not yet received the  letter
   granting leave. In the circumstances Ms Patel  made  submissions  on  the
   asylum grounds only.

11. Ms Patel submitted, in relation to the first ground, that the judge  had
   erred by failing to  take  into  account  in  his  findings  the  matters
   accepted by the respondent, such as the plausibility of  the  appellant's
   father being a member  of  the  Ogboni  cult  (at  [37]  of  the  refusal
   decision), the plausibility of the appellant's claim to have been told by
   cult members that she was expected to replace  her  deceased  father  (at
   [45]) and the fact that the appellant came from an  area  where  FGM  was
   prevalent and had been subjected  to  FGM  herself.  As  for  the  second
   ground, Ms Patel submitted that the judge erred by simply rubber-stamping
   the respondent's adverse credibility findings rather than making his  own
   findings and by  making  adverse  findings  arising  from  the  screening
   interview, contrary to the guidance in YL (China) [2004] UKIAT 00145.  Ms
   Patel submitted further that the judge  also  erred  in  his  credibility
   assessment by failing to consider the appellant's evidence in her witness
   statement in relation to her father having his eyes and  tongue  missing;
   by making adverse findings based upon the  appellant's  evidence  in  her
   previous appeal under the EEA Regulations which was not relevant  to  her
   asylum claim; by making adverse findings  on  the  appellant's  delay  in
   claiming asylum and failing to consider  that  she  had  previously  been
   granted leave under the EEA Regulations; and by taking section 8  of  the
   Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  as  being
   determinative. Ms Patel submitted that the judge had failed  to  consider
   the background evidence relating to cults  in  Nigeria  when  considering
   sufficiency of protection and had failed to apply  the  appropriate  test
   and consider relevant factors when considering internal relocation.

12. Mr McVeety submitted that the grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with
   the judge's decision. He submitted  further  that  the  judge  had  taken
   account of the respondent's views on plausibility, he  had  provided  his
   own reasons for making the adverse credibility findings that he  did,  he
   was entitled to rely on the inconsistencies arising  from  the  screening
   interview given in particular the nature of the inconsistencies,  he  was
   entitled  to  rely  on  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in  her  EEA
   Regulations appeal in regard to the person who brought her up as that was
   related to the  asylum  claim,  he  did  not  take  section  8  as  being
   determinative but was entitled to consider the delay in  the  appellant's
   claim and he took all relevant evidence  into  account  when  making  his
   findings, in the alternative, on sufficiency of protection  and  internal
   flight.

Discussion and Findings

13. In granting permission, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Easterman  made  it
   clear that  he  did  not  consider  that  the  grounds  relating  to  the
   appellant's asylum claim had particular merit. I am entirely in agreement
   and, like Mr McVeety, consider the grounds  to  be  little  more  than  a
   disagreement with the judge's adverse findings.

14. The appellant's first ground of challenge is that the  judge  failed  to
   incorporate the respondent's  positive  findings  in  his  assessment  of
   credibility. However, that is plainly not the case as the judge, at [12],
   specifically referred to,  and  set  out  in  some  detail,  the  matters
   accepted by the  respondent  and  the  matters  which  she  found  to  be
   plausible. In any event, whether or not parts of  the  appellant's  claim
   were considered to be plausible, the respondent did not find the claim to
   be a genuine and credible one and she completely rejected the appellant's
   claim that her father was a member of the Ogboni and  Asigidi  cults  and
   her claim to have received threats from cult members to kill her  and  to
   subject her daughter to FGM. Accordingly, the fact  that  the  respondent
   considered parts of the claim to be  plausible,  whilst  appreciated  and
   noted by the judge, was in any event immaterial given  that  her  account
   was ultimately not accepted in any respect.

15. As for the assertion in the grounds that the judge simply  endorsed  and
   rubber-stamped the  respondent's  adverse  credibility  findings  without
   making his own assessment, that is also clearly and unequivocally not the
   case. At [59] the judge accepted that there was validity in all, or most,
   of the credibility  points  raised  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
   decision and at subsequent points in his decision  referred  to  specific
   paragraphs  of  the  refusal  decision  which  made  adverse  credibility
   findings. Far from simply adopting those adverse findings,  however,  the
   judge observed the extent to which the appellant had  failed  to  address
   those matters in her statement and her oral evidence and then went on  to
   give details of the various  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  in  her
   evidence and to provide his own, cogent reasons for drawing  the  adverse
   conclusions that he did. In so far as the judge relied on inconsistencies
   arising from the screening interview, he plainly followed the guidance in
   YL (China), which he specifically referred to at [23], and considered the
   inconsistent  evidence  in  the  round  together  with  the  many   other
   discrepancies arising in the  evidence.  As  Mr  McVeety  submitted,  the
   inconsistencies  arising  from   the   screening   interview   were   not
   insignificant and I agree that the judge was entitled to have  regard  to
   the impact of the  evidence  given  at  that  stage  on  the  appellant's
   subsequent account.

16. Likewise, I agree with Mr McVeety that the judge was perfectly  entitled
   to have regard to the appellant's evidence in her EEA Regulations  appeal
   as her account of her mother's death and her aunt's  involvement  in  her
   life was relevant to the issue of her father's influence in  drawing  her
   into the cults and was thus directly relevant to  her  asylum  claim.  Ms
   Patel challenged the judge's consideration of section 8 and the delay  in
   the appellant's claim for asylum as being  a  determinative  factor,  but
   again that was clearly not the case and the judge simply considered it as
   another of many reasons for the appellant's credibility being undermined,
   as he was perfectly entitled to do. The judge was fully  aware  that  the
   appellant had previously been granted a period of residence under the EEA
   Regulations but was entitled nevertheless to consider the delay in making
   a claim for international protection  as  an  indication  of  a  lack  of
   credibility.

17. Accordingly, it seems to me that there is no merit in the  challenge  in
   the grounds to  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings.  The  judge
   undertook a detailed assessment of the appellant's claim  and  considered
   her  evidence  against  the  background  evidence  and  country  guidance
   caselaw. The judge provided a detailed account of the inconsistencies and
   discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence  and  gave  full  and  cogent
   reasons for concluding that they were such that the  claim  could  simply
   not be believed. Having reached such a conclusion, the  judge's  findings
   on sufficiency of protection and internal relocation  were  not  material
   and were simply made in the alternative. In any event I find no merit  in
   the challenge in the grounds  in  that  respect  and  consider  that  the
   conclusions were properly reached by the judge with full  regard  to  all
   relevant factors and in the context of the relevant country  reports  and
   background information.

18. Accordingly, I find no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  findings  and
   conclusions on the appellant's asylum claim.  The  judge  was  fully  and
   properly  entitled  to  reject  the  appellant's  claim  as  lacking   in
   credibility and to conclude that she was at no risk on return to Nigeria.
    I do not need to make findings on Article 8, given that the  appellant's
   claim has been accepted to the extent that she and her children have been
   granted discretionary leave as a result of her eldest child's  length  of
   residence in the UK.

DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to
   the appellant's asylum claim did not involve an error on a point  of  law
   and I do not set aside the decision  in  that  regard.  The  decision  to
   dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds stands. In regard to  human  rights,
   the judge's decision has been  set  aside  and  the  appellant  has  been
   granted leave.

     Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.




Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 1 February
2021
