
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01333/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2017                           |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               miss ivy murena
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Nyawanza
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
    refusal of the respondent to grant her asylum and leave to remain under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She arrived in the  UK  on  24
    April 2016 and subsequently claimed asylum on 13 May 2016.

3.   She claimed to be a member of the  MDC  who  has,  in  the  past,  been
    kidnapped by ZANU-PF militia.  She claims she joined the MDC  in  2014.
    She began to receive threats from ZANU-PF in February 2014.  She claims
    she was then kidnapped, beaten and held for  two  days  by  ZANU-PF  in
    April 2016.  She fled Zimbabwe following her release.

4.   The judge  noted  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account.   The
    appellant initially claimed in interview that she  joined  the  MDC  in
    June or July 2014.  She later changed her  evidence  in  interview  and
    claimed she became a member of the MDC in January 2014.

5.    The  judge  also  noted  the  appellant's  claim  in  her  substantive
    interview that she was threatened and subsequently kidnapped  and  held
    for two days by ZANU-PF militia.  However, the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant failed entirely to mention in her  screening  interview  that
    she was kidnapped.  She mentioned being  threatened  and  followed  but
    there was no mention of a kidnapping.

6.   The judge noted the appellant's assertion during the hearing  that  her
    sister did not know she was coming to the UK.  However, in contrast  in
    the interview, the appellant stated her sister told her to wait for her
    at the airport.

7.   The judge however did not find the inconsistencies to  be  significant.
    Similarly, although the appellant's answers during the interview  about
    the MDC were vague and general, the judge found  her  knowledge  to  be
    consistent with what one would expect from a low-level  member  of  the
    MDC.  The judge was willing to  expect  that  the  appellant  became  a
    member of the MDC some time in 2014.  She also found that the appellant
    was a low member of the MDC in Zimbabwe.

8.   The judge also accepted the appellant's account  that  she  experienced
    some problems in her home area  from  ZANU-PF,  including  threats  and
    kidnapping.

9.   The judge applied the decision in CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) which held as follows:

         23. " ... as a general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker
             fro the UK, having no significant MDC profile, would result in
             that person facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to the Zanu-PF...." Those returning to  a  rural  area
             may find it difficult to avoid  adverse  attention.   However,
             this does not include MDC members  returning  to  Matabeleland
             North or Matabeleland South.


         24.   CM goes on to state, that in general a  returnee  to  certain
             areas  in  Zimbabwe  is  not  at  risk  unless  they  have   a
             significant MDC profile, which the appellant accepts she  does
             not.  Even those with a significant MDC profile will  face  no
             risk from Zanu-PF in Bulawayo.  Those from  major  cities  may
             find it difficult to relocate to a  rural  area  for  fear  of
             discrimination; I note that the  appellant  does  not  express
             this concern.


         25.   Ms Ramsey argued during submissions, that the appellant state
             in interview that she faced no problems in Bulawayo; this this
             would be a viable alternative.  She further  argued  that  the
             appellant could safely return to South Matabeleland.   I  find
             this accords with the court's findings in CM (supra).


         26.   Although I accept that the appellant has established  to  the
             requisite standard that she is a low level member of  the  MDC
             and that she did experience some problems in  her  home  area,
             thus it would not be safe for her to return there, I find  the
             appellant could safely  relocate  elsewhere  within  Zimbabwe,
             including Bulawayo and South Matabeleland.  Although I  accept
             there has been an increase in violence in Zimbabwe in the lead
             up to the elections, in reliance on the country guidance  case
             of CM, I find there are parts of Zimbabwe that  the  appellant
             could safely return to.  Accordingly, I find the appellant has
             failed to show she is in need of international protection.


10.  The judge went on to find that the appellant would not be at real  risk
    of suffering treatment that reaches the Article 3 threshold.

11.  Mr Nyawanza accepted that the only issue in this case  is  whether  the
    appellant can safely relocate to another area in Zimbabwe.   He  argued
    that because the appellant had been persecuted by state agents  in  her
    home area, the only conclusion that can be  drawn  from  this  is  that
    internal relocation is not an option for her.  This is because  of  the
    reach of the state agents throughout the country.

12.  As to whether the judge made an inconsistent finding as to whether  the
    appellant had been kidnapped or not, Mr Nyawanza submitted that it  was
    the appellant's failure to  mention  that  she  was  kidnapped  at  the
    screening interview which the judge found amounted to an inconsistency.
      The  judge  went  on  to  find  that  the  inconsistencies  were  not
    significant and therefore at paragraph  22  found  that  she  had  been
    kidnapped.  I accept Mr Nyawanza's analysis and accept that  there  was
    no inconsistency in the judge's finding as to whether the appellant had
    been kidnapped or not

13.  Nevertheless, I do not  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  her
    conclusion that the appellant can relocate safely to  another  part  of
    Zimbabwe.   The  judge  properly  applied  CM  and  in  light  of   the
    appellant's evidence, she made findings  that  were  sustainable.   The
    judge's findings disclose no error of law.

14.  Mr Nyawanza argued that the appellant is not expected  to  lie;  so  if
    she is asked about her loyalties on  arrival  at  Harare  Airport,  she
    would not be able to lie about where her loyalties  lay  or  about  the
    fact that she claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.  I find  that  this
    argument does not assist the appellant in light  of  the  changes  that
    have taken place in Zimbabwe.  Those changes are in the public domain.

15.  The judge's decision dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  shall  stand.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 18 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
