
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01345/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2018                          |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Smith, Counsel instructed by South West
                    London Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity, appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 15th January 2018  to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh  dismissed
    the appeal in a decision promulgated on 14th August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claims  that  his
    father worked illegally transporting goods over the border between Iran
    and Iraq and that he occasionally helped his father.   He  claims  that
    his father was well-known to smugglers  and  the  authorities  for  his
    illegal activities.  He claims that in late 2015 two men  came  to  the
    Appellant's home seeking his father's assistance to cross  the  border.
    The Appellant came to know that these two men were members of KDPI  who
    had been delivering leaflets  promoting  KDPI.   As  they  crossed  the
    border they were shot at by the authorities and they returned fire with
    the weapons they had in their possession. The Appellant  says  that  he
    believes that one of the Pasdar (Revolutionary Guards) was  injured  by
    the gunfire. The Appellant's father  escaped  the  scene  and  returned
    home.  The Appellant claims that, when he  returned  home,  his  father
    advised the Appellant and his mother that they were to leave the  house
    immediately.  The Appellant and his  parents  left  Iran  travelled  to
    Iraq.  The Appellant travelled onwards on his own on the basis that his
    parents were to follow him.  The Appellant arrived in  the  UK  on  4th
    December 2015.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the  Respondent  had  accepted
    that the Appellant is Iranian.  At paragraph 34 the  judge  found  that
    the Appellant is a credible and consistent witness.   The  judge  noted
    that, apart from being aware that his father smuggled goods across  the
    border, the Appellant was not privy to the details of who  he  smuggled
    for or where he delivered the  goods.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was aware that his father assisted two men to the border  and
    this incident involved an exchange of gunfire between the KDPI and  the
    Iranian authorities.  The judge took into  account  the  expert  report
    provided and found it credible that the Appellant would not be informed
    of any details of the journey his father was going  to  undertake  with
    the two men and the judge found it credible that, if his father were so
    minded, that he would assist the two as KDPI  members  without  fearing
    this is a greater risk to him and his family.  The judge also found the
    Appellant's narrative of the background to his travelling to Europe  to
    be credible and consistent with the expert report.

 4. At paragraph 36 the judge said; "the issue I find to be  determined  by
    me is whether upon return to Iran the Appellant would in  fact  attract
    adverse attention from the Iranian authority."  The  judge  noted  that
    the Appellant asserts that his father feared for his life and  that  of
    his family and therefore left Iran immediately because he  believed  he
    had been identified.  The judge accepted that there is a risk  that  if
    the Appellant's father is known and  he  has  been  identified  to  the
    authorities the Appellant would upon return be identified as the son of
    a smuggler and specifically  the  smuggler  who  was  involved  in  the
    crossfire involving the two KDPI members.

 5. However the judge went on to find at paragraph 36;

         "I have no evidence that the two  KDPI  members  were  captured  or
         identified.  I have  no  evidence  that  they  were  aware  of  the
         Appellant's father's details and certainly no  evidence  that  they
         knew the Appellant.  I also have no evidence  that  informants  had
         provided  details  of  the  Appellant  and  his   father   to   the
         authorities.  The expert report simply speculates on the point  and
         has no  evidential  value  as  to  whether  informants  would  have
         identified the Appellant and his father to the authorities."

 6. The judge also found at paragraph 41 that there is "little evidence  of
    the Appellant's father's involvement with the KDPI".

 7. There are three grounds of appeal.  The  first  ground  contends  that,
    having found that the Appellant is a credible and  consistent  witness,
    and having accepted his account that his father had assisted  two  KDPI
    members to the border and that there was an exchange of fire there, the
    judge failed to give any or adequate reasons  for  rejecting  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk on  return  as  a  result  of  his  father's
    actions.  It is contended that the judge's findings are  at  odds  with
    her finding that the Appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  which
    included that his father had assisted the two KDPI members, that  there
    had been an exchange of fire and that his father had  fled  immediately
    because he believed that he had been identified.  In my  view  this  is
    linked with the second ground which contends that the judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting the country expert's evidence  that
    it  is  plausible  that  the  Appellant's  father  was  identified   by
    informants and came to the  attention  of  the  authorities  is  simply
    speculation.

 8. I note Mr Kandola's submission that the finding  at  paragraph  36  was
    open to the judge  even  though  she  had  accepted  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim. He submitted that it was open to the judge  to  find
    that there was no evidence that  the  authorities  had  identified  the
    Appellant's father and, if he had not been identified, then there is no
    risk to the Appellant.

 9. However in my  view  the  judge  did  make  a  material  error  in  her
    conclusions  in  relation  to  this  matter.   The  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 16 the Appellant's claim that when his father returned to the
    family home he advised the Appellant and his mother that they  were  to
    leave the house immediately.  At paragraph 20 the Appellant's  evidence
    that his father is well-known within his community  as  a  smuggler  is
    recorded and his evidence that there were people within  the  community
    who were informers. The Appellants evidence was  that,  as  his  father
    left their home urgently, he was aware of the risk that as  members  of
    the KDPI the authorities  would  want  to  detain  anyone  involved  in
    assisting the KDPI.  It is also  recorded  at  paragraph  21  that  the
    Appellant said that his father informed him  after  the  shooting  that
    they were wanted by the government.  At paragraph 34  the  judge  found
    the Appellant to be a credible and consistent witness.  The  judge  has
    not specifically rejected any aspect of the Appellant's  claim  or  the
    Appellant's evidence.

10. Further, at paragraph 22 of his report, the expert, Dr Engeland, said;

         "... the discussion on identification  of  Mr  [A]'s  father  could
         perhaps be irrelevant: most of the time the  Iranian  forces  chase
         any individual or group of individuals they see in  the  mountains,
         and this without prior identification.  It  is  therefore  possible
         that the authorities gave chase to the  three  individuals  without
         identifying them because of the darkness.  In the case at hand,  it
         is also possible that the authorities had  been  tipped  off  by  a
         local spy or informant.  The authorities have  recruited  Kurds  as
         'border guards' or  'village  guards'  to  help  them  monitor  the
         situation, spy on other Kurds and report on secessionist groups and
         smugglers.  If such is the case, the authorities would  have  known
         of the identity of the smuggler, Mr [A]'s father, and  of  the  two
         travellers.  It is my opinion that it is plausible someone informed
         the authorities of Mr [A]'s father passage  through  the  mountains
         with two KDPI  members:  the  authorities  have  stepped  up  their
         efforts in the area since the 2017 terrorist  attacks  against  the
         Iranian Parliament and the Khomeini Mausoleum: it has been reported
         that these attacks could have been carried out by Iranian Kurds  in
         the name of ISIS.  It has also  emerged  that  ISIS  is  trying  to
         recruit among Iranian Kurds.  This has led Iranian  authorities  to
         recruit more of border  guards  and  village  guards.   This  could
         explain how Mr [A]'s father's identity and decision  to  guide  two
         KDPI members  through  the  mountains  came  to  be  known  by  the
         authorities."

11. The judge said at paragraph 36 that she had no evidence as to  how  the
    Appellant and his father would have been identified to the authorities.
    However she failed to give any or adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's evidence on this point which she found to be  credible  and
    rejecting the expert's opinion which is consistent with the Appellant's
    evidence.

12. I find that the judge did make a material error of law at paragraph  36
    in her treatment of the Appellant's evidence and the expert's  evidence
    and failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting this evidence.   This
    is a material error of law.

13. There is no challenge to the judge's findings of fact.  And as this  is
    a discrete finding which goes to risk on return I can set  the  finding
    aside and remake the decision.  Mr Kandola and Miss Smith agreed that I
    could remake the decision on the basis of the evidence before me.

Remaking the Decision

14. As set out above, the judge found at paragraph 34 that the Appellant is
    a credible and consistent witness. The Appellant's evidence is that his
    father was known as a smuggler, his father  told  him  that  they  were
    wanted by the government and there were people within the community who
    were informers.  The expert concludes that the Appellant's evidence  on
    this matter is plausible and that it is plausible that the  authorities
    would have been informed of the Appellant's father's actions by  spies.
    I also consider the judge's conclusion which has not been challenged at
    paragraph 43 that the objective evidence shows that if the Appellant is
    suspected of involvement with the KDPI he is at risk on return. I  also
    note the findings in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seekers)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).

15. I am satisfied, based on these findings that, if the Appellant were  to
    return to Iran, he is likely to be identified as the son of his  father
    who is wanted by the authorities. Accordingly, I am satisfied, based on
    the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, that the  Appellant
    has established that there is a real risk that he  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution upon return to Iran on the  basis  of  his  imputed
    political opinion.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.

An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date: 24th November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable therefore I make no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 24th November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

