
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01129/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2019                 |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    F. W.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;
Appellant:    Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Respondent:   Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      0. The Appellant, an Eritrean national, entered the UK illegally and
         then made a protection claim in 2018 which was refused on 23
         January 2019. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was
         heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands in a
         decision promulgated on 19 June 2019.

      0. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 9 August 2019. The Respondent has not
         replied to that grant with a Rule 24 response. Neither party has
         applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) to introduce further evidence. Thus
         the matter came before me.

    The challenge

      0. It is common ground before me that the Appellant's Eritrean
         nationality, and his age and identity were not in dispute before
         the First-tier Tribunal ["FtT"]. Nor was the Appellant's claim to
         have left Eritrea for Sudan in 2014, when he would have been aged
         about 48, in dispute. Those agreed facts begged the following
         questions, which needed to be considered in the light of the
         current country guidance of MST and Others (national service - risk
         categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 433;

          i) whether the Appellant was formally and legitimately discharged
             from his military service, or a deserter,

         ii) the implications of the Appellant's possession of a document
             that he had described as a formal legitimate discharge from
             military service,

        iii) whether the Appellant had established that despite any formal
             discharge from military service he was nonetheless still
             regarded by the Eritrean authorities as a military reservist,
             and liable to recall to military service,

         iv) whether the Appellant had established that he left Eritrea
             unlawfully, or, whether the evidence required a finding that
             he had the connections and documents to have left lawfully
             having been issued with an exit visa,

          v) whether the Appellant had established that he would upon
             return be perceived as a deserter and/or one who had left
             illegally, and thus had established that he faced a risk of
             detention and/or ill treatment in the event of his return to
             Eritrea.

      0. It may be that neither representative appearing before the FtT had
         engaged properly with the current country guidance to be found in
         MST, but it is agreed before me that the Judge's decision makes no
         reference to the guidance to be found in MST @ [368-70]. Nor is
         there reference to the guidance to be found in MST @ [297-310]. It
         is also agreed that the Judge's decision [30] contradicts the
         guidance to be found in MST without offering any adequate reason
         for any finding that it was appropriate to reach a conclusion
         contrary to the country guidance.

      0. Even at the date of the hearing the Appellant was below the 55 year
         old threshold limit for recall to service, and thus below the
         normal threshold for the acquisition of an exit visa. It was agreed
         that the evidence might however permit the FtT, having properly
         directed itself as to the current country guidance, to reach the
         conclusion either that the Appellant was at real risk of harm upon
         return, or, that in the light of the inferences that could be drawn
         from his possession of a discharge certificate, that he was not.

      0. In the circumstances both parties were ultimately agreed that the
         Judge did fall into material error of law, and, that the only
         practical course open to me was to set aside the decision and remit
         the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. I agree
         that this is the only pragmatic course open to me, because it
         cannot be said that the Appellant has yet had a fair hearing of his
         appeal. In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that
         the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the First
         Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive
         the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
         considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the
         Practice Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the
         judicial fact finding exercise required is such that having regard
         to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal
         should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
         the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing with the following directions;

    The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hands, at the North Shields Hearing Centre.

    A Tigrinyan interpreter is required.

    Both parties shall serve and file by 5pm on 27 September 2019 a
    skeleton argument that sets out clearly, but in brief, the elements of
    the guidance to be found in MST that they rely upon, adequately cross-
    referenced to the evidence that has been filed in the appeal.

Notice of decision

The decision did involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  sufficient  to
require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
Accordingly  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal   for
rehearing, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13 September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes



