
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01122/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th July 2019                |On 17th July 2019               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA



                                   Between

                                     G U

                          (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones instructed by Tamil Welfare Association

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant seeks, with permission, to challenge the determination of
    the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  24th  April  2019,  which
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  asylum.   The
    appellant's appeal was allowed on article 3 and article 8  grounds  but
    not on asylum grounds.  It was described as an 'uplift appeal'.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who maintained  that  she  had
    published an article on human  rights  in  Sri  Lanka.   She  had  also
    engaged in protests in Sri Lanka whereupon she was detained, questioned
    and raped.  Her detention was said to be  post  conflict  and  she  had
    related that the authorities had subsequently twice  visited  her  home
    seeking her whereabouts.

 3. The appellant asserted in the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    that,  as  accepted  at  paragraph  62  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination, she would be at real risk of detention  for  questioning
    on her return to Sri Lanka by reason of her past activities  (the  core
    of her claim being accepted by the Tribunal), and she would be at  real
    risk of being ill-treated during such detention.

 4. It was argued that as  the  detentions  were  post  conflict  and  were
    intelligence led that that should have influenced the  outcome  of  the
    appeal on asylum grounds in the appellant's favour given ME (Sri Lanka)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 and  which  had  been  cited  in  the  appellant's
    representative's skeleton argument.  Insufficient regard had been given
    to the past persecution (which was accepted) and her activity with  the
    TGTE in the United Kingdom.  In that regard, the judge  had  failed  to
    have regard to UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 85.

 5. The grounds of challenge to the First-tier Tribunal also asserted  that
    the Tribunal erred in law in failing to apply GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) given the  finding
    that she was likely to be questioned and detained and allow the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.

 6. At the hearing before us Ms Everett resiled from the Rule  24  response
    which had advanced that the grounds did not disclose any error of  law.
    In the circumstances, we considered that Ms Everett was  proper  to  do
    so.

 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant, accepted her account of the  appellant  that  she  had  been
    detained in relation to political protests, ill-treated  in  detention,
    her whereabouts subsequently sought, and was  involved  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the TGTE.  We find that the error of law identified by the
    grounds of challenge was made out.  When considering the asylum grounds
    the Judge had failed to follow the relevant caselaw.

 8. Ms Everett also formally conceded, on behalf of the Secretary of State,
    that on the findings of the judge, which had not been challenged by the
    Secretary of State in the Rule 24 response, and in line with case  law,
    that asylum should have been granted.

 9. On the unchallenged findings of the judge we found that to be a  proper
    concession.  On the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  on  the
    relevant caselaw as cited above, asylum should have been granted.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. We set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007)  in  relation  to  the  conclusions  on
    asylum only.  We remake the decision under section 12(2)  (b)  (ii)  of
    the TCE 2007 and in the light of the concession we allow the appeal  on
    asylum grounds.




    Decision

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed  Date 5th July 2109




    Helen Rimington

    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

