
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01423/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 5 August 2019                   |           On 24 September 2019         |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Kelleher on behalf of Barnes, Harrild and Dyer
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Tsamados ('the judge'), promulgated on 31 August  2018,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
        his asylum, humanitarian protection and private  life/human  rights
        applications.


     2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran.  He
        appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  him
        asylum based upon his claimed well-founded fear of persecution as a
        result of political opinion and race; and in terms of  there  being
        substantial grounds for believing he would  face  a  real  risk  of
        suffering serious harm on return from the UK under  paragraph  339C
        of the Immigration Rules; and under Articles 2,  3  and  8  of  the
        European Convention on Human Rights and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
        Immigration Rules.

     3. The matter has something of a protracted history.  The  judge  made
        the following  findings  (which  I  do  not  understand  to  be  in
        dispute):

             'He is a citizen of Iran and arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
             ('UK') on 12 October 2009 and claimed asylum. He was 16  years
             old at that  time  and  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
             remain. On expiry he renewed his claim for asylum,  which  was
             refused, and his appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
             ('FTT')) Immigration Judge  ('IJ')  Plumtree  on  9  September
             2010.  Thereafter  he  made  several  fresh  applications  for
             asylum, the latest of which was  on  23  September  2013.  His
             solicitors made additional representations on 23 December 2013
             and on 23 September 2014. The Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department ('SSHD') again dismissed his application  initially
             without a right of appeal.  However,  following  a  successful
             challenge by way  of  judicial  review,  the  SSHD  agreed  to
             reconsider the decision. It is  the  further  refusal  of  the
             appellant's application  on  17  January  2018  which  is  the
             subject of this appeal.'

     4. The judge heard the appeal  on  21  August  2018,  dismissing  each
        element of the appellant's claim.


     5. An anonymity direction was granted by Judge Simpson on 14  February
        2018 and confirmed by the judge on 24 August 2018.  I  extend  that
        direction for the purposes of these Upper Tribunal proceedings.


     6. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce
        identified two central points:

           1. The grounds argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
              follow the applicable country  guidance  and  risk  assessment
              framework when it considered whether the appellant would  face
              a real risk of serious harm upon return to Iran having regard,
              cumulatively, to the fact that he is a Kurd, a  failed  asylum
              seeker and that he has been convicted  in  the  UK  of  crimes
              including being drunk and disorderly.
           2. The relevant paragraphs of the decision are  at  63  -  69.  I
              grant permission because it is arguable that the tribunal here
              failed to consider the findings in SSH & HR to the effect that
              returnees will specifically be asked about whether  they  have
              criminal convictions abroad. It was not the  appellant's  case
              that the UK authorities would have told the Iranians about his
              convictions; it was his case that he would be asked about them
              and applying the ratio of HJ (Iran) he cannot be  expected  to
              lie in order to avoid serious harm.


     7. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

     8. There is one matter I should address at the outset. The premise  of
        the grant of permission to appeal suggests that SSH and HR (illegal
        exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) ('SSH &
        HR') found 'to the effect that returnees will specifically be asked
        about whether they have criminal convictions abroad'.

     9. I am not persuaded about that. SSH  &  HR  does  establish  that  a
        person returning to Iran on  a  laissez  passer  (temporary  travel
        document,  which  I  understand  to  be  the  case  here)  will  be
        questioned.  The Upper Tribunal so finds  at  paragraph  9  of  its
        judgement.

    10. The tribunal further states:

             23. .....The evidence in our view shows no more than that they
             will be questioned, and  that  if  there  are  any  particular
             concerns arising from their previous activities either in Iran
             or in  the  United  Kingdom  or  whichever  country  they  are
             returned  from,  then  there  would  be  a  risk  of   further
             questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment.   In  this
             regard it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-
             examination where  he  said  that  the  treatment  they  would
             receive would depend on their individual case.   If  they  co-
             operated and accepted that they  left  illegally  and  claimed
             asylum abroad then there would be no reason for ill-treatment,
             and questioning would be for  a  fairly  brief  period.   That
             seems to us to sum up the position well, and as a  consequence
             we conclude that a person with no history other than  that  of
             being a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and  who
             could be expected to tell the truth when questioned would  not
             face a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  during  the  period  of
             questioning at the airport.


    11. The Upper Tribunal concluded that the questioning of a returnee and
        their treatment will depend on the  individual  case.  Its  finding
        does not extend to the  returnee  being  asked  specifically  about
        criminal convictions while they were abroad,  and  the  appellant's
        representative has not sought to suggest that SSH  &  HR  did  make
        such a finding (although she does advance that the  risk  of  being
        asked about activities abroad, and  therefore  previous  offending,
        remains).


    12. With the above caveat, I now turn to the substance  of  the  appeal
        which centres upon whether  the  appellant's  criminal  convictions
        could lead to the type of protracted questioning and  ill-treatment
        that the appellant's representative suggests and whether the judge,
        cumulatively, has taken into account the various  factors  in  this
        matter, including that the appellant is a  Kurd,  a  failed  asylum
        seeker and has been convicted in the UK of crimes, including  being
        drunk and disorderly.

    13. The representative advances that the judge erred in  the  following
        ways:

         a. by concluding that the appellant would  not  have  to  tell  the
            truth when questioned upon return about his  illegal  exit  from
            Iran or his activities carried out abroad;
         b. by concluding that the  Iranian  authorities  would  not  become
            aware of the appellant's criminal record  in  the  UK  upon  his
            return to Iran and that this would not exacerbate  his  risk  of
            persecution;
         c. by failing to properly consider the combined risk factors of the
            appellant's ethnicity,  his  illegal  exit  from  Iran  and  his
            criminal record in the United Kingdom as exacerbating  the  risk
            of the appellant suffering persecution, detention and  potential
            ill-treatment upon return to Iran as a failed asylum seeker.

   a. The expectation to tell the truth

    14. The first limb of this  appeal  advances  on  the  basis  that  the
        appellant would have to tell the truth when questioned upon  return
        about his illegal exit from  Iran  and  any  subsequent  activities
        carried out abroad (particularly his conviction involving alcohol).


    15. There is more than one element to this.

    16. First, the appellant was found not to be credible in his claims  to
        be involved with political activities previously  in  Iran.  In  my
        judgement, it cannot be argued that he would be required  to  refer
        to political beliefs that two tribunals have held he did  not  hold
        and about activities in which two tribunals have held he was  never
        involved in. There is no requirement  for  him  to  'lie'  in  this
        regard unless he chooses to perpetuate the  untruthful  account  he
        has given in the UK. The appeal cannot therefore  succeed  on  this
        point.

    17. Second, in terms of his illegal exit from Iran, the reasons he gave
        for  leaving  were  found  to  be  untrue.   The  judge   correctly
        identifies  that  Kurdish   returnees   do   not   generally   face
        prosecution. That not only accords with the country  guidance,  but
        also SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053
        and paragraph 34 of  SSH  &  HR.  While  counsel  is  correct  that
        subsequent to the judge's determination a further country  guidance
        case has been issued, namely HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]  UKUT  00430
        (IAC), the judge was required to consider the law as it was on  the
        day. He cannot be criticised for not taking  into  account  a  case
        that had not been decided (per SA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State
        for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 683). As a result, no error
        of law arises. (I observe, but no more, one of the findings  in  HB
        included that  the  mere  fact  of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
        ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and  even  if  combined
        with illegal exit, did not create a risk of persecution or  Article
        3 ill-treatment.)

    18. Third, there is the issue of what he would say about  his  previous
        convictions,  in  particular  the  offence  of  being   drunk   and
        disorderly. In this regard, his convictions were accepted  by  both
        parties as being 'spent'. The judge found that the first was  dated
        27  February  2014  and  is  a  conviction  for  being  drunk   and
        disorderly, to which the appellant pleaded guilty and was  given  a
        six-month conditional discharge. The second is  dated  26  February
        2014 and was a conviction for failing to surrender to custody at an
        appointed time, for which the  appellant  pleaded  guilty  and  was
        given a six-month conditional discharge.

    19. This third element in terms of the expectation to  tell  the  truth
        ties in directly with the second ground of appeal,  namely  whether
        the Iranian authorities  would  become  aware  of  the  appellant's
        criminal record.

b. The Iranian authorities would become aware of  the  appellant's  criminal
record in the UK

    20. The judge summarises the argument before him as follows:


             65. The appellant's counsel submitted that the nature of  this
             offence is such that it would be taken very seriously in  Iran
             because it involved the drinking of alcohol. He submitted that
             whilst these offences are spent convictions, a point  made  by
             the respondent's representative (in that they do not  have  to
             be disclosed to prospective employers in the  UK),  they  will
             still remain on  the  appellant's  criminal  record  and  this
             record is something that the Iranian authorities could  obtain
             or find out about. My view is that given  that  these  records
             are strictly confidential except those with specific authority
             by which to obtain them and subject to data protection laws, I
             did not accept that it is likely that they would fall into the
             hands of the Iranian authorities.

    21. The latter point is accepted for the purposes of these proceedings.
        In her written submissions, counsel for the appellant  states  that
        it was not the appellant's case that the British authorities  would
        disclose his criminal record if returned to Iran,  rather  that  if
        returned he will be questioned and that questioning would  lead  to
        him revealing his activities in the United Kingdom,  including  his
        criminal record (and that because  one  of  the  offences  concerns
        alcohol, this would place the appellant at greater risk).


    22. On this point, the judge concluded that it seemed unlikely that the
        need to voluntarily mention his convictions would arise. The  judge
        states that he  does  not  agree  with  the  proposition  that  the
        appellant would be bound to tell the truth  and  thus  'reveal  all
        about his past' to the Iranian authorities.

    23. The force of this point rests on whether the  judge  was  right  in
        that conclusion.

    24. The appellant's representative relies upon the case of HJ (Iran)  v
        the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 231  and
        RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
        UKSC 38 as authority for the proposition that returnees  cannot  be
        forced to lie or act against their conscience.

    25. The above cases, and the case law that has developed from them,  is
        directed  towards  characteristics  or  statuses  that  either  the
        individual cannot change or cannot be expected  to  change  because
        they are so closely linked  to  his  or  her  identity  or  are  an
        expression of fundamental rights.


    26. The difficulty with the appellant's argument, as I see it, is  that
        the  above  cases  focus  on  what  may  be  classed  as  something
        altogether more deep-rooted than what I am being asked to consider.

    27. To be expected to lie about or conceal your sexuality or  political
        and religious beliefs or membership of a particular social group in
        order to avoid  persecution  is  established  to  be  a  breach  of
        Convention rights, such as the right to freedom of thought, opinion
        and expression. For my part, however, I do not see that as being on
        all fours with the issue of whether an individual  is  required  to
        disclose two  spent  convictions,  in  circumstances  where  it  is
        accepted that the only way the authorities will find out about said
        convictions are from the appellant himself.

    28. This gives rise to issues of fact. In the instant matter the  judge
        determined that the appellant would not be bound  to  make  such  a
        disclosure or alternatively reveal the whole truth about his past.

    29. I take the view that the judge has properly digested and dealt with
        the argument. The judge acknowledges the  appellant  has  a  memory
        problem. In terms of  the  appellant's  initial  recollection,  the
        judge noted that the appellant did not even think  he  had  such  a
        record, he thought he had been arrested on two occasions  but  'did
        not have any actual problems with the police'.


    30. It therefore appears to me that  the  analogy  with  HJ  (Iran)  is
        misplaced and that the judge was entitled to come to  the  view  he
        did on the previous convictions. I can find no requirement for  the
        appellant to disclose two spent convictions, even if  he  is  asked
        about them. I do not see this as impacting on the  appellant  being
        seen to be co-operating and providing information in other regards.

    31. As a result, I cannot criticise the judge for his approach  to  the
        Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  ('CPIN')  Iran:  Fear   of
        punishment  for  crimes  committed  in  other  countries   ('Double
        Jeopardy' or re-prosecution) (January 2018). His view was that  the
        information in  that  notice  was  unlikely  to  arise  because  he
        concluded the Iranians would not obtain details of the  appellant's
        offending. That was a matter for the judge, and I do not propose to
        interfere with that finding.


    32. Those representing the appellant also make reference  to  paragraph
        21 of SSH & H which states:


        21.  It is relevant at this point also to refer to the letter of 25
             February 2016 from Mr  Griffiths,  the  Assistant  Director  of
             Immigration Enforcement concerning the numbers of failed asylum
             seekers who have been returned  to  Iran.   ....  Mr  Griffiths
             asked various questions of the FCO Charg� d'Affaires in Tehran,
             and was told, following the matter having been raised with  the
             Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Social  Department,
             that Iranian  nationals  entering  Iran  on  a  laissez  passer
             usually face minimal formalities at  the  airport.   They  were
             required to fill in a form which took around  ten  minutes  and
             were then free to go.  He said they  would  not  be  questioned
             unless they had been involved in or suspected  of  having  been
             involved  in  a  crime  when  overseas.   He  did  not  respond
             specifically to such questions as whether there  is  a  special
             court at Tehran Airport to deal with undocumented returnees and
             whether there are lengthy investigations into  returnees  which
             would  involve  them   being   bailed   or   imprisoned   while
             investigation takes place.  It may be that the  latter  can  be
             seen to have been dealt with implicitly in the response.

    33. The judge does not see this as being an issue as he does not accept
        that the appellant would  be  required  to  disclose  his  criminal
        convictions. Further, the tribunal in SSH &HR does not  develop  Mr
        Griffiths observations. It finds that returnees are  likely  to  be
        questioned. It does not make specific findings as to what  type  of
        questions they may be asked, other than it will be dependent on the
        case. In my view,  it  is  unclear  what  the  reference  to  being
        'involved in a crime when overseas' relates. If it is  a  reference
        to criminal activity while overseas that is perceived to be against
        the Iranian regime, such as propaganda against the State or against
        its national security, then that would be different to it  being  a
        reference to simply any crime committed  when  overseas.  Later  in
        SSH&H  (para  29)  the  tribunal  notes  remarks  made  by   Iran's
        Prosecutor General in 2011 that Iranians who have committed a crime
        outside the country while abroad and  act  against  their  national
        security could be prosecuted.  That is not the situation here and I
        decline to speculate further.

    34. Nor am I persuaded that counsel's submissions on the pinch-point in
        terms of entry into Iran adds anything in relation  to  a  material
        error of law or approach. While counsel is correct to suggest  that
        in AB& Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran  [2015]
        UKUT 00257 (IAC), there  is  reference  to  the  act  of  returning
        someone creating a pinch-point, so that returnees are brought  into
        direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both the  time
        and inclination to interrogate them; that was  in  the  context  of
        people who engaged in internet (and political)  activity.  That  is
        not the case in this matter. There is no finding that the appellant
        was involved in Kurdish political activities or  supported  Kurdish
        rights and there  is  no  proper  reason  to  assume  he  would  be
        perceived to be.

    35. As a result, I can find no material error of  law  on  this  second
        ground.

    c. failing to properly consider the combined risk factors

    36. The final part of this appeal rests on whether the judge  dealt  in
        an appropriate and adequate way  with  the  cumulative  aspects  of
        whether the appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
        ('reasonable likelihood of persecution' per R v Secretary of  State
        for the Home Department ex parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958).


    37. The issue in the instant matter is  of  risk  on  return  following
        illegal exit from Iran, being of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  having  been
        convicted in the UK and now being a failed asylum seeker.  Risk  in
        relation to these matters should be addressed both  separately  and
        cumulatively.

    38. Having considered the determination in the round, it appears to  me
        that the judge has gone to some lengths to deal with the  arguments
        that arose, giving a reasoned explanation for why each  failed  and
        why a real risk of serious harm did not arise. The judge  considers
        country guidance in relation to Iran: Kurds and  Kurdish  political
        groups -July 2016, and CG Iran: illegal exit version 4.0 July 2016,
        together with the other guidance and information referred to in his
        decision.  I reject the assertion that  the  judge  has  failed  to
        follow the  case  of  SSH  &  HR  (which  reinforces  that  Kurdish
        ethnicity might be an exacerbating factor for a returnee  otherwise
        of interest).  The judge makes extensive references to  that  case,
        takes proper account of the appellant's status as a Kurd and failed
        asylum seeker, acknowledges the appellant  will  be  questioned  on
        return and considers appropriately the case law in relation to risk
        on return.

    39. As part of this exercise, the judge was entitled  to  consider  the
        previous asylum  claim;  that  no  political  activities  had  been
        identified; that the appellant had a low profile in Iran; that  his
        Kurdish ethnicity had been considered previously; that more  recent
        guidance suggested that illegal departure alone would not be enough
        to  place  him  at  risk;  that  in  general,  returnees  were  not
        prosecuted for illegal exit; and that there were  voluntary  return
        schemes available that would not place an individual at risk.

    40. The judge has appropriately noted that the previous tribunal  found
        the appellant to have fabricated his claim to  be  associated  with
        the Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan ('PJAK') and had embellished
        at least one incident in relation to a stop, which the judge found,
        on the evidence, meant it was  unlikely  he  had  been  stopped  by
        soldiers with regard to smuggling alcohol  and  cigarettes,  (going
        further than the original judge had in 2010).

    41. The judge disbelieved the appellant's claim  that  the  authorities
        went to his parents' home. He concluded  that  the  appellant  came
        from a poor farming family, which had no political involvement.  It
        is plain that the judge viewed elements of the appellant's evidence
        with scepticism, as had the previous tribunal.

    42. The judge acknowledges that Kurds in Iran  face  discrimination  by
        reference  to  the  county  guidance  available  to  him  and  that
        ethnicity was a risk factor, particularly  for  those  involved  in
        Kurdish political activities (which he  found  this  appellant  was
        not).

    43. The judge adequately deals with the expert evidence. The judge does
        not refuse this claim on the basis of the reports being generic, or
        for that matter on the reports alone. There is  far  more  to  this
        claim than that. He considers those reports as one element  of  the
        evidence before him,  simply  noting  that  they  are  generic,  as
        opposed to being appellant specific. He prefers the  reasons  given
        by the respondent in this respect.  That was a matter for the judge
        and I cannot say that he erred in so doing.

    44. It is apparent from, amongst others, paragraphs 89 and  90  of  the
        decision, that the judge had all relevant factors in mind  and  was
        assessing them both individually and collectively.


    45. As a result, I  reject  any  suggestion  that  the  judge  did  not
        approach this exercise cumulatively or with regard to the  relevant
        law or country guidance. The evidence was highly fact specific  and
        it appears to me the judge has considered the  various  aspects  of
        this claim with anxious scrutiny, including the  passage  of  time,
        finding, as the judge was entitled to do,  that  the  risk  factors
        were not made out.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Taylor House,  London  on
21 August 2018 under reference PA/01423/2018 is upheld.

The anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved  in
this appeal.

Signed                                                                 [pic]
                  Date 2 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

