
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01421/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th October 2016                 |On 9th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    H M R
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel instructed by Krisinth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    M S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  24th  February  1967.
    She applies, with permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Reid, dismissing her appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    protection  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   That
    decision was dated 29th January 2016.

 2. The grounds for permission were various and at the  outset  noted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a number of positive credibility
    findings accepting the appellant's account of  coming  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities  in  2008  after  she  the  appellant  had
    accommodated someone who had been linked to the LTTE.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted her mistreatment in  2008  and  her  subsequent
    release on reporting conditions.  The judge further accepted  that  the
    appellant had been stopped on return to Sri Lanka in 2013. He  did  not
    accept that she had been detained for five days.

 3. I address each ground of challenge in turn. Ms  Walker  relied  on  and
    expanded on each of the written grounds. Mr  Kotas  identified  that  a
    reading of the decision as a whole, effectively answered the grounds.

 4. First, the grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings
    at paragraph 34 were confused and unreasonable.  It was unclear why the
    absence of any further medical evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    overnight hospital admission and lack of further treatment affected the
    credibility of her claim to have been detained for  a  period  of  five
    days.  The judge was not a qualified medical professional and the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning at paragraph 34 was flawed.

 5. Mr Kotas' response was that it was  open  to  the  judge  to  make  the
    findings he did.  The judge was surprised there was no follow-up  after
    a five day detention. That in part explained his approach. The findings
    of the judge had to be viewed in the light of the whole  determination.
    Reading paragraph 34 as a whole, it is clear that the judge found there
    was no evidence of the appellant being kept in hospital "as claimed for
    two days", only of some medical tests.

 6. I find that there is no error of law in respect of the judge's approach
    at paragraph 34. It is clear from the findings that the judge  found  a
    discrepancy between the claimed doctor's advice and her accessing  care
    once back in the United Kingdom  which  "she  did  not  do  so  on  her
    return".  The judge also noted that there were "no details of any tests
    or treatment in the period after her return in October 2013 being noted
    in the GP printout page".  It  was  open  to  the  judge  to  find  the
    credibility as to the circumstances and length of the claimed detention
    as distinct from the questioning on entry.  The judge clearly had issue
    with the length of detention as claimed by the  appellant,  that  being
    five days, as a significant period and  the  minimal  medical  evidence
    despite the fact  that  she  was  ostensibly  released  from  detention
    because of her medical condition.  Evidently the judge did  not  accept
    the circumstances of her detention and this is clear from paragraph  36
    where the judge specifically found that she may  have  been  questioned
    but that she was not detained for the length of time that  she  claimed
    and such that she was in fact of no interest to the authorities.

 7. The judge at [36] noted  that  the  appellant  remained  in  Sri  Lanka
    between 13th October 2013 when she claims she was released  and  stayed
    on until 21st October 2013, despite being told "in no uncertain  terms"
    that she should return to the police station after being discharged  by
    the hospital and was said to have agreed to do so. She did not and  the
    judge quoted directly from the appellant's interview  statement  handed
    in during her asylum interview.  This clearly affects  the  appellant's
    credibility.

 8. As the judge noted, the cousin was not contacted  during  the  days  or
    weeks after she was released and he was never contacted  at  all.   The
    judge clearly found it not credible that the police did not monitor  or
    check up on her after releasing her and did not retain her passport  or
    put in place any arrangements to stop her if she tried  to  leave.   It
    was open to the judge to find that the appellant was therefore  not  of
    significant interest to the authorities and not detained for five  days
    as she claimed.

 9.  The judge also noted that the  appellant's  cousin  could  have  given
    evidence about the claimed five day detention but had not done so,  and
    noted at paragraph 37 that the appellant was able to continue with  her
    visit to see her stepmother in hospital before returning to the  UK  on
    the originally planned date, not  having  cut  short  the  visit  after
    having been questioned and "not in turn being excessively worried about
    being able to leave as planned to return to her daughter and husband in
    the UK".  The judge also noted  that  the  increase  in  mental  health
    symptoms did not come on after this visit but later in  the  summer  in
    2015.

10. The fact is that the appellant's account of her detention and the  fact
    it was her detention that had caused chest pains,  was  not  consistent
    with the tests in Sri Lanka  which  as  the  judge  stated  'raised  no
    concerns', and her actions of  not  consulting  any  doctor  after  her
    return to the UK.  Indeed the medical evidence following a claimed five
    day detention and an overnight in  hospital  is  simply  two  pages  of
    photocopied pictures with the appellnt's name, the date and a  doctor's
    rather than a hospital stamp.  Effectively the judge  did  not  accept,
    although she may have had tests for chest  pains,  that  she  had  been
    necessarily detained.

11. When reading the decision in this respect overall, the judge  does  not
    assume the role of  a  medical  practitioner  but  makes  relevant  and
    pertinent observations about the tests themselves, the appellant's  own
    accepted conduct and her own interview  statement  [at  36]  after  her
    claimed detention which she asserted caused her medical problems.

12. The next ground of appeal was on the basis that the judge had erred  in
    finding it implausible that the appellant would have been detained  and
    interrogated about the involvement in diaspora activities  as  she  had
    not been involved in any such activities.  The judge, it was  asserted,
    had failed to consider the plausibility of  the  appellant's  claim  to
    have been perceived to be involved in diaspora activities in the UK  in
    view of her  past  profile.   It  was  apparent  from  the  appellant's
    evidence that the authorities who detained and questioned her  in  2013
    were fully aware of her previous  detention  and  she  was  also  asked
    further questions in relation to this as well.  The judge  should  have
    considered the relevance of her  past  profile  and  whether  this  was
    capable of having an impact on how she might be perceived.

13.  That challenge is not sustainable. The judge's findings must  be  seen
    in the light of the conclusions later in the decision.  At paragraph 33
    it is  clear  that  the  judge  does  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    questioned about possible LTTE sympathies and  that  it  was  plausible
    that "she was questioned because previously  detained  in  2008".   The
    judge noted that in her witness statement the  appellant  related  that
    the focus of the questioning appeared to have been in the activities in
    the UK in support of the LTTE which indeed she had never been  involved
    in.  The judge accepted that the past was relevant as to why she  might
    be accused of LTTE activities in the UK.

14. It was open to the judge to find that as the  appellant  had  not  been
    involved in any activity in the UK that she would be not of interest to
    the  appellant  on  that  ground,  but  specifically  the  findings  at
    paragraph 36 and 37, and to which I have  referred  to  above,  confirm
    that the judge concluded that the appellant did  not  leave  Sri  Lanka
    immediately after her release and proceeded about her  business  seeing
    her stepmother in hospital and  departed  on  the  date  that  she  had
    originally planned.  This pointed  to  the  actual  perceived  risk  or
    otherwise from past involvement.  The  judge  did  not  accept  on  the
    evidence as a whole from the appellant but did take  into  account  how
    the authorities might perceive the appellant from any past and  current
    activity.

15. Ground 3 was that the judge erred in the finding at paragraph  38  with
    regard to the approach to the appellant's failure to claim asylum after
    her return to the UK in October 2013.  The grounds refer to the judge's
    acceptance at paragraph 24 that "given the appellant had not  told  her
    husband specifically about the  sexual  abuse  at  the  time",  it  was
    plausible for the appellant after her 2008 detention "to  find  another
    route out of Sri Lanka by applying for a student visa rather than  just
    leaving  and  applying  for  asylum  at  that  time".   The  judge  was
    criticised on the basis that the  judge  had  accepted  that  to  be  a
    plausible explanation for the appellant's actions following her  escape
    from detention previously but did not  accept  her  explanation  for  a
    later behaviour following 2013, and it was unreasonable for  the  judge
    then to proceed to find that the appellant's subsequent delay in making
    her claim for asylum damaged her credibility.  The judge did not engage
    with the appellant's explanation for delaying.  The Human Rights  Watch
    Report, as Ms Walker submitted in the hearing before me, indicated  the
    difficulties appellants had with sexual abuse and being able  to  relay
    those concerns to others.

16. I find this has no traction at all.  At paragraph 24 the  judge  states
    that although the appellant had not told her husband about  the  sexual
    abuse, but she had told him about being arrested, and  that  conclusion
    further was couched in the observation that the appellant  was  seeking
    to find another route out of  Sri  Lanka.  It  did  not  refer  to  the
    appellant's removal from the UK.  In this instance,  and  at  paragraph
    38, the judge found that  the  appellant  claimed  she  was  after  the
    claimed 2013 detention "now faced  (on  her  account)  with  the  stark
    reality that she was still of interest particularly now  that  she  had
    been in the UK and was now also accused  of  diaspora  activities"  and
    that "she knew her previous two periods of leave in  the  UK  had  been
    time limited and would have known  that  any  entrepreneur  application
    would also initially be time limited or in  fact  might  not  succeed".
    The situation was very different.

17. Moreover, the fact is that the appellant had  related  to  her  husband
    that she had been arrested previously.  There was  no  indication  that
    there was sexual abuse in the claimed five day detention and no  reason
    given that, why the appellant, as the judge found, did not apply as  an
    asylum seeker in June 2014 when her post-study visa expired but instead
    applied as an entrepreneur and not for asylum, albeit that she knew the
    consequences.  This was  not  the  appellant  "trying  to  continue  as
    normally as she could in her then situation"  as  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 25, and, whilst the appellant was in Sri  Lanka,  but,  in  a
    totally different context  of  the  appellant  being  in  the  UK,  and
    further, having already advised her husband that she  had  indeed  been
    arrested.

18. In ground 4 the judge is criticised at paragraph 39 of the decision for
    attaching adverse weight  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not
    previously disclose at the  time  of  her  asylum  interview  that  the
    authorities had been looking for  her  after  her  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.  It was submitted that the appellant did not specify when it was
    that she was told that the authorities were looking for  her  and  thus
    should not be criticised for not mentioning it earlier.

19. I find there is no merit in this ground as the appellant states herself
    "since I have been back in the UK I have spoken with my cousin  on  the
    phone and she has told me that the authorities have been  back  to  the
    house where I used to live".  Not only does this refer to  a  timescale
    of "since" being back in the UK, which would indicate that  the  cousin
    has told her over a period of time, but it  is  for  the  appellant  to
    prove her case and it was open to the judge to find that the  appellant
    had not mentioned this in her interview statement or even in her asylum
    interview and only mentioning it at the time of seeing Dr Lawrence. The
    judge does not have to give reasons for  reasons.   Not  only  did  the
    judge criticise the appellant for  failing  to  produce  this  evidence
    earlier, but also criticised her for failing to produce  evidence  from
    anyone else that these visits were indeed made and certainly the cousin
    had not been contacted.  The judge therefore rejected the claim of  the
    visits on more than one ground.

20. I turn to the next ground criticising the judge's finding that  because
    there were only 'several'  visits  made  between  2013  and  2016  that
    indicated that  the  appellant  was  not  really  being  of  any  "real
    interest" and the judge made  an  artificial  distinction  between  the
    authorities wanting to make further enquiries  and  of  being  of  real
    interest.  It was contended that if there had been any  visits  by  the
    authorities to the appellant's previous address,  this  was  of  itself
    enough to suggest the appellant was  of  sufficient  adverse  interest.
    The difficulty with this submission is that the judge had clearly found
    that he disbelieved the appellant on this ground at  paragraph  39  and
    even therefore if there were a distinction  to  be  made,  it  was  not
    material.

21. The last ground was that the judge erred in findings on the credibility
    of the appellant's account of  detention  on  her  return  in  2013  by
    failing to give  any  consideration  to  the  contents  of  the  expert
    psychiatric report as relevant to  these  aspects  of  the  claim.   Dr
    Lawrence's report was given weight in relation to  the  2008  detention
    and the judge accepts the diagnosis of Dr Lawrence that she was clearly
    very afraid to return Sri Lanka.

22. The assessment of the psychiatric report is  open  to  the  Immigration
    Judge and the credibility findings are a matter for the judge.   It  is
    clear that the judge has given weight to the report of Dr Lawrence  and
    the judge generously noted that whilst the appellant  did  not  have  a
    diagnosis of depression until October 2015, it was not always the  case
    that people reacted immediately to traumatic  events,  [paragraph  22].
    That said,  the  judge  had  given  copious  and  ample  reasoning  for
    rejecting the account of the appellant that she was detained at  length
    in 2013 and of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities for  the  reasons
    given by the judge at paragraphs 37 and 38.

23. The judge gave a series of  findings,  not  least  that  the  appellant
    returned  three  times  to  Sri  Lanka  since  2008,  had   effectively
    exaggerated any claimed detention in 2013 and indeed had failed to make
    a claim for asylum prior to the expiry of her post-study  visa,  albeit
    that she claimed at that time that she was fully aware that she was  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities following her claimed  detention
    in October 2013 and that she had failed to  make  any  mention  of  the
    visits since being back in the UK in October 2013.  As pointed  out  by
    Mr Justice Ouseley (as he then was) in HE (Crediblity  and  Psychiatric
    Reports - DRC) 2004 UKIAT 00321, the part which  a  psychiatric  report
    can play in assisting the assessment  of  crediblity  is  usually  very
    limited... in any event and importantly the report is unlikely to  have
    considered other causes for what has  been  observed  or  the  possible
    diagnosis, if any, if the history is untrue'.

24. On an overall reading of this determination, and  what  is  a  critical
    finding by the judge, is that the appellant remained in Sri Lanka after
    her said detention for nearly two weeks while at the same time  failing
    to report which is what was said to have been  demanded  of  her.  That
    behaviour is entirely inconsistent with being at risk. It was therefore
    open to the judge to place the weight on the report of Dr Lawrence that
    he did.

25. I find that there was no speculation by the judge in relation  to  this
    decision and it was a carefully and comprehensively  reasoned  decision
    accepting certain aspects of the appellant's claim but rejecting others
    and that the judge is open to do.

26. There is no material error of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands
    decision and the decision shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date Signed 8th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
