
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/01037/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th December 2017                         |                              |
|                                              |On 23rd January 2018          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                mr Iya Cisse


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Non-appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Guinea born in 1984 who sought  to  claim
    asylum on the basis that he was homosexual and Christian and  therefore
    at risk of persecution if returned to Guinea.
2.   In a decision of 18th January 2017 the respondent rejected that  claim.
     The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, which appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hudson  on  2nd  March  2017.   In  a
    determination  dated  14th  March  2017  the  appellant's  appeal   was
    dismissed, the Judge concluding that the appellant was  not  homosexual
    nor indeed a Christian nor was he at risk upon return on any basis.

3.   In the course of the hearing it  was  made  clear  that  the  appellant
    suffered from  hepatitis  B  and  was  receiving  treatment  under  the
    National Health Service for that condition.  It was raised as  being  a
    factor which would prevent him from working were he to be  returned  to
    Guinea and thus expose him to hardship and deprivation.

4.   The appellant, through the grounds of appeal sought to argue  that  his
    chronic hepatitis was such as  to  entitle  protection.   Although  the
    Judge had applied N v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
    UKHL 31 he said that the Judge erred in law in failing  to  follow  and
    apply Paposhvili v Belgium - 41738/10 [2016] ECHR 1113, a  decision  of
    13th December 2016 which imposes a much lower threshold than does N  so
    that the First-tier Tribunal might have reached a different  conclusion
    if it had applied Paposhvili.

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on that  limited
    basis.

6.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.  The  appellant
    did not attend.  Seemingly he is no longer represented  by  his  former
    solicitors.  He has moved from the  area  with  NASS  support  but  his
    current whereabouts are unknown.  The appellant  has  done  nothing  to
    notify the Tribunal as to his current address.

7.   In those circumstances it is in the interest of justice to  proceed  to
    determine the appeal.

8.   As I have indicated the Judge did not believe that  the  appellant  was
    homosexual or a Christian and that has not been  a  finding  challenged
    specifically by the appellant in his grounds.  The narrow  point  being
    the applicability of Paposhvili.

9.   That matter can be dealt with quickly because the  Upper  Tribunal,  in
    the decision EA & Others (Article 3  medical  cases  -  Paposhvili  not
    applicable) [2017] UKUT 00445 IAC) , stated in terms that the  test  in
    Paposhvili is not one which is open to the Tribunal to apply by  reason
    of its being contrary to judicial precedent.

10.  The precise arguments  which  were  raised  by  the  appellant  in  his
    grounds of appeal were those considered by the Upper Tribunal in  EA  &
    Others.  It is the decision to be  followed.   In  those  circumstances
    this appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.   The  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand namely that the appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed on asylum grounds; on humanitarian protection grounds  and
    on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.






[pic]

Signed                                  Date 19 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


