
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01480/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 9 May 2017                       |On 24 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     PQ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton of the Specialist Appeals Team

  Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
                            Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Vietnamese national  born  in  April  1999.   On  27
    September 2014 he clandestinely entered the United Kingdom and the next
    day claimed asylum as an unaccompanied minor.  The  following  day  the
    local social services conducted an age assessment and decided he was an
    adult.   When  advised  of  this  on  the  same  day  he  absconded  in
    consequence of which his asylum  claim  was  considered  to  have  been
    abandoned.  Some eleven months later  the  Appellant  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of cultivating cannabis in respect of which no further action
    was taken.  He was then accepted  into  the  detained  asylum  process.
    When interviewed he claimed to  be  a  victim  of  trafficking  and  in
    September  2015  the  Competent  Authority  determined  there  were  no
    reasonable grounds to show that he was a  trafficking  victim  and  his
    asylum claim was refused.

Hearing History

 2. The Appellant was unrepresented at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  of
    his appeal. The substance of his claim is found at paragraphs  7-12  of
    the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Rothwell  promulgated
    on 8 January 2016.  The Appellant continued to be detained and  it  was
    not until 8 April 2016 at a detention advice surgery that  he  obtained
    legal advice and instruct his solicitors.

 3. They then lodged an out  of  time  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  On 27 April 2016 Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Manuell  extended  time  but  refused  permission   to   appeal.    The
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on 1 April 2016 Upper
    Judge Gill granted permission to appeal because it was  arguable  Judge
    Rothwell may have erred in law in her assessments  of  credibility  and
    future risk.

 4. By a judgment in judicial review proceedings handed down on 22 February
    2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek found the Appellant's date of birth
    to be as he claimed and that he was a minor.  He attained his  majority
    shortly before the hearing before me.

 5. The evidence before Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek included two  expert
    reports and oral testimony from  Dr  Juliet  Cohen,  a  well-known  and
    highly respected expert in this jurisdiction and an expert  report  and
    oral testimony from Ms Christine Beddoe, a specialist advisor on  human
    trafficking and child exploitation as well  as  a  statement  and  oral
    testimony from Ms Helen  Joyce  a  project  worker  at  the  Children's
    Society, and three statements signed by the Appellant  on  6  July,  12
    October and 5 December 2016.

 6. At the hearing, Mr Norton for the  Respondent  produced  a  copy  of  a
    letter of 2 May 2017 from the Respondent to  the  Appellant  confirming
    that the Competent Authority had made a  conclusive  finding  that  the
    Appellant is a victim of trafficking.



The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 7. The Appellant was unrepresented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Judge in the  absence  of  any  evidence  other  than  the  Appellant's
    assertions properly relied on the age assessment of  the  local  social
    services.  She noted he had  not  claimed  asylum  in  France  and  had
    absconded from social services.  In the  circumstances  she  found  the
    presumption contained in  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2014  militated   against   his
    credibility.  She did not accept his  account  of  the  deaths  of  his
    mother when he was young and of his father later  in  a  road  accident
    caused probably  by  his  drinking.   This  led  her  to  conclude  the
    Appellant would not be at risk from any gang in Vietnam on  account  of
    any liabilities for payment of  debts  incurred  by  his  father.   She
    accepted the Appellant had lived with his grandmother in  France  until
    her death and that he was the victim of forced labour in  the  form  of
    debt bondage arising from circumstances on or subsequent to his arrival
    in France.  She did not accept his claims to have been  trafficked  out
    of Vietnam or to be at risk on return.  She  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on all grounds.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 8. In the light of the judgment of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  in  the
    challenge to the age assessment by the local social services I find the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  that  the
    Appellant was not a minor and her adverse credibility findings  relying
    on the presumption he was an adult are sufficiently unsafe as to amount
    to a material error of law.

 9. Conscious  of  the  considerable  time  which  has  elapsed  since  the
    Respondent's refusal decision, the prolonged detention of the Appellant
    as both a minor and a victim of trafficking and having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I asked the parties if there was any objection to
    my proceeding to deal with the substantive appeal and re-making of  the
    decision.  Neither had any objection.

Findings and Consideration

10. I take account of the criticisms, highlighted by Mr Norton, made of  Dr
    Cohen and Ms Beddoe in the judgment of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    at paragraphs 297-310 and also that the substance of  the  findings  of
    each of them was accepted.

11. I am satisfied to the lower standard of proof that  the  Appellant  has
    been the victim of trafficking in France and into  the  United  Kingdom
    and, on the evidence recorded by Dr Cohen, a victim of sexual abuse  in
    France.

12. I enquired what  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal  constituted  the
    relevant Particular Social Group (PSG)  for  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention claim. I indicated that in respect  of  the  return  of  the
    Appellant to Vietnam I had difficulty in  immediately  identifying  the
    relevant PSG.  The Appellant's account of  debt  bondage  and  fear  of
    persecution in Vietnam had been found not credible and he had been  the
    victim of trafficking and sexual abuse outside Vietnam.  Ms Moffatt for
    the Appellant did not seek seriously to identify a relevant PSG.

13. Looking at the evidence in the round, I find to the lower standard that
    the Appellant will be at risk of serious harm on return to  Vietnam  by
    reason of his extreme vulnerability evidenced by the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the expert evidence, even after taking  account
    of the fact that the Appellant is now a few weeks over the age  of  18.
    The appeal is allowed on humanitarian  protection  grounds  by  way  of
    reference  to  Article  15(b)  of  the  old   Qualification   Directive
    (2004/83/EC) and paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  For  similar
    reasons, the Appellant succeeds on his claim that his return to Vietnam
    would place the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  its  obligations  under
    Article 3 of the European Convention.

Anonymity

14. The anonymity direction and anonymization order made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal is continued but I have adopted the anonymising initials  used
    by the Upper Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside to  a  limited  extent.   The  following  decision
    substituted:-


    The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).


Signed/Official Crest  Date 12. v. 2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid and so no fee award can be made.

Signed/Official Crest  Date 12. v. 2017


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

