
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/01217/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th December 2017                |On 15th January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     OAA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Akindele (Solicitor, Defank Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's application for asylum was made on the 29th of July 2016
   and rejected by the Secretary of State for the reasons given in the
   Refusal Letter of the . The Appellant's appeal against that decision was
   heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill at Manchester on the 10th of
   March 2017 and dismissed for the reasons given in the decision
   promulgated on the 28th of March 2017. The Appellant sought permission to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted on the 31st of
   July 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had not given
   adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant's account was not
   credible or why there would be adequate protection for the Appellant on
   return.

2. The Judge's findings on credibility are set out in paragraphs 22 to 42
   of the decision. The Judge noted the adverse findings made by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Narayan in the Appellant's appeal in December 2014. The
   Appellant had not claimed asylum until after that decision and the Judge
   had regard to the Appellant's remaining in Nigeria for 6 years after the
   claimed danger arose. The Appellant's explanation for the delay in
   claiming asylum was rejected.

3. Sufficiency of protection was considered in paragraphs 37 to 43. The
   Judge found that the objective evidence did not show that there was a
   generalised of specific risk to the Appellant or her children from
   kidnappers or Boko Haram in Nigeria. The Judge also found that relocation
   within Nigeria was an option.

4. At the hearing the representatives made submissions in line with their
   respective cases. These are set out in the Record of Proceedings and
   referred to where relevant below. Clearly Devaseelan applied and the
   findings of Judge Narayan were the starting point for the consideration
   of the evidence in this appeal. In the decision of Judge Narayan the
   position of the Appellant and her 2 children were specifically raised and
   considered.


5. The Judge noted the evidence of the Appellant in regard to working in
   Nigeria, an area where he could have departed from the findings of Judge
   Narayan but as was noted at paragraph 25 the Appellant did not give
   straightforward answers and was evasive. The Appellant's case had to be
   assessed against the background of her delay in leaving Nigeria, the
   previous findings and the delay in making this claim. Mr Akindele's
   submission that the previous credibility findings were not material is in
   my view simply wrong, the Judge had to assess the credibility of the
   Appellant on the basis of her previous conduct and having been found to
   have given unreliable evidence that was a factor that would count against
   her.


6. Paragraphs 32 to 36 come under the heading "Global assessment of
   evidence". That title is misleading as the preceding paragraphs from
   paragraph 21 onwards were headed "Findings of facts and reasons" and that
   is where the bulk of the Judge's assessment is to be found.


7. The complaint that the Judge had not considered the position of the
   children is misleading to some extent. This was a point covered by Judge
   Narayan and in rejecting the Appellant's asylum claim the same
   considerations would apply, there was no evidence that showed that
   circumstances were materially different if they were to be returned now.
   Mr Akindele did not point to any evidence that would suggest that the
   Appellant could not live in an area not under the influence of Boko
   Haram.


8. Given the previous findings made by Judge Narayan which were the
   starting point for the consideration of the Appellant's case the Judge
   approached the task correctly. Evidence was received on the issue that
   Judge Narayan had considered and there was clearly nothing reliable in
   the Judge's view to justify departing from his findings. The delay in
   leaving Nigeria was a point that was properly considered and the Judge
   was obliged to consider the delay in claiming in the UK. The failure to
   raise the issue before Judge Narayan was significant and the findings in
   paragraphs 28 to 31 justified.


9. The decision had to be read as a whole having regard to the Appellant's
   history and experience of the immigration system along with that of her
   family. The decision has to be read as a whole without taking matters out
   of context. The Judge was right to observe that there was no evidence to
   show that the Appellant and her daughters could return to Nigeria and
   that it would be reasonable to expect them to do so.


10. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 27 gave made
   the following observations: "Decisions of tribunals should not become
   formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.
   Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to
   mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of Appeal or elsewhere
   will rarely prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v
   Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the
   assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew
   how he should perform his functions and which matters he should take into
   account". He added that an "appellate court should resist the temptation
   to subvert the principle that they should not substitute their own
   discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which
   enables them to claim that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some
   principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not
   need to be recited. For example, it would be surprising to see in every
   civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof;
   or in every running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
   negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
   reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
   correct legal test to any question it is deciding."

  11. With that guidance in mind I am satisfied that the decision showed
      that the Judge was fully aware of what had to be considered and the
      relevant factors to be taken into account. The decision shows that the
      Appellant was not believed in relation to the core of the account and
      why that was so and that there was no evidence show that she and her
      children could not reasonably return to Nigeria. The decision was open
      to the Judge for the reasons given and is not affected by any error of
      law, the decision of Judge Shergill stands as the disposal of the
      appeal in this case.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 12 January 2018

