
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01642/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               NIGHIA TRUNG LE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss L Irvine, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gillespie, dismissing his deportation  appeal.   He  was  granted
    permission by the FtT, "limited to the paragraph 398 grounds".  He  did
    not apply further for permission.

 2. The appellant's case was  lucidly  set  out  in  a  note  and  in  oral
    submissions by Miss Irvine.  Reduced to its essence, the appellant says
    that the judge failed to consider article 8 of the ECHR,  section  117C
    of the 2002 Act, or paragraph 398 of the immigration  rules  (paragraph
    13 of the note), and that the decision should be remade in his  favour,
    based upon an expert report.   The  appellant's  receipt  of  documents
    stolen from the Vietnamese government, dating back to his grandfather's
    problems with that government, exposed him to risks including detention
    without charge, torture, and  prosecution  for  acquisition  of  secret
    documents on military activities;  or  at  least  to  problems  through
    stigma  derived  from  his  grandfather's  convictions  and   his   own
    conviction in the UK, the  negative  attitudes  of  Vietnamese  society
    towards criminals, and difficulty in  securing  official  registration,
    and  consequently  in  securing  employment.   These  constituted  very
    compelling circumstances in terms of paragraph 398 of the  rules,  over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

 3. Mr Matthews submitted thus.  The case in the FtT was put under articles
    3 and 8.  The judge correctly rejected the case under article 3,  which
    was argued on the basis that the government might target  him  for  his
    family links.  The judge did appear to have proceeded on the basis that
    the documents produced were  genuine,  but  plainly  rejected  as  far-
    fetched the appellant's account that he was  instrumental  in  recently
    having them stolen.  Rather, the judge sensibly explained at  paragraph
    26 why he found that the documents were  in  prior  possession  of  his
    relatives  in  Germany.   The  expert  report  was  predicated  on  the
    appellant being responsible for  stealing  the  documents  and  on  the
    Vietnamese authorities being aware of that.  Once that  assumption  was
    removed by the judge's findings, any significance of  the  report  fell
    away.  Permission had not been  granted  on  grounds  directed  against
    those findings, and in any event there was no substance in the  grounds
    on which permission had been refused.  There was no basis on which  the
    appellant was likely to  be  prosecuted,  tortured  or  otherwise  ill-
    treated for  betrayal  of  state  secrets.   The  report  made  further
    assumptions which it failed to justify.  The appellant had not  claimed
    to engage in any political opposition from abroad.  The author did  not
    justify  by  source  references  her   views   on   difficulties   over
    registration and employment.  The judge did not accept that the  family
    would  suffer  serious  adversity   over   thirty   years   after   the
    grandfather's imprisonment and found that other difficulties alluded to
    in the expert report regarding employment and residential  registration
    were "not of such  a  serious  order  as  to  engage  article  3  ECHR"
    (paragraph 29).  The judge did not separately explain the outcome  with
    reference to article 8, but that  had  to  be  the  same.   There  were
    plainly no very compelling circumstances.

 4. Miss Irvine in reply said that the respondent's  argument  depended  on
    rejection of how the appellant came by the documents, but the basis  of
    the  appellant's  problem  was  simply  possession  of  the  documents,
    regardless  of  how  they  were  obtained.   She  also  said  that  the
    respondent was not entitled now  to  raise  criticisms  of  the  expert
    report which had not been made in the FtT.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. I think the expert's qualifications are sufficient to  give  credit  to
    what she says about matters such as the registration system in Vietnam.
     However,  I  do  not  find  anything  in  those  matters  which  bears
    significantly on the outcome.

 7. It might not be apt for the respondent to develop new criticisms of the
    expert report as a  way  of  supporting  the  FtT  decision,  but  such
    comments become open if the stage of remaking the decision is  reached,
    or as alternative submissions.

 8. There is no reason to think that the Vietnamese authorities would  take
    any interest at all in the appellant over  documents  relating  to  his
    grandfather's long-ago trial, if he did not come by them as he claimed.
     That part of the judge's findings is not open to attack,  and  in  any
    event his reasons are sensible.

 9. Whether the threshold for article 3 risk and the threshold for  article
    8 in terms of very compelling circumstances is exactly the same, I need
    not decide.  It is sufficient to note that it is  a  deliberately  high
    test, and that for the same reasons as the judge gave  when  dismissing
    the case under article 8, this case inevitably failed  under  paragraph
    398.  The judge may not have needed to say any more in the end than  he
    did, that the appeal was  dismissed  also  "against  deportation";  but
    there should ideally have been before  that  express  consideration  by
    reference to article 8 of the ECHR, section 117C of the 2002  Act,  and
    paragraph 398  of  the  immigration  rules,  as  in  the  framework  of
    counsel's note.

10. The criticism is a counsel of perfection.  I see no need to  set  aside
    and remake the decision.  If there had been, I would have no difficulty
    in  holding  that  the  appellant  has  shown  no  problems  he   might
    realistically encounter in Vietnam which even  approach  the  level  of
    very compelling circumstances, so as  to  outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in his deportation as a foreign criminal.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            26 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




