
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01600/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 April 2019                   |On 14 May 2019                     |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                    [K S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Fountain,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 10 October 1999.
         He is now 19 years old but arrived in the United Kingdom in October
         2015 having left Iraq in about September 2015  when  he  was  still
         only 15 years old. He appeals against the determination  of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal  promulgated  on  17  August  2018
         dismissing his appeal against the refusal of the Secretary of State
         made on 12 January 2018 to grant him further leave to remain.

      2. It is accepted that the appellant is an Iraqi national  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity. The appellant claimed that, in 2015, Isis  took  control
         over his home town of Mosul requiring him and other workers in  the
         same factory to join their forces but under a threat  that,  if  he
         failed to do so, there would be killed. After  the  fifth  occasion
         when the threat was reissued, he left Mosul and  travelled  to  the
         United Kingdom via Turkey, Greece and France. He claimed asylum  on
         17 October 2015.

      3. It is accepted that the appellant's identity documents are  in  the
         possession of the respondent.  The  appellant  has  a  CSID  and  a
         nationality card.

      4. It is the respondent's case that the appellant will be returned  to
         Baghdad from where he will be able to travel to the IKR.

      5. The issue in this appeal  is  limited  to  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge properly applied the current country guidance of AAH
         (Iraqi Kurds-internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212  (IAC).
         The challenge to the determination focuses upon the judge's finding
         in paragraphs 31 and 32. Paragraph 31 reads as follows:

             "The case of AAH makes it clear that since all Iraqis will  be
             returned to Baghdad,  if  they  are  in  possession  of  their
             nationality card and their CSID, those  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
             will be able to relocate  to  the  IKR  without  the  risk  of
             persecution  or  serious  harm.  They  will  be  subjected  to
             screening but, even though the appellant  is  a  young  single
             male from Mosul, I am satisfied that the fact that he will  be
             able to evidence the fact that he has been  in  the  UK  since
             2015 means he would be able to show that he has no  connection
             to an ISIS controlled area."

      6. Mr Jacobs, appearing on behalf of  the  appellant  criticises  this
         paragraph as being wholly inadequate. In doing so, he  relies  upon
         paragraph 7 of the AAH (Iraqi Kurds) which provides:

             "Whether [an Iraqi national returnee] P would be at particular
             risk of ill-treatment during the  security  screening  process
             must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.  Additional  factors
             that may increase risk include ...(ii)  coming  from  an  area
             associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting
             age. He is likely to be able to evidence the  fact  of  recent
             arrival from the UK, which  would  dispel  any  suggestion  of
             having arrived directly from ISIL territory."

      7. The italicised words are only a summary. For the full reasoning  of
         the Tribunal, it is necessary to  turn  to  paragraph  120  of  the
         determination:

             "The third potential obstacle for a person seeking  refuge  in
             the IKR is the security clearance procedure. IDPs  wishing  to
             enter the  territory  must  pass  through  security  screening
             checkpoints, where they are questioned  about  their  origins,
             experiences and motives. The KRG is  understandably  concerned
             about infiltration by ISIL fighters who  'melted  away'  after
             the assault on Mosul and other strongholds. There is a general
             suspicion  of   people,   particularly   single   young   men,
             particularly those who have  moved  from  areas  formerly  (or
             still) under ISIL control such as Ninewa and Diyala. A  number
             of organisations, notably Human Rights Watch, have reported on
             the Asayish not simply refusing entry  to  suspects  at  these
             checkpoints, but detaining them and subjecting  them  to  ill-
             treatment  including  torture.  The  majority  of  the   cases
             reported concern Arabs and Turkmen, but Dr Fatah stressed that
             one  could  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of  Kurds  being
             subjected to similar levels of scrutiny: there were after  all
             Kurds who fought with ISIL. HRW report on at least one case of
             a Kurd being detained on the basis that  he  had  remained  in
             Mosul whilst it was under ISIL control;  in  another  a  young
             Kurdish boy amongst a group of Arabs was  held  and  allegedly
             tortured.  The  current  stand-off  with  the  GoI  means  any
             relaxation of this security screening is unlikely.  Whether  a
             Kurd would  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  by  the  security
             services in the IKR must be assessed on a case-by-case  basis.
             Factors that could increase risk include coming from a  family
             with a known  association  with  ISIL,  coming  from  an  area
             associated with ISIL and being a single male of fighting  age.
             It is however the  case  that  returnees  should  be  able  to
             evidence the fact that they have recently arrived from the UK,
             thus dispelling any suggestion that they  have  come  straight
             from ISIL territory."

      8. This passage demonstrates the risk that the Iraqi authorities  face
         from former ISIL fighters  re-emerging  from  an  area  which  they
         formally controlled. However, in the  appellant's  case  there  are
         overwhelming reasons why he would not be considered to be a  member
         of ISIL. First, he was a boy of 15 when he  left  Iraq.  There  are
         cases where children have been forcibly  "conscripted"  into  ISIL.
         There  may  even  be  cases  where  such  children  have  done   so
         voluntarily. However, this appellant can  hardly  be  viewed  as  a
         volunteer as he left Iraqi within weeks of ISIL taking over control
         in Mosul. His departure is much more readily viewed  as  a  flight.
         Indeed, were he to have demonstrated an  interest  in  fighting  on
         behalf of ISIL,  he  would  hardly  have  left.  The  time  of  his
         departure roughly coincides with the  arrival  of  ISIL  in  Mosul.
         Secondly, his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2015  has  both
         geographically and intellectually distanced himself from  the  ISIL
         fighters in Mosul. His presence in the United Kingdom is capable of
         incontrovertible proof. He could not have been an ISIL fighter  who
         had melted away after the assault on Mosul by the Iraqi authorities
         in 2017. He has the documentation to establish both his identity as
         well as his presence in the United Kingdom.

      9. It is clear that the judge had this in mind when she  recorded  the
         crucial factors which were directly drawn from the decision in  AAH
         to which she also made express reference. She acknowledged he would
         be subject to screening and that,  as  a  young  single  male  from
         Mosul, the authorities would wish to examine his whereabouts in the
         crucial  period  between  2015  to  date.  However,  she  correctly
         satisfied herself that he would be well capable of establishing his
         identity and his presence in the United Kingdom  since  2015.  When
         the judge said that he would be able to show he has  no  connection
         to an Isis controlled area, she could not and  did  not  mean  that
         Isis was not in control of Mosul. She had already acknowledged that
         he came from Mosul. Instead, it is clear, without doubt,  that  she
         was making the obvious factual finding that he  had  no  connection
         with Mosul, an Isis-controlled area, during the time when Isis  was
         conducting atrocities there.

     10. I reject Mr Jacobs' principal assertion in the  grounds  of  appeal
         and in his skeleton argument that the  judge  did  not  follow  the
         guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds). Instead, I find  that  she  followed
         its guidance to the letter. Nor was she making a general assessment
         of Iraqi males of Kurdish ethnicity. Instead, as her recital of the
         facts makes  clear,  she  was  considering  the  position  of  this
         particular appellant, his age when he left, the place he left  from
         and the time spent in the United  Kingdom.  All  of  these  factors
         informed her assessment of whether this appellant would be  wrongly
         perceived to have been an ISIL fighter who  melted  away  when  the
         authorities re-took control of Mosul.

     11. The second principal submission  made  by  Mr  Jacobs  arises  from
         paragraph 10 of the italicised words in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds).  This
         concerns the ability of a returnee to secure employment bearing  in
         mind the unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs in the IKR  is  70%.  The
         material parts are as follows:

             "(iv)     patronage and  nepotism  continue  to  be  important
             factors  in  securing  employment.  A  returnee  with   family
             connections in the region will have a significant advantage in
             that he would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts
             to make introductions to prospective employers and  the  vouch
             for him;

             (v) skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
             the  greatest  disadvantage,   with   the   decline   in   the
             construction industry reducing the number  of  labouring  jobs
             available;

             (vi)      if [a returnee] P is from  an  area  with  a  marked
             association with ISIL, that may deter prospective employers."

     12. For the reasons I have already given, the fact that this  appellant
         formally came from Mosul and left, as a boy, when ISIL took control
         should dispel the suggestion that a prospective employer  would  be
         deterred in the circumstances of the appellant's case.

     13. Mr Jacobs also submitted that the appellant's personal profile  put
         him at risk.  He did so relying upon paragraph  44  of  AAH  (Iraqi
         Kurds) which provides:

             "UNHCR (April 2017) report that the implementation of such on-
             entry screening varies from governate to governate,  and  even
             checkpoint to checkpoint. It is reported to commonly focus  on
             the person's religious/ethnic profile,  background,  place  of
             origin and family composition. For that reason the groups most
             likely to be denied entry are  Sunni  Arabs  or  Turkmen  from
             former ISIL territory. There have been a number of  disturbing
             cases of IDPs attempting to enter the IKR being  detained  and
             tortured  on  suspicion  of  being  ISIL  fighters.  This  has
             included, reports Human Rights Watch (June 2017), at least one
             Kurdish boy amongst a group of Arab children aged  between  11
             and 17."

     14. This submission is related to that which he made earlier.  However,
         he was only able to rely upon the fact  that  the  appellant  is  a
         Sunni Muslim  from  Mosul  as  being  factors  likely  to  raise  a
         suspicion that he is a former ISIL fighter. For the reasons that  I
         have already given, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  quite
         capable of establishing his identity and history such as  to  avoid
         the risk of detention and torture  on  suspicion  of  his  being  a
         former ISIL fighter.

     15. In paragraph 32 of the determination, the judge said

             "The appellant's situation is similar to that of the appellant
             in AAH who had limited education  and  was  semi-skilled.  The
             appellant before me has had some  education  here  in  the  UK
             which will stand him in good stead and he did have  work  when
             in Mosul albeit of the labouring sort and  only  for  a  short
             time which is not a factor in his favour given the decline  in
             the construction industry in the  IKR.  However,  the  crucial
             thing is that he has documents just as had  the  appellant  in
             AAH. The fact that the appellant in AAH had no  links  to  the
             IKR did not prevent the tribunal from concluding that  it  was
             not unduly harsh to expect him to relocate  to  the  IKR  even
             though it was accepted that he could not go back to Kirkuk. In
             this case, the fact that the appellant has  been  educated  in
             the UK for almost 3 years, almost negates the fact that he has
             very little work experience because he will be  able  to  make
             use of that education and thus be on a par with someone who is
             considered to be semi-skilled at the very least and thus in  a
             better  position  to  obtain  employment  and  thus  keep  the
             accommodation he will be able to obtain in the beginning  with
             the assistance of the grant given to all returnees."

     16. Mr Jacobs submitted that, in reaching this  conclusion,  the  judge
         failed to have regard to the factors identified by the Tribunal  in
         paragraph 10 of  the  italicised  words.  That  submission  is  not
         sustainable. It is apparent from the judge's reference to education
         and skills that the judge was referring to the  difficulties  faced
         by returnees to  the  IKR.  She  correctly  pointed  out  that  the
         appellant's position is similar to the appellant in the case of AAH
         (Iraqi Kurds). The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         minor and was treated as a minor by the local authority which  must
         have  included  placing   him   in   an   appropriate   educational
         environment.  Mr  Jacobs  referred  to  his  having  only   limited
         qualifications (ESOL)  but  the  judge  clearly  had  in  mind  the
         progress that the appellant is likely to have made  in  the  United
         Kingdom since 2015.

     17. Far from failing to have regard to the factors  identified  by  the
         Tribunal in paragraph 10 of the  italicised  words  in  AAH  (Iraqi
         Kurds), the judge made scrupulous reference to them and  reached  a
         lawful and proper conclusion that the personal circumstances of the
         appellant would not render his return unlawful notwithstanding  the
         less advantageous economic circumstances that presently  face  Iraq
         when compared with those in the United Kingdom.

DECISION

    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no  error  of   law   and   her
    determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                         Dated 25 April 2019
