
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01218/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Ell, instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated 17.9.19, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his
    protection claim and to deport him to Iraq.

 2. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on
    17.10.19.

 3. The appeal in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  heard  by  Mr  Justice  Lane,
    President, on 2.12.19. It was noted that  there  was  no  challenge  to
    those aspects of the First-tier Tribunal's decision that  involved  the
    issuing by the respondent of a certificate under section 72 of the 2002
    Act, nor to the judge's  adverse  findings  in  respect  of  Article  8
    private and family life in the UK.

 4. However, in the decision promulgated 13.12.19,  an  error  of  law  was
    identified in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The President set aside the FTT decision, "solely by reference  to  the
    issue of risk of serious harm on return and whether there may in  terms
    of the Rules be very significant obstacles to his returning to  (Iraq).
    The findings regarding the absence of relevant Article 8  life  in  the
    United Kingdom stand."

 5. The appellant was directed to set out in writing  in  detail  the  case
    case he wished to advance, "It will then be for the Upper  Tribunal  at
    the remaking to hearing to consider that case, making such findings  as
    are necessary." The President anticipated that by  the  time  the  case
    came before the Upper Tribunal to be remade, there may be fresh Country
    Guidance on Iraq. "If that is the position then both  parties  will  be
    expected by the Upper Tribunal to make their submissions  by  reference
    to it."

 6. In addition to  the  appellant's  bundle  submitted  to  the  FTT,  the
    Tribunal has received and taken into account the appellant's  Statement
    of Case (SC) and Further Witness Statement (FWS),  both  dated  13.1.20
    were served late, with permission, given the recent promulgation of the
    Upper Tribunal's Country Guidance on Iraq in SMO, KSP and  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]  UKUT  00400  (IAC).  Shortly
    before the commencement of the hearing Mr Ell's skeleton  argument  was
    handed in, which I have now also considered.

 7. All the relevant documents, evidence and submissions  have  been  taken
    into account in the round, in the context of the whole,  before  making
    any findings of fact. I have also taken into account that in large part
    the appellant's oral evidence  was  given  through  an  interpreter  in
    Kurdish Sorani.

Relevant Background

 8. The appellant arrived in the UK in January 2007 as a minor. He was born
    and raised in Peramagrum, near Sulaymaniyah, which is within the IKR of
    Iraq. He made a claim for asylum alleging that he worked as a  shepherd
    for MH. One day men stole the sheep and his angry  employer  threatened
    to kill him. He therefore fled Iraq in December 2006. The asylum  claim
    was refused in February 2007 but as he  was  a  child  he  was  granted
    Discretionary Leave to Remain until June 2007.  In  July  2010  he  was
    granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 9.  In October 2014 the appellant was convicted after trial of an  offence
    of rape of a woman and sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment. This led  to
    the decision in January 2016 to deport him to Iraq. At  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing, the appellant maintained that he was  innocent
    of the charge and had been wrongly convicted. Even though the woman was
    drunk and asleep, he maintained that she had consented to sex. He  also
    claimed to be in a relationship with a British  woman  and  to  have  a
    parental relationship with four women.

10. He maintained that he had never been issued with a  CSID  or  passport,
    did not speak Arabic and knew no one in Baghdad.

11. Judge Thorne found that the appellant was a foreign criminal who failed
    to rebut the presumption that he had been convicted of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constitutes a danger to  the  community.  It  follows
    that he was excluded from protection of the Refugee Convention and from
    humanitarian protection.

12. Judge Thorne also concluded that the appellant  failed  to  demonstrate
    that he had any family life in the UK, there being no evidence  of  any
    ongoing relationship with a partner or British  citizen  children,  and
    evidence in fact that he had split from his partner many years ago  and
    had no contact with any child. By the President's direction, that  part
    of the decision must stand.

13. The remaining aspect of the appellant's claim was that he was  in  need
    of international protection on  a  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return,
    arising from the fact that he was from the IKR but without  any  family
    who could assist him. He claimed that his father had  passed  away  and
    that his mother and brother lived  in  Turkey.  However,  he  told  the
    author of the psychiatric report that his mother had relocated to Iran.
    His father allegedly emanated from Kirkuk and he had an uncle  in  that
    city but was no longer in contact with him.  For  justifiable  reasons,
    upheld by the Upper Tribunal, the judge found that  the  appellant  was
    not an honest witness.

14. At [54] of the FTT decision, Judge Thorne rejected the  claim  that  he
    had no family in Iraq to help him obtain a CSID on return  which  would
    allow him to enter and work in  the  IKR.  In  the  alternative,  Judge
    Thorne decided that he could consider the appellant's case by reference
    to Iran, and that he could go to live with his mother in that  country,
    when Iran did not feature in the respondent's decision  and  relocation
    to Iran was never the respondent's case. For that reason, the President
    identified this as an error of law.

15. The President found  that  Judge  Thorne  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for the findings regarding family in Iraq, failed to state what
    aspects of the evidence in this regard had been accepted  or  rejected.
    In particular, the judge failed to give a legally adequate response  to
    the evidence regarding the following  matters:  "firstly,  whether  the
    appellant emanated from the IKR; and secondly, and importantly, whether
    the appellant's father emanated  from  the  IKR  or  as  the  appellant
    contended, from Kirkuk; thirdly, whether there may be a relative,  such
    as the uncle, who is in a position to assist the appellant and, if  so,
    where that relative might be." Reasons needed to be  provided  for  the
    conclusions set out at [54] of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

16. It follows from the above that the issues before the Upper Tribunal  in
    the remaking of the decision in the appeal have narrowed to the risk of
    serious harm on return and/or whether there  may  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Iraq, pursuant to paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules or article 3 ECHR outside the Rules.

17.  The  appellant  maintains  that  he  was  born  in  Peramagrum,   near
    Sulaymaniyah, which is within the IKR, that his father has passed away,
    and that his  mother  and  siblings  live  in  Iran.  His  new  witness
    statement asserts, "My father and paternal uncle lived in Kurdistan but
    I believe that they were born in Kirkuk," but admits  that  he  has  no
    evidence to  support  the  assertion.  He  claims  that  his  uncle  is
    presently in Kirkuk but that he has not spoken to  him  since  he  left
    Iraq in 2006. He claims he cannot recall where the uncle lives and does
    not have any contact number for him.  Until  October  2019  he  was  in
    regular  contact  with  his  mother  in  Iran  but  her  phone  is  now
    disconnected. The appellant  does  not  have  a  "current  CSID"  or  a
    passport, current or expired, and his instructions remain that  he  has
    never held either document. He maintains that  he  does  not  know  the
    volume or page reference in the Family Book relating to his family  and
    neither do his family members in Iran. It  is  submitted  that  in  the
    circumstances, there is no prospect of the appellant obtaining  a  CSID
    either before or on arrival in Baghdad.

18. As stated above, Judge Thorne found the appellant  was  not  an  honest
    witness and the President considered that conclusion justified. Without
    the need to repeated them in full, for the same reasons,  I  also  find
    that  the  appellant's  credibility  is  undermined.  For  example,  he
    maintains his innocence of the rape offence and falsely maintained that
    he had family life with a partner and children in  the  UK.  There  are
    also internal inconsistencies in the appellant's account. For  example,
    although he claims that he believes his father,  who  allegedly  passed
    away in 2016, and his paternal  uncle  were  born  in  Kirkuk,  in  the
    screening interview he stated that his father was  born  in  Peramagrum
    village, as was the appellant.

19. I also found the appellant to be  a  poor,  uncooperative  and  evasive
    witness in his own cause. He appeared either  unable  or  unwilling  to
    answer straightforward questions from Mr Tan with a straight answer and
    on several occasions prevaricated or became aggressive in his  answers.
    I had to advise him that he did not help his case  when  not  answering
    the question asked. It also appeared that  his  evidence  was  evolving
    during the hearing as he was pressed about his family circumstances  in
    Iraq. Asked to explain why he believed both his father  and  uncle  had
    been born in Kirkuk, he claimed that when in Kirkuk  he  had  seen  his
    uncle's passport which stated that he was born in Kirkuk and he assumed
    that as they were brothers, his father must also have been born  there.
    Mr Ell accepted that this does not feature in any  of  the  appellant's
    various previous accounts. Mr Tan also had difficulty  in  getting  the
    appellant to answer whether he knew this fact before he left Iraq.  The
    appellant appeared unwilling to  directly  answered  the  question  and
    after being pressed repeatedly he finally said that before he left Iraq
    he didn't know where his father was born. However, it was  pointed  out
    to him that in the Screening Interview he had stated in 2007  that  his
    father was born in Peramagrum, which is near Sulaymaniyah  in  the  IKR
    and was asserting in oral evidence that his father was born in  Kirkuk.
    Pressed on this discrepancy, he claimed that when he came to the UK  he
    only knew that his father had lived and  grown  up  in  Peramagrum  and
    therefore  believed  at  that  time  that  he  was  born  there.   That
    explanation makes no sense, given he stated his father's birthplace  in
    the Screening Interview in  2007.  In  reality,  none  of  his  answers
    provided any  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  inconsistency  and  I
    concluded that the appellant was not being  truthful  in  his  oral  or
    written  evidence,  further  undermining   his   credibility.   Further
    inconsistencies were put to him, including that  he  claimed  that  his
    father had passed away in 2016 but had apparently told Dr Khristy  that
    he died in 2015, to which he  claimed  never  to  have  said  that.  No
    attempt had been made to correct the alleged error and in  the  context
    of the whole, I find that he did tell Dr Khristy that his father passed
    away in 2015, but the difference is so slight that I am satisfied  that
    it has no overall effect on his credibility.

20. However, he also maintained in oral evidence that he had  but  the  one
    uncle in Iraq and no aunts but at Q25 of the asylum interview had  said
    that he had both aunts and uncles in Iraq, in the plural. He  tried  to
    rationalise the inconsistency by suggesting that they do not live there
    anymore. He went on to allege in  evidence  that  these  were  maternal
    aunts who lived in Iran and visited his mother in Iraq for a few months
    at a time before returning to Iran. I found the appellant's evidence on
    this entirely incredible and incapable of belief, given that  this  was
    the first time he claimed  that  the  relatives  he  had  mentioned  in
    interview were  maternal  and  merely  visiting  Iraq  in  the  way  he
    described. None of his explanations or account on this issue  made  any
    sense of the assertion in evidence that he had but  one  uncle  and  no
    aunts in Iraq and I concluded that he had fabricated this evidence.  Mr
    Tan also pointed out a significant discrepancy between the claim in the
    appellant's recent witness statement that he last contacted his  mother
    in October 2019 but before then had claimed it was June  2019.  At  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing in August 2019 he said  it  was  six
    months since he had contacted his mother, which would be about February
    2019.

21. Similarly, the appellant was vague when pressed  as  to  other  details
    about his family. He could not say where his parents married  or  when.
    Despite the relevance of the  issue  as  to  whether  he  could  obtain
    identification documents from Iraq, as highlighted in SMO at  [383],  I
    found it incredible that he had never asked his mother or siblings  for
    copies  of  their  identity  documents,  or  a  copy  of  the  marriage
    certificate, or for his mother's  Iraqi  residence  documents.  He  was
    aggressive when answering Mr  Tan's  questions  about  this  issue  and
    appeared unwilling and  uncooperative.  He  also  maintained  that  his
    mother had no contact with his uncle, but agreed that he had not  asked
    her about that, stating that the uncle was on  his  father's  side.  He
    maintained that he had not been able  to  speak  to  his  mother  since
    October 2019.

22. Even  making  due  allowances  for  the  difficulties  with  the  court
    interpretation, particularly when the appellant chose  to  answer  some
    questions in English, I found the  appellant's  account  on  these  key
    issues evasive and unpersuasive so that I reached the  firm  conclusion
    that he was not telling the truth. It follows that I can  place  little
    weight on any assertion by the appellant as to his family circumstances
    in Iraq. Given the appellant's  overall  credibility,  which  has  been
    significantly undermined for the reasons  explained,  I  found  that  I
    could not accept the claim to be no longer in contact with his  mother.
    I am driven to reject the claim that he has lost touch with his  family
    members and I reach the conclusion that he remains in contact with both
    his mother, siblings and paternal uncle, but that it suits his case  to
    claim that he has now lost all contact so that he can claim that he  is
    unable to obtain their assistance to obtain  ID  documentation,  or  to
    assist him on return.

23. In relation to being able to return to Iraq, I recognise the importance
    of the CSID in assessing whether there are very  significant  obstacles
    or a risk of serious harm on returning to the IKR, or whether it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect him to do so. I also accept that if  he  does
    not have a CSID and if were to be genuinely unable to  provide  himself
    or obtain the Family Book volume and page number, the  appellant  would
    not be able to obtain a CSID before returning to Iraq.

24. The Country Guidance provides that whether an individual will  be  able
    to obtain a replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the  documents
    available and, critically, the availability  of  the  volume  and  page
    reference of the entry  in  the  Family  Book  in  Iraq,  which  system
    continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity  process.   "Given  the
    importance of that information, most Iraqi  citizens  will  recall  it.
    That information may also be obtained from family members, although  it
    is necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the father's  or
    the mother's side because  the  registration  system  is  patrilineal."
    Taking into account the appellant's general lack of credibility,  I  do
    not accept the claim that he has somehow lost contact with  his  uncle,
    or even his mother and siblings. It would be remarkably unlucky for him
    to have lost contact with all of them, as claimed. In  this  regard,  I
    also note that the appellant's case is that  his  uncle  suggested  and
    funded the appellant's journey to the UK to the cost of $14,000.  I  am
    satisfied that the uncle would have retained a close  interest  in  the
    appellant's progress and taken steps to remain in contact. I also  note
    that the appellant was able to use a neighbour in Iraq to help  provide
    some information. Considering the evidence as a whole, I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant remains in contact with family in Iraq and with  his
    mother in Iran and could but has  chosen  not  to  seek  assistance  in
    retrieving the information necessary to obtaining a CSID in  an  effort
    to avoid being returned to Iraq.

25. It is the appellant's case that he was born and raised within the  IKR,
    where his mother, father and uncle also  lived.  He  lived  and  worked
    there himself until leaving the country in 2006, at the alleged age  of
    about 15 years. It will, therefore, not be necessary to go to Kirkuk to
    seek his CSID; it can be obtained within the IKR  in  the  Sulaymaniyah
    Province. The Country Guidance  confirms  that  all  CSA  offices  have
    reopened.

26. Further, I do not accept the claim that his uncle lives in  Kirkuk.  It
    is not at all clear to me why the uncle would go to live in Kirkuk when
    the appellant's original claim was that both his father and  his  uncle
    lived in Sulaymaniyah Province within the IKR and that his father,  and
    thus it may be presumed his uncle, were both born there.  Nevertheless,
    Kirkuk is relatively close to the IKR, within 120  Km,  and  given  the
    demise of ISIS there is no reason based on safety why  the  appellant's
    paternal uncle would not be able to travel to Sulaymaniyah to  retrieve
    the necessary volume and page number, or a replacement  or  first-issue
    CSID for the appellant. Considering the evidence as  a  whole,  I  find
    that I cannot accept  his  claim  to  have  lost  contact  with  family
    members, so that I am satisfied that they, or  at  least  his  paternal
    uncle, will be able to assist him obtain the necessary information with
    which he will be able to obtain  a  CSID  through  an  Iraqi  Consulate
    before leaving the UK.

27. The appellant accepts the Country Guidance that former residents of the
    IKR will be returned to the IKR. The Guidance also notes that there are
    direct flights to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah and, therefore,  the  appellant
    will need not make either a transit at Baghdad Airport or  an  overland
    journey from Baghdad to the IKR. He will need either  a  Laissez-passer
    or a passport to be able to be returned to Iraq. However, in the  light
    of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international
    protection claim cannot succeed by reference to  any  alleged  risk  of
    harm arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport  or
    a Laissez-passer, if the Tribunal finds that return  is  not  currently
    feasible  on  account  of  a  lack  of  any  of  those  documents.  The
    respondent's case, advanced by Mr Tan, is that the appellant  can  seek
    the assistance of family to obtain the necessary information to  enable
    him to both obtain a CSID and travel documentation to facilitate return
    to Iraq and the  IKR.  Considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant will be able to obtain  a  CSID  and  with
    that document will, in due course, be able to obtain either a  passport
    or Laissez-passer to enable him to be returned to Iraq. It follows that
    I find that return will be feasible within a short time,  depending  on
    the appellant's cooperation.

28. In summary, for the reasons set out herein, I find as a fact  that  the
    appellant was born and raised within the IKR and that  his  father  and
    uncle were also born and lived there. I reject the  claim  that  either
    uncle or father were born in Kirkuk. I reject as not credible the claim
    that his paternal uncle is in Kirkuk, it making no  sense  for  him  to
    relocate from the IKR to Kirkuk. It follows  that  he  is  entitled  to
    return to the IKR and will not need to visit Kirkuk. Even if I am wrong
    and the uncle is in Kirkuk, I find that  the  appellant  has  not  lost
    contact with him and find that his uncle will be  able  to  assist  the
    appellant to obtain the necessary information to enable him to obtain a
    CSID either in the UK or shortly after arriving in the IKR, to where he
    will be able to fly without  needing  to  transit  Baghdad  Airport  or
    making an overland journey, as per the country guidance. Kirkuk is less
    than 120 Km from Sulaymaniyah and there is  no  reason  why  his  uncle
    would not be able to meet him on return.

29. I accept, however, that the appellant  has  been  consistent  that  his
    mother is in Iran and it follows that he cannot be expected  to  return
    to live with her there. However, I find that he remains in contact with
    his mother and siblings and, if necessary, can call on their assistance
    for information that will assist  him  to  obtain  a  CSID  and  travel
    documentation, including information about the siblings own  CSIDs  and
    the marriage details of his mother and father.

30. Applying the country guidance, I am satisfied that on  arrival  in  the
    IKR the appellant will be able to go to the CSA office  for  the  place
    where he was born, raised and lived until  leaving  Iraq  in  order  to
    obtain a replacement CSID. Even if he does not  obtain  a  CSID  before
    leaving the UK, with the assistance  of  his  family  members  and  the
    information they can provide, I am satisfied that he will  be  able  to
    obtain a replacement CSID that will give him access to  state  support,
    employment, etc.

31. There has been no challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal  finding  that
    notwithstanding moderate depression, the appellant is of  general  good
    health and will in any event be  able  to  obtain  appropriate  medical
    treatment on return to Iraq. Nothing in the medical  evidence  suggests
    that he will be unable to work. In addition, he will be entitled to the
    assisted voluntary return funds of up to �1,500 which will be more than
    adequate to fund accommodation, maintenance and basic  necessities  for
    several months whilst he settles and seeks employment. He will, in  the
    circumstances, not need to go to  an  IDP  camp  or  rely  on  critical
    shelter arrangements on his return to Iraq.

32. Given that he has no well-founded fear of persecution and will  not  be
    at risk of serious harm, there is no reason why he should not return to
    his home area.  However,  if  he  does  not  wish  to  do  so,  he  can
    undoubtedly relocate in safety within the IKR, for  example  to  Erbil,
    and it will not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to do so.
    As he will be able to evidence his arrival from the UK he will face  no
    suspicion of ISIS involvement and will be at no risk at  any  screening
    interview on arrival in the IKR. I  do  not  accept  that  he  will  be
    without family assistance in the IKR, but even  if  his  uncle  is  not
    there or not able to come to the IKR to assist him, he  will  still  be
    able to call on financial support and other assistance from  his  uncle
    to be able to settle in the IKR.

33. In all the circumstances, for the  reasons  outlined  above  and  after
    fully taking into consideration the new evidence and submissions, there
    is no reason for the appellant not to return to Iraq and the IKR. I  am
    satisfied he will face no risk of serious harm and that there  will  be
    no very significant obstacles to his return. The findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal on article 8 ECHR issues stand as made.

Decision

34. I remake the decision in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 27 January 2020
