
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01477/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2019                       |On 22 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buchanan promulgated on  13  July  2018  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  19
    January 2018 to refuse his asylum claim and to return him to Iran.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is a Kurd by origin, and comes  from  a
    village near Sardasht in Iran. On 16 July 2017  while  he  was  working
    with his father, a group of armed men came to speak to  them  and  then
    the appellant was told by his father to show the men to Alwatan village
    which he did.  He then went home and three hours later his father  came
    back explained that the men had attacked the military base  in  Alwatan
    and that he had heard from the headman in the village that the men  had
    given the appellant's name as someone who had helped them and for  that
    reason the appellant was at risk and arrangements were  then  made  for
    him to flee and the appellant travelled first via Turkey, then  to  the
    United Kingdom where he claimed asylum.

 3. The appellant was interviewed and the Secretary of State  rejected  his
    application.  The Secretary of State accepted  that  the  appellant  is
    Kurdish but did not accept that he was Iranian. He did not  accept  the
    appellant's account of what had happened  in  July  2017  and  did  not
    accept that the authorities could have come after him only three  hours
    after the attack on the military base.

 4. On appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  gave  evidence
    before the judge who also heard submissions  from  representatives  for
    both parties.

 5. The judge did not believe the appellant for a number of  reasons  which
    are set out at paragraphs [23] to [25]  of  his  decision.   The  judge
    concluded that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to  Iran
    because he did not believe his account and did not accept that he would
    be at risk on return simply by being  a  failed  asylum  seeker  as  an
    Iranian man who did not have a passport.  The judge also concluded that
    he was not entitled to humanitarian  protection  and  that  his  return
    would not be in breach of the Human Rights Act.

 6. The appellant's solicitors challenged that decision in the  grounds  of
    appeal which run to some 41 paragraphs.  Broadly they attempt to make a
    forensic attack on the judge's findings as to credibility.  There are a
    number of reasons advanced for that.

 7. First, the judge erred in making an adverse finding that the  timescale
    of the events occurring was concerning specifically how it was that the
    appellant was able to arrange $9,000 to be paid to an  agent  and  then
    for the  appellant  to  leave  Iran  without  documents  and  that  the
    appellant had not been asked about this and could not explain that.

 8. Second, in finding it implausible  that  there  was  only  three  hours
    between the appellant leaving the armed men some distance away from the
    military base and reaching the village  yet  a  substantial  amount  of
    information had been able to be gained by that point by the appellant's
    father, the judge failing to take into account what the  appellant  had
    said in his witness statement and in reply to questions 117 and 118  in
    his asylum interview.

 9. Third, that the judge had erred in failing to take  into  account  that
    the men had attacked a military base and thus what he had characterised
    as being implausible was not; and it was thus as  it  was  more  likely
    that an interrogation would be carried out  immediately  and  that  the
    appellant's account of how his name would  be  given  or  would  become
    known should have been taken into account.

10. Fourth, that it would not have taken the authorities long to reach  the
    area and that the judge had erred in not noting that the military  base
    and the village were not that far apart and it was not implausible that
    the sounds of shooting could have carried over that difference.

11. Fifth, that the judge had erred in failing to take into account how the
    timeline was explained by the appellant as being credible and that  the
    judge had failed to notice the individual who spoke to the  appellant's
    father would be aware who he is.

12. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on
    15 August 2018 and his reasons are set out primarily at paragraphs  [4]
    to [6] of his decision:

         "4.  At [8] the appellant complains that the  judge  made  findings
             about matters as to which the appellant  was  not  questioned.
             There is no merit in  the  submission.   The  proceedings  are
             adversarial.  It is for the appellant to satisfy the  Tribunal
             as to his case it is not for the Tribunal to identify possible
             weaknesses in it and invite the appellant to remedy them.

         5.   At [13] to [15] the appellant submits by reference to  replies
             to questions 117 and 118 of  the  asylum  interview  that  the
             judge at 23.4 misstated the  point  in  time  from  which  the
             period of three hours should be measured and describes this is
             going to the  core  of  the  claim.   However,  the  reply  to
             question 119 in the interview is consistent with the  decision
             at 23.4, the ground relied on is misleading without merit.

         6.   In any event when it is complained that the decision fails  to
             take account of evidence presented at the hearing it  must  be
             shown by reference to a skeleton argument  placed  before  the
             judge at the hearing or by a statement by a person present  at
             the hearing, that such material was presented at  the  hearing
             itself not only at the later stage of  the  asylum  interview.
             This has not been done."

13. The appellant's solicitors (Braitch & Co) then renewed the  application
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was  put  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley who on 19 November stated  that  permission  to
    appeal was granted.  However, in his reasons he stated:

         "I  have  read  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Buchanan in the light of the appellant's renewed application to the
         Upper Tribunal and I find that I am in  agreement  with  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Dineen.   The  application  fails  to  identify  any
         properly arguable error of law on the part of  the  First  Tribunal
         Judge or raise any other issue justifying the grant of permission."



14. Understandably,  in  the  light  of  the  apparent  contradiction,  the
    appellant  made  queries  through  his  new   representatives,   Morden
    Solicitors as to what had in fact been decided.  This was then followed
    by directions being issued by Judge Dawson staying the  hearing  on  25
    April to allow Judge Chalkley to revise his decision and/or correct  it
    if so minded. Judge Chalkley did not amend  his  decision  and  so  the
    matter came before me today.

15. Having explained the situation to the appellant who  was  unrepresented
    he agreed to proceed with the hearing.   He  had  initially  sought  an
    adjournment to obtain further representatives, but later, after  I  had
    explained what had happened, he agreed to proceed.

16. An interpreter was provided and I heard submissions from the  appellant
    as well as Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State.  Ms  Everett
    relied primarily on the decision of Judge Dineen submitting that it was
    clear that there was no error of law in this case.

17.  I asked the appellant to clarify the timeline of the events on 16 July
    2017. He said to me that he had taken the  men  to  a  point  where  he
    indicated the Alwatan village.  From that point  it  would  have  taken
    them about half an hour to an hour to get there, that he then  returned
    home which took him about an hour  and  three  hours  after  that,  his
    father arrived and explained to him all the  information  that  he  had
    related in his asylum claim that is that the people  had  been  caught,
    interrogated and that his name had been given and that thus he  was  at
    risk.

18. I now turn to the grounds of appeal.   Dealing  with  the  first  point
    which is set out at paragraphs [2] to [9] of  the  grounds  I  consider
    that this is without merit.  It was open to the judge  to  find  it  of
    concern that in such a short period of time arrangements could be  made
    by the paternal uncle to employ an agent and pay some US$9,000.   I  am
    not satisfied that it was unfair or unlawful for the judge to  take  an
    inference adverse in that case given that this is a point raised in the
    refusal letter.  It was for the appellant with the  assistance  of  his
    solicitors to address that point as Judge Dineen  has  pointed  out  in
    refusing permission.

19. It is important to note that what the judge said at paragraph  23.1  is
    not that it was just getting an agent it was to getting of an agent and
    the paying of $9,000 and for the appellant's arrangement to leave  Iran
    without travel documents and it was a fair comment for the judge to say
    it is a remarkably short period  in  which  to  put  the  sophisticated
    arrangements into place and find someone to  undertake  those  services
    and to raise and pay with that amount of money.

20. Turning to the sequence of events on 16 July 2017, the judge  noted  at
    paragraphs 23.4 and 23.5 that it was not believable  that  all  of  the
    information and events could have happened and then been relayed by the
    headman of the village to the appellant's father within  the  space  of
    three hours.  It is said in the grounds that this is contrary  to  what
    is said in response to questions 117, 118.

21. I do not consider that properly construing what  is  written  that  the
    judge did misunderstand the timeline in this case.  More to  the  point
    it is evident from what the appellant said in response to question  127
    which was so  within  three  hours  of  the  attack  taking  place  the
    surviving men who had all been  interrogated  and  gave  your  name  as
    someone who helped them answer yes.    He was also asked how they would
    know his name question 128 it was put to him that his  explanation  did
    not explain how they would know his name.

22. In the circumstances the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the  adverse
    conclusions about this.  It is simply not the case that the  judge  did
    not take into account the evidence.  It is furthermore  speculative  to
    say that the judge has failed to consider that the men who attacked the
    military base make it  more  likely  that  an  interrogation  would  be
    carried out immediately.  It is also speculative to suggest  that  they
    would come to the  appellant's  village  and  it  is  more  likely  the
    authorities would interrogate him immediately to find  out  where  they
    had come from and how they made their way to the base.

23. Similarly, what is averred at [23] that there are only  eight  families
    in the village is simply making further submissions.  It does not  show
    that the judge made an error in his approach to  the  evidence  and  in
    essence the grounds as pleased are nothing  more  than  an  attempt  to
    reargue the appeal rather than identifying any error or mistake of fact
    made by the judge. Further, it is of note that the  judge's  assessment
    of credibility is subdivided at paragraph 23 into seven items which  he
    considered in the round and a number of them at 23.3 and 23.7  are  not
    in effect challenged.

24. Accordingly, for these  reasons  and  the  reasons  given  in  refusing
    permission by Judge Dineen I conclude that the judge's approach to  the
    issue of credibility was not infected by any error of law and that  his
    reasons for making findings on credibility adverse to the appellant are
    adequate and sustainable.

25. Accordingly, I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15 July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
