
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01179/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 30 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SF
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Dixon, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim and medical evidence of a  confidential
          nature.

       2. The appellant, a citizen  of  Pakistan,  has  appealed  against  a
          decision made by First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  Judge  Swinnerton,
          sent on 24 April 2019,  in  which  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on
          protection and human rights grounds.   Judge  Swinnerton  did  not
          accept the appellant's claim to be gay or his account  as  to  how
          what happened in Pakistan to support his fear of returning there.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

       3. The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  on  all  of  the
          seven grounds relied upon, in a decision dated 28 May 2019.


       4. At the hearing before me, Mr Dixon  relied  upon  each  ground  of
          appeal and I deal with his submissions in more  detail  below.   I
          indicated to Mrs Aboni  that  I  only  wished  to  hear  from  her
          regarding the submission that the FTT failed to  apply  the  Joint
          Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 ('the Guidance')  to  this
          appellant's accepted vulnerability, when making findings of  fact.
           She invited me  to  find  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
          identify in what manner the FTT failed to apply the  Guidance  and
          the extent to which this prejudiced the appellant.  I  then  heard
          briefly from Mr Dixon in reply, before reserving my decision.

Error of law discussion

       5. I shall deal with each of the appellant's seven grounds of  appeal
          in turn.

Ground 1

       6. I entirely  accept  that  [2]  read  in  isolation  describes  the
          applicable standard  of  proof  incorrectly.   However,  when  the
          decision is read as a whole I am satisfied that  the  FTT  applied
          the correct standard of proof.  The FTT  made  it  clear  at  [28]
          that,  "applying  the  low  standard  of  proof  applicable"   the
          appellant would not be at "real risk"  if  returned  to  Pakistan.
          There is no indication from the actual findings  of  fact  that  a
          higher standard of proof was applied.  When the decision  is  read
          as a whole, the summary of the position at [2]  is  careless,  but
          does not constitute a material error of law.

Grounds 2 and 4

       7. Mr Dixon made submissions on these two grounds together and it  is
          convenient for me to do the same.


       8. The appellant relied upon a  psychiatric  report  prepared  by  Dr
          Eldred dated 1 April 2019 in  support  of  his  evidence  that  he
          suffered from depression and should be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
          witness.  Contrary to the assertion at [8]  of  the  grounds,  the
          FTT made it clear at [10] of its decision  that  it  accepted  the
          application for the  appellant  to  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
          witness.  The FTT was clearly aware of and took  into  account  Dr
          Eldred's report and referred to it at  [19]  and  [20].   The  FTT
          quoted in full from the  extract  of  the  report  diagnosing  the
          appellant as having "symptoms of a depressive episode  of  a  mild
          to moderate severity".

       9. The FTT did not expressly  refer  to  the  appellant's  depression
          when  making  its  findings.   However  this  must  be  viewed  in
          context.   The  FTT  clearly  recorded  that   it   accepted   the
          application  made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  he  was   a
          vulnerable witness.  There is no reason to believe that  this  was
          not done in all material respects.  The FTT was aware of and  took
          into account Dr Eldred's report.  This  was  the  source  material
          for the appellant's vulnerability.  In these  circumstances  there
          is no proper basis in support  of  the  submission  that  the  FTT
          ignored the appellant's depression, when making  its  findings  of
          fact.  In addition, although Dr Eldred notes at [2.1  4)]  of  his
          report that he was asked to address  how  the  appellant's  mental
          health might affect his  ability  to  provide  "credible  complete
          consistent testimony", this was not directly  addressed  beyond  a
          reference to his concentration being adversely  impacted  at  6.5.
          Indeed, Dr Eldred recorded at [7.2] that  the  appellant  gave  "a
          clear consistent and corroborated history" and was fit to  provide
          oral evidence in court [7.14].

      10. In AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123,  Sir  Ernest
          Ryder, the Senior President of  Tribunals,  considered  an  appeal
          involving a young man from Afghanistan with  a  claimed  traumatic
          history.   In AM's case the psychologist offered advice as to  how
          AM  could  obtain  effective   access   to   justice   given   his
          psychological difficulties.  It was agreed  before  the  Court  of
          Appeal that insufficient steps had been taken to ensure  that  the
          proceedings were fair.  There has been no such criticism  in  this
          case.  Mr Dixon confirmed that in this case the  FTT  only  failed
          to take the Guidance into account when making  its  findings.   Mr
          Dixon did not take  me  to  the  Guidance  or  make  any  specific
          submission on which aspect of the  Guidance  was  not  taken  into
          account.  As noted in AM the Guidance contains five key features:

                       "a.   the   early   identification   of   issues   of
                       vulnerability is  encouraged,  if  at  all  possible,
                       before any substantive hearing through the use  of  a
                       CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);
                       b. a person who is incapacitated or  vulnerable  will
                       only need  to  attend  as  a  witness  to  give  oral
                       evidence where  the  tribunal  determines  that  "the
                       evidence is necessary to enable the fair  hearing  of
                       the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by
                       doing so" (PD [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
                       c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable  person  does
                       give oral evidence, detailed provision is to be  made
                       to ensure  their  welfare  is  protected  before  and
                       during the hearing  (PD  [6]  and  [7]  and  Guidance
                       [10]);
                       d. it is necessary to give special  consideration  to
                       all of the personal circumstances of an incapacitated
                       or vulnerable  person  in  assessing  their  evidence
                       (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
                       e.  relevant  additional  sources  of  guidance   are
                       identified   in   the   Guidance    including    from
                       international  bodies  (Guidance  Annex  A  [22]   to
                       [27])."


      11. This is not a case in which clear  discrepancies  emerged  at  the
          hearing.  Rather, the FTT had concerns about  the  evidence  as  a
          whole and particularised these.  As I have  already  indicated  it
          should not be assumed  that  the  FTT  left  out  of  account  the
          appellant's  depression,  when  it  clearly  referred  to  it  and
          clearly accepted that he is a vulnerable witness.


      12. The grounds also suggest at [9] that the FTT was wrong  to  impugn
          the medical report at [25]  on  the  basis  that  it  is  "clearly
          predicated upon  the  basis  that  [the]  Appellant's  account  is
          genuine".  However the FTT did not  impugn  the  entirety  of  the
          report.  Rather, the FTT's observations as quoted are  limited  to
          the appellant's suicide risk.  The FTT was  entirely  entitled  to
          assess the appellant's suicide risk in this way.  The  appellant's
          claimed suicidal ideation was  inextricably  linked  to  his  fear
          that he was  at  risk  in  Pakistan  as  a  gay  man.   Dr  Eldred
          understandably accepted the appellant's claim to be gay,  but  the
          FTT was entitled to reject it, for the reasons it provided.

Ground 3

      13. Mr Dixon accepted that if the FTT was  entitled  to  approach  the
          claimed suicide risk in  the  manner  it  did  (as  I  have  found
          above), the contention that the FTT failed to address the  country
          background material relevant to those presenting with a high  risk
          of suicide in Pakistan was immaterial.  I need say no  more  about
          Ground 3 in these circumstances.

Ground 5

      14. Mr Dixon drew my attention to evidence supporting the  appellant's
          claim  that,  to  use  Mr  Dixon's  words,  he  had   'significant
          interactions' with gay men.  The FTT  was  clearly  aware  of  and
          took into account the evidence of social  media  interactions  and
          referred to these expressly at [24].  There was no  error  of  law
          in noting that despite living in the UK since 2012  the  appellant
          did not provide details of any  specific  relationship.   This  is
          distinct from the interactions contained in  the  social  media  /
          applications.


      15. The criticism in the second half of [27] of the grounds of  appeal
          that  the  FTT  failed  to  take  into  account  the   appellant's
          depression when making findings on the  absence  of  relationships
          is not well-founded.  As set out above, the FTT was aware  of  the
          contents of  Dr  Eldred's  report.   It  is  noteworthy  that  the
          appellant's  depression  did  not   prevent   him   from   forging
          friendships.


Ground 6

      16.  Ground  6  criticises  the  FTT's  approach  to   the   witnesses
          supporting the appellant's claim to be gay.  It  is  suggested  at
          [21] that it is implicit that the FTT regarded  the  witnesses  to
          have fabricated evidence. Mr Dixon agreed with me  that  this  was
          not implicit from the  decision  at  all.   Rather,  the  FTT  has
          explained at [26] why it did not regard  the  witnesses'  evidence
          to be helpful or credible.  Having heard from the witnesses,  this
          was a matter for the FTT and there is  no  error  of  law  in  the
          approach to the live witnesses.

Ground 7

      17. Mr Dixon relied upon the two  limbs  to  ground  7,  which  I  now
          address in turn.


      18. The submission that the  FTT  failed  to  take  into  account  the
          material change in circumstances  between  the  appellant's  claim
          that when he left Pakistan his family  did  not  really  know  for
          certain that he was gay and they only gained this  knowledge  when
          he told them when he was already in the UK was  addressed  by  the
          FTT in considerable detail at [20].  The grounds of appeal do  not
          more than disagree with these findings of fact.

      19. Ground 7 also  submits  that  the  FTT  failed  to  take  relevant
          matters into account when  drawing  adverse  inferences  from  the
          appellant's delay in claiming asylum in  the  UK.   The  appellant
          claimed asylum in France in 2014 and shortly after  this  returned
          to the UK in December 2014, but did not claim asylum  until  2017.
          Mr Dixon submitted that the FTT failed  to  address  the  possible
          explanations for this in the evidence,  such  as  the  appellant's
          depression and reluctance to  disclose  his  sexuality.   In  this
          regard Mr Dixon drew my attention to the supporting  letters  from
          gay support / advocacy groups in Birmingham.  This ground  is  not
          made out.  When pressed, Mr Dixon acknowledged  that  the  medical
          report and the supporting letters do not date the commencement  of
          the appellant's depressive symptoms.  Whilst it might be  implicit
          that these were present for a period before  2017,  there  was  no
          credible, independent evidence dating them back to 2014.   In  any
          event, the appellant's own articulated reason for  the  delay  did
          not rely  upon  depression  or  any  reluctance  to  disclose  his
          sexuality  to  the  authorities  in  the  UK.   His  own   witness
          statement dated 25 March 2019 explains  the  delay  by  saying  at
          [13]  that  he  was  afraid  he  would  be  deported.   In   these
          circumstances, the FTT was  entitled  to  find,  for  the  reasons
          provided at [21] and [22], that the appellant did  not  provide  a
          credible  explanation  for  the  substantial  delay  in   claiming
          asylum.


      20. There is a suggestion in [27] of the grounds that the  FTT  failed
          to take into account supporting letters, in  particular  a  letter
          from Mr Hillier of 'BGLAD'.  There is no  cogent  reason  to  find
          that this letter was left out of account when it was  specifically
          referred to by the FTT at [19].

Conclusion

      21. It follows that the grounds of appeal have not been made  out  and
          there is no material error of law in the decision of the FTT.

Decision

      22. The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of  a  material
          error of law.



Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 22 August 2019

