
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/01828/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  3rd July 2017                        | On 7th July 21017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                      Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss, Counsel Fitzsimons instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination  promulgated  on  the  25th
    April 2017 dismissed his claim for protection based on  his  membership
    of a particular social group, on the grounds of his sexuality as a  gay
    man.

 3.  The Appellant's lengthy immigration history  is  set  out  within  the
    determination at paragraph 1 and in the decision letter issued  by  the
    Secretary of State at paragraph 13.

 4. The basis of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  recorded  in  the
    decision  letter  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs [18] to [23]. His claim for protection related  to  fear  on
    return to Pakistan in the light of his sexuality  as  a  gay  man.  The
    decision letter made reference to a number of matters which was said to
    undermine his credibility in relation to his  factual  account  of  his
    sexuality and also his immigration history. In particular it was  noted
    that an application was submitted on the basis of a relationship with a
    woman which was further pursued by way of judicial review. The decision-
    maker considered letters that have been provided by  the  Appellant  to
    support his claim but it was considered that those documents were self-
    serving  and  had  little  weight  attached  to   them.   In   addition
    consideration was given to section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004, and that it was only after  his
    arrest in December 2016 that  he  made  a  claim  for  asylum.  It  was
    concluded that the Appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any  reasonable
    explanation of his failure to claim asylum before his arrest. Thus  his
    claim was rejected.

 5. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 4th April 2017. There
    had been a preliminary issue raised before the judge which  related  to
    an application for an adjournment. The basis  of  the  application  was
    that judicial review proceedings had been  issued  in  the  High  Court
    challenging the Appellant's detention and the retention of his claim in
    the DAC procedure. The papers also refer to a previous application  for
    an adjournment relating to the non-availability of a material  witness.
    The judge refused that application at paragraph 9  on  the  basis  that
    there had  been  no  High  Court  order  staying  the  proceedings  and
    therefore it was "in the interests of justice and fairness to proceed".
    The Appellant heard evidence from the Appellant  and  his  partner  and
    submissions from each advocate.

 6.  The judge set out his findings at paragraphs [44] to  [54].  In  those
    findings he rejected the core of the Appellant's claim that  he  was  a
    gay man.  He  found  the  Appellant  to  be  "vague  and  evasive",  he
    disbelieved his account as to why he had entered  into  a  relationship
    with a woman [46]-[47] and did not accept that the  Appellant  and  his
    partner had given consistent evidence concerning their relationship [48
    - 50] and that if he had had "homosexual feelings throughout his  life,
    he would have had more relationships than the one and only with Mr  B".
    Consequently he dismissed his appeal.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  that  decision   Immigration
    Judge Gibb granted permission to appeal on the 17th  May  2017  in  the
    following terms:

     "The grounds, which were in time, complain that the  judge  erred  in:
    (1) refusing to adjourn the  hearing  (is  not  suitable  for  the  DAC
    procedure, and for a witness to attend): and (") not taking account  of
    the background evidence and context in assessing credibility through un
    evidenced assumptions as to likely behaviour.

    The grounds are arguable. The reasoning at [9] is brief,  and  arguably
    does not address the central issue of fairness. Second  round  is  also
    arguable, with reference to the reasoning at [48-50].

    There is another area of concern, namely the determination has numerous
    spelling, typographical and grammatical errors. These  suggest  that  a
    draft determination may have been promulgated in error. At  [54]  there
    is a positive statement as to credibility in the third sentence of that
    paragraph that is at odds with the  rest  of  the  decision.  With  the
    seriousness of the subject matter and the need for anxious scrutiny  it
    is problematic when a determination has errors that are so numerous  as
    to suggest that the promulgated decision has  not  been  proofread  and
    finalised."

 8. At the hearing before  this  Tribunal,  Miss  Fitzsimmons  appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant, who had not been produced from detention.  She
    made reference to information that she had been  given  by  Mr  Clarke,
    Senior presenting officer, that there was a note that the Appellant had
    applied for voluntary return. Mr Clarke could give no  further  details
    and whilst time was given for Ms Fitzsimons to take  instructions,  she
    was not able to furnish the court with any further information  despite
    being given time to ascertain the circumstances from both the Appellant
    and from her instructing solicitors. In those circumstances there being
    no evidence in this respect, I continued to hear the submissions of the
    parties.  An  additional  issue  raised  by  Ms  Fitzsimons   was   the
    application made for an adjournment the previous  day  which  had  been
    refused by Upper Tribunal Jordan. This indicated  that  permission  had
    been granted to apply for judicial review. I informed the parties  that
    in reaching a view on that application, it was necessary for me to hear
    the  submissions  of  the  parties  relating  to  whether  or  not  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal demonstrated the making of  an
    error on a point of law.

 9. Therefore I heard the submissions from the parties which are set out in
    my record of proceedings to which I have had regard  when  reaching  my
    overall decision.

10. Miss Fitzsimons relied  upon  the  written  grounds  which  raised  two
    specific grounds; ground 1, dealing procedural unfairness caused by the
    refusal to grant an adjournment and the second ground relating  to  the
    credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge  and  his  expectations  of
    "homosexual behaviour."   In  respect  of  ground  one,  she  took  the
    Tribunal  through  the  history  and  the  applications  made  for   an
    adjournment. In this respect she made reference to the relevance of the
    evidence of the witness who was unable to attend in the  light  of  the
    adverse credibility findings  subsequently made at paragraphs 45 to  47
    by the judge. The judge reached an adverse  conclusion  concerning  his
    prior relationship  with  a  woman,  however,  the  witness  had  given
    evidence to put this relationship in context. As to ground 2, she  made
    specific reference to paragraph 50 of the determination  at  which  the
    judge made a finding that if the Appellant in fact  was  gay  he  would
    have had more than one relationship. She submitted that this failed  to
    take account of the evidential context of the Appellant's past  history
    and the impact upon him and in addition demonstrated an assumption made
    by the judge that a person  who  was  gay  would  have  more  than  one
    relationship. She also relied on  Judge  Gibbs'  observations  and  the
    matters raised in the grant of permission. Thus overall  she  submitted
    the findings of fact were unsafe and in the  light  of  the  procedural
    irregularity should be set aside.

11. Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the  rule  24
    response dated 5 June  2017.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  directed
    himself appropriately and in relation to ground one, there was  nothing
    to demonstrate that an application was made for  an  adjournment  other
    than on the basis that the Appellant had an outstanding judicial review
    claim. He submitted there was no injunction or interim  relief  granted
    and therefore it was a matter for the judge to decide. As to ground  2,
    he accepted that that at paragraph 50 the judge had given a  subjective
    view of homosexual behaviour but that the judge had given other reasons
    for reaching the conclusion that the Appellant had not demonstrated his
    sexual orientation. Mr Clarke made reference to the judge's referral to
    his evidence as being "vague  and  evasive"  and  that  he  had  had  a
    previous relationship with a woman and the circumstances of  that.  The
    judge also made reference to inconsistencies as to the  evidence  given
    by the Appellant and his partner. As to the issues raised in the  grant
    permission Mr Clarke submitted that they were simply a "slip"  made  by
    the judge.

Decision on error of law:

12. Having had the opportunity to hear the submissions of the  parties  and
    consider  them  in  the  light  of  the  papers  before  me   and   the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to adjourn the proceedings any further. It seems to  me  that
    whatever the outcome of the outstanding proceedings, the position as to
    whether the judge erred in law or not will still remain  an  issue  and
    therefore if the judge did err in law it is necessary to ascertain that
    as soon as possible. I have therefore gone on to consider  the  grounds
    advanced on behalf of the Appellant and the submissions made by each of
    the parties.

13.  The first error relates to an issue of procedural unfairness based  on
    the refusal of the judge to grant an adjournment. The grounds  referred
    to two elements of that application. Firstly, on 4 April  2017  on  the
    day of the hearing, the Appellant's representatives had issued judicial
    review proceedings challenging his detention and the retention  of  the
    claim in the DAC and seeking interim relief. However  it  is  right  to
    observe from the file before me that on the 29  March  2017,  a  letter
    before action was sent to the Secretary of State setting out the nature
    of the claim and in particular, raising the issue  of  the  failure  to
    give the Appellant the opportunity to gather evidence relating  to  his
    claim.  A copy of that letter before action is on the UT file. On  31st
    March 2017 an application was made for an adjournment on this basis but
    was refused noting that such an application could be presented  on  the
    day of the hearing (as it subsequently was). The grounds  set  out  the
    material relevant to consideration of whether the claim  was  one  that
    was suitable for the DAC process.

14. The judge  set  out  his  reasons  for  refusing  that  application  at
    paragraph 9. He stated that there had been no High Court order  staying
    the proceedings before the Tribunal therefore it was "in the  interests
    of justice and fairness"  to  proceed  with  the  hearing.  No  further
    reasons were given or any explanation as to why the decision was either
    "in the interests of justice" or was otherwise "fair".  Whilst  it  was
    right that the High Court had refused interim  relief  on  the  papers,
    Miss Fitzsimons submitted that it was intended that the matter be given
    consideration by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  exercise  of  its
    discretion by reference to the issues.

15. In my judgement, the judge's consideration of the issue at paragraph  9
    did not engage with the nature of the application, the reasons  for  it
    nor did the judge apply the relevant procedural rules or direct himself
    to the law that he should apply. As set out in the decision of  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 148  (IAC)  the  issue  is  one  of
    fairness and  the  right  of  an  Appellant  to  a  fair  hearing.  Had
    consideration of this issue been undertaken it would have  resulted  in
    an investigation into  the  history  and  that  on  the  same  day  the
    Appellant's representatives had requested an adjournment on account  of
    the judicial review proceedings, they had also made a request based  on
    a witness who could not attend the hearing.  I  take  into  account  Mr
    Clarke's submission that it does not  appear  that  this  part  of  the
    application had been made specifically before the  judge,  despite  the
    grounds referring to it. However, in my judgement full consideration of
    the  circumstances  surrounding  the  adjournment  request  would  have
    resulted in this being raised. The Appellant's  solicitors  had  raised
    the issue of the ability of those detained in the DAC and  particularly
    LGBT claimants to produce evidence relevant to the circumstances of the
    claim. Therefore the non-availability of a witness who would be able to
    provide such evidence was a relevant consideration to the overall issue
    of fairness. A previous adjournment had been granted for the attendance
    of a witness. The solicitors had provided evidence in support  of  that
    application. As the grounds  set  out,  there  was  relevance  to  that
    evidence as it went to the issue of credibility and in  particular  the
    Appellant's circumstances at the time  of  the  relationship  breakdown
    with a woman and his "coming out" as a gay man. Both  were  points  the
    judge later went on to find as particularly adverse  to  the  Appellant
    (see paragraphs 46 - 47). Therefore  it  is  conceivable  that  at  the
    adjournment been considered in the  light  of  the  full  material  and
    granted, material evidence would have been before the judge bearing  on
    an issue that he had to decide.

16.  I  therefore  find  an  error  of  law  on  the  basis  of  procedural
    irregularity which is sufficient by itself to result  in  the  decision
    being set aside and in those circumstances it is not necessary  for  me
    to consider further the other remaining grounds advanced on  behalf  of
    the Appellant. However in this context I observe  that  the  judge  did
    make findings which related to discrepant evidence between that of  the
    Appellant and his partner (see paragraphs  48  and  49)  which,  as  Mr
    Clarke submitted, are not challenged in the grounds and  were  findings
    that were reasonably open  to  the  judge  to  make  on  the  evidence.
    However, as Miss Fitzsimons submits, there were  errors  when  reaching
    the overall finding as to the Appellant's sexuality. The judge  reached
    a finding at [50]  that  "if  the  Appellant  had  homosexual  feelings
    throughout all of his life then he would have  had  more  relationships
    than the one and only with Mr B". However such finding failed  to  take
    into account the evidence recorded by the judge  paragraphs  19  to  20
    concerning the context and  circumstances  which  led  to  that  single
    relationship. Furthermore, such a finding appears to presuppose that  a
    homosexual person will be expected to have more than one  relationship.
    There is no such test for sexual  orientation  being  measured  by  the
    nature and frequency of partners and that is an error of approach which
    I accept may have undermined his overall finding.

17. The grant of permission  also  identified  a  further  issue  that  the
    determination  is   inconsistent   concerning   the   nature   of   the
    relationship. At [54] the judge stated "I do accept that the  Appellant
    is in a genuine homosexual relationship with Mr  B  who  came  to  give
    evidence." Mr Clarke submits that this was simply a slip. That  may  be
    so when read in the light of the  paragraph  but  not  necessarily  so.
    There  were  a  number  of  spellings  and  typographical   errors   as
    highlighted  in  the  grant  of  permission  which  suggests  that  the
    determination may not have been properly proofread or indeed finalised.
    However my decision does not rest on that point and  having  considered
    the grounds overall and having reached the conclusion that the  grounds
    relating to procedural irregularity or fairness are  made  out  and  in
    addition to the points  set  out  earlier,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    determination should be set aside.

18. As to the remaking of the decision, it is not possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision as the Appellant has not been  produced
    nor have his witnesses been asked to attend and also in  the  light  of
    the ongoing litigation. It is also necessary to consider the nature  of
    the error of law found. As it refers to procedural unfairness and  also
    the findings subsequently reached, it will  be  necessary  for  further
    findings of fact to be made on all  the  evidence.  Consequently  I  am
    satisfied that the correct  course  would  be  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant's solicitors will be required to  inform  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of the time scale of the litigation and any submissions as  to
    any further listing or adjournment as may be necessary.

Decision:

The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error ona point of law; it is set aside  and  remitted  to  the  FTT  for  a
hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. The direction applies both to the Appellant and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 6/7/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
