

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01898/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 12 July 2016                       |On Friday 22 July 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between


                                    K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by Theva & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this is a
protection based claim, I consider it appropriate that the anonymity
direction is continued.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge M R Oliver promulgated  on  21  March  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 7 October 2015 rejecting his protection claim.


    2. The Appellant is from Sri Lanka. The background facts in relation to
       the Appellant's claim are set out in the Decision at [14]  to  [26].
       The Appellant was found not to be credible and/or not to be at  risk
       for reasons set out at [45] to [49] of the Decision.  This  followed
       a section of the Decision at [43] to [44] where the Judge  considers
       the Appellant's claim against the backdrop of the  country  guidance
       case of GJ & others (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
       UKUT 00319 (IAC).


    3. The main thrust of the challenge to the Decision is that  the  Judge
       failed to properly  consider  whether  the  Appellant's  name  would
       appear on a stop list or a watch list and whether, therefore,  there
       was a real risk that he would be detained on return to Sri Lanka and
       thereby face the real risk of ill treatment as identified at (4)  of
       the headnote in GJ.


    4. Permission was granted mainly on this basis by Upper Tribunal  Judge
       Plimmer on 23 May 2016.  This  matter  comes  before  me  to  decide
       whether the Decision contains an error of law and if so  to  re-make
       the Decision or remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for  re-
       hearing.


Submissions


    5. Mr Lewis submitted that the Decision  is  unsafe.   The  Appellant's
       account was accepted by the Respondent as consistent.  The Appellant
       did not exaggerate the level of his involvement with  the  LTTE;  he
       accepted that it was low level.  The risk to him though  is  on  the
       basis that the assistance given extended beyond the end of the  war.
       The Respondent's refusal focussed on the lack  of  corroboration  of
       the Appellant's account.  He should not therefore be criticised  for
       submitting the evidence from his mother  and  his  aunt  at  a  late
       stage.  The reason given by the Judge for  rejecting  that  evidence
       was that it was "self-serving".  That was not  though  a  reason  to
       place no weight on it.  That evidence was capable  of  corroborating
       the Appellant's account.


    6. Mr Lewis accepted that there is no  evidence  in  this  case  of  an
       arrest warrant or court order.  However, he  pointed  to  background
       evidence to  the  effect  that  these  documents  are  held  by  the
       authorities and it would not be possible therefore for the Appellant
       to obtain a copy.  As I observed, it is unusual for an Appellant  to
       rely on this evidence which is usually relied upon by the Respondent
       as showing that an arrest warrant or court order is unreliable.   As
       Mr Lewis pointed out, though, it is to the Appellant's  credit  that
       he has not sought to produce a document simply in order to meet  the
       Respondent's objection that there is  no  corroboration.   Mr  Lewis
       submitted that the Appellant's case is that he does not know whether
       there is an arrest warrant against him.  He directed me  to  [8]  of
       the grounds (that is the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  the
       Decision).


    7. Mr Lewis also criticised the Judge's treatment  of  the  Appellant's
       wife's failure to give evidence in support of the Appellant's  case.
       The Judge viewed as important to the  Appellant's  credibility  that
       the Appellant's wife was not called to give evidence.   He  accepted
       that the Appellant said that he had not  told  his  wife  about  the
       extent of his claim for fear of putting her in danger but the  Judge
       considered that she could nonetheless provide some  context  to  why
       the  Appellant  had  made  attempts  to  secure   leave   by   other
       applications, which factor was damaging to his credibility.


    8. Mr Kotas submitted that the Judge provided adequate reasons for  his
       findings.  The suggestion that the Appellant would be on a stop list
       was speculative given the lack of evidence that there is any  arrest
       warrant or court order in force against him.  The fact of being on a
       watch list, even if the Appellant could support such a  case,  would
       not, on the findings in GJ lead to a risk  of  detention  since  the
       evidence is that those on a watch list would be  monitored  and  not
       detained.  It is the Appellant's case that he has not  continued  to
       support the LTTE.  It is not accepted that he has been  involved  in
       activities which would  lead  the  authorities  to  suspect  him  of
       supporting them on return.


    9. Mr Kotas pointed out that the height of the Appellant's case is that
       the police were asking after him in 2011 as a result of smuggling in
       2007-8 (although I noted that in fact it  is  the  Appellant's  case
       that the risk arises not simply on that basis but  also  because  he
       assisted in providing accommodation for LTTE members  in  2009).  Mr
       Kotas pointed out that there is in fact some  inconsistency  in  the
       Appellant's case in relation to sur place  activities  as  noted  at
       [40] of the Decision.


   10. In relation to the Appellant's explanation for why  the  police  had
       not visited since 2011 (that they were aware that he  had  left  Sri
       Lanka), this assumes that the police would act in this rational way.
        It is not plausible that  they  would  not  check  whether  he  had
       returned since.  In Sri Lankan cases, it is generally  the  position
       that the police keep coming back.


   11. In relation to the (lack of) evidence  from  the  Appellant's  wife,
       this as a matter for the Judge and Mr Kotas accepted that this would
       in any event be only hearsay. That was, though, not the point  which
       the Judge was making.  It is damaging to the Appellant's credibility
       that he did not claim asylum until after he had been in the  UK  for
       some time.  The fact that he made other application in order to stay
       before resorting to making an asylum claim  was  therefore  relevant
       and the Appellant's wife could have given evidence to explain  that.
       The fact that the point was not taken in the  Respondent's  decision
       letter  was  irrelevant.   It  was   evidence   which   could   have
       corroborated the Appellant's case.


   12. In relation to the evidence from the Appellant's  aunt  and  mother,
       the Judge made two points about this.  The first  was  that  it  was
       "self-serving".  The second was that  it  was  produced  late.   The
       Judge considered the evidence in the round and it was open to him to
       give this evidence little weight.

Decision and reasons


   13. Whilst, as noted at [15] of the Decision, the Appellant's  case  was
       that he "did not know" if he was  wanted  by  the  authorities,  the
       Appellant did not  say  either  in  his  witness  statement  or  his
       interview that there was an extant arrest  warrant  or  court  order
       against him.  It was not asserted  in  Counsel's  skeleton  argument
       before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he was  at  risk  on  that
       account.  The Respondent had taken this point in the refusal  letter
       and also pointed out that neither the Appellant  nor  his  associate
       nor the persons he claimed they assisted were on  a  list  of  those
       wanted by the authorities (as noted at [27] of the Decision). It was
       not said in the aunt or mother's statement that the police in either
       Sri Lanka or India had said that a charge was made against him.   In
       light of that evidence, it  was  not  for  the  Judge  to  speculate
       whether there was an arrest warrant or court order in place.  It  is
       for  the  Appellant  to  show  a  real  risk.   The  Judge  has  not
       misunderstood the evidence.  The evidence simply  does  not  support
       the suggestion that there is an arrest warrant  or  court  order  in
       place against the Appellant.


   14. The risk which the Judge was then required to consider was  whether,
       in the event that the authorities had  any  interest  in  him  as  a
       result of his prior involvement, this interest would be a continuing
       one in circumstances where it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant
       had been in any way involved in any pro-LTTE activity since he  came
       to the UK.  The Judge noted at [40] that there is  an  inconsistency
       in that regard since the Appellant said  in  his  witness  statement
       that he had attended about twelve events in the UK to commemorate or
       protest whereas he said in interview that he had not  been  involved
       in any political activity.  Mr Lewis did not pursue a case that  the
       Appellant is at real risk as a result of any such  activities  (even
       if he did attend any demonstrations) and he was right to do so.  The
       evidence is inconsistent.


   15. The Appellant's case as to risk based on continuing support for  the
       LTTE therefore turns on his  account  of  smuggling  in  2007-8  and
       providing accommodation for three exiled LTTE members in 2009.   The
       question whether that  would  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  now  is
       considered in  GJ.   As  noted  in  GJ  the  issue  is  whether  the
       individual  concerned  had  or  would  be  perceived  to  have   any
       significant involvement with  the  LTTE  currently  or  would  be  a
       destabilising influence on return.  It is in that context  that  the
       Judge considers at [45] whether there  is  continuing  interest  and
       finds, based  on  the  fact  of  a  single  visit  to  each  of  the
       Appellant's aunt and mother in 2011,  that  there  would  not  be  a
       continuing interest even if the Appellant's case  is  taken  at  its
       highest.  The Judge was entitled to give "little if any  weight"  to
       the evidence given  in  those  letters  in  light  of  the  concerns
       identified at [46] as well as the late timing of  their  production.
       It is not the Appellant's case that he has had any involvement  with
       the LTTE since 2009 whereas there is at least  the  suggestion  that
       his friend who instigated the Appellant's involvement in 2007-9  may
       well have been involved in rebuilding the LTTE which may explain his
       friend's detention if indeed he was detained (see [37]  to  [39]  of
       the Appellant's witness statement).


   16. Although it was accepted by the Judge and the  Respondent  that  the
       Appellant's account had been largely consistent, he did not make  an
       asylum claim until 2015.  That was four years after  he  arrived  in
       the UK and after he claimed that he became  aware  that  his  fellow
       supporter who had returned to Sri Lanka had been detained as well as
       that his family had been visited in both Sri Lanka and India.  It is
       in the context of this delay as well as the further  undermining  of
       his credibility by making a number of applications after  his  leave
       expired in other categories which led the Judge  to  find  that  his
       wife's evidence could have assisted and the fact that  she  did  not
       give evidence was therefore considered important.  It  was  open  to
       the Judge to give this (lack of) evidence weight.


   17. The Judge provided a careful analysis of  the  Appellant's  evidence
       and has given adequate reasons for finding the Appellant not  to  be
       credible.  Those were open to him on the  case  as  argued  for  the
       Appellant and the  evidence  produced  on  his  behalf.   The  Judge
       properly applied the country guidance on Sri Lanka to the  facts  of
       this case.  I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in
       the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision.




    DECISION
      I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material error  of
      law.  The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver promulgated
      on 21 March 2016 is therefore maintained.
      Signed           [pic] Date    21 July 2016


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
