
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/01013/2015
                                                               PA/01014/2015
                                                               PA/01015/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21st September 2016               |On 25th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                 HP, ND & SP
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  and  is  Sinhalese.  The
    second and third appellants are the spouse and child dependants,  whose
    status is to be determined  in  line  with  the  first  appellant.  The
    dependants are both Sinhalese and citizens of Sri Lanka.

 2. As one of the appellants is a minor, I make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 11th July 2016, whereby  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  decisions  of   the
    respondent dated 26th August 2015. The decisions by the respondent were
    to refuse each of the Appellants' protection claims.

 4. By decision made on the 10th August 2016 leave to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

    Immigration History

 5. On the  2nd  November  2009  the  first  appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance to come  to  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  General  Student.  That
    application was refused in April 2010.

 6. On the 9th July 2010 the first appellant applied  again  as  a  Tier  4
    General Student. The application was granted and  the  first  appellant
    was given leave valid from 19th July 2010  to  30th  August  2013.  The
    second and third appellants were granted leave as  dependants  in  line
    with the first appellant.

 7. The appellants arrived in the UK on the 5th August 2010.

 8. On 9th August 2013 the first appellant was granted further leave  as  a
    Tier 4 General Student with the two dependants being granted  in  line.
    That leave was valid until 28th August 2014.

 9.  On the 27th May 2014 the leave of all  the  appellants  was  curtailed
    with no right of appeal. The reason for curtailment is not stated.

10. The first appellant made two further applications for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 General Student, both of which were  refused,  one  on  the
    30th June 2014 and one on the 19th  February  2015.  The  decisions  to
    refuse further leave did not attract a right of appeal.

11. On the 14th April 2015 the first appellant claimed asylum with the  two
    remaining  appellants  as  dependants.  The  respondent   refused   the
    application by decision dated the 26th August 2015. The refusal of  the
    protection claim attracted a right of appeal. The  appellants  appealed
    and the appeal was heard in the First-Tier Tribunal on 5 July 2016.

    Basis of the claim to asylum

12. The first appellant  was  born  in  1981.  She  first  met  the  second
    appellant at school.  In or about 2001 the first and second  appellants
    entered into a relationship. By late  2002  she  was  pregnant.  It  is
    alleged that the relationship between the first  and  second  appellant
    was broken off when the second appellant learnt of  the  pregnancy.  In
    part pressure from the  second  appellant's  family  may  have  been  a
    factor.

13. The first appellant was at the time living with her parents.  She  gave
    birth to the third appellant in 2003.

14. The first appellant's parents began to rent an annex of their  property
    to one Mr Nilanka [sometimes referred to as  Milanka].  It  is  claimed
    that he was Sinhalese, he had an ID card that  confirmed  his  identity
    and he claimed to be an engineering student at University  in  Colombo.
    The first appellant entered into a  relationship  with  Mr  Nilanka  in
    September/October 2007. By December 2007 the appellant  began  to  live
    with Mr Nilanka in the annex.  The  relationship  is  alleged  to  have
    lasted for some 1 � years. In April 2009 Mr  Nilanka  became  extremely
    stressed and unfriendly to the first appellant.

15. On the 9th May 2009 the first appellant found a  note  saying  that  Mr
    Nilanka had left and the first appellant was not to look for  him.  The
    first  appellant  sought  to  trace  him  through  the  University  but
    allegedly discovered that there was no student at the University by  Mr
    Nilanka's name.

16. The second appellant had been in the UK. He  heard  what  had  happened
    because he was in touch with the first appellant's sister. In May  2010
    he returned to Sri Lanka and appears to have resumed  his  relationship
    with the first appellant. They married in June 2010.

17. Thereafter the  first  appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    student. The circumstances in which the first appellant  entered  as  a
    student and the two remaining appellants entered as dependants  is  set
    out above.

18. Whilst the appellants were in the UK, it is alleged that the Sri Lankan
    Terrorism Investigation Division of Colombo [TID]  went  to  the  first
    appellant's home looking for Mr Nilanka and to the home  of  the  first
    appellant's parents. According to the appellant's statement  this  took
    place or about October 2010. TID were seeking Mr Nilanka alleging  that
    he had been involved in the LTTE's explosive  intelligence  unit.  They
    requested that the first appellant return to Sri Lanka  and  report  to
    them.

19. I note that the documents produced by the appellant at pages 45  to  51
    seem to indicate that the police interest in Mr Nilanka came  after  he
    had escaped on the 8th June 2014 from an incident involving the police.



20. Allegedly the TID called again at the parent's home  in  January  2015,
    stating that they had found  new  evidence.  They  arrested  the  first
    appellant's father and detained  him  overnight.  They  questioned  the
    father about the  first  appellant  and  Mr  Nilanka.  The  father  was
    allegedly released on reporting conditions.

21. It is alleged that the TID  commenced  court  proceedings  against  the
    first appellant and had a warrant for the arrest of the first appellant
    issued by the court. Documents were produced including court  documents
    and a copy of the arrest  warrant.  Checks  had  been  carried  out  by
    embassy staff in Colombo and as a result of  those  checks  a  document
    verification report had been produced. In respect  of  Court  Case  no.
    B122474/14 and the warrant for arrest issued in respect  of  that  case
    the information indicated that the case had not been filed by the TID.

22. The document verification report [DVR]  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    contains the following:-

         According to the court documents received for case no B12474/14 the
         complainant is given as the Terrorism Investigation Division  (TID)
         Colombo.

         09/02/2016 at 12.29 pm

         A  written  request  was  submitted  to  the  Director,   Terrorist
         Investigation Division Columbo via fax ...to enquire as to  whether
         a court case bearing reference B12474/2014 had been filed by  their
         division.

         18/04/2016 at 8.30am

         Terrorism Investigation Division  confirmed  that  court  reference
         B12474/14 is not relevant to the T I D and that no  case  has  been
         filed by them under this reference.

23. On that basis the documents submitted by the appellants were held to be
    false. It is clear  that  the  information  that  had  originally  been
    requested was to the director of the TID, but it is not clear as to who
    was giving the response.

24. As part  of  the  appellant's  evidence  written  statements  had  been
    obtained from the first appellant's parents and sister to  support  the
    first appellant's account.

25. The appellants in response to the DVR had had legal representatives  in
    Sri Lanka attend the court to obtain confirmation  that  the  documents
    themselves had been issued by the court. As such verification had  been
    carried out, it was submitted that little weight could be  placed  upon
    the document verification report. It was asserted that the DVR  was  an
    unimpressive document which was vague to the point of unreliability and
    amounted to little more than unverifiable assertions.

26. The first appellant claimed that she feared returning to Sri  Lanka  as
    she feared being arrested, detained and mistreated by the  authorities.



27. The judge rejected the appellant's account. The  judge  in  considering
    the claims by the first appellant took account of  the  case  of  GJ  &
    others Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319.    The  judge  has  considered
    carefully the categories of individuals that would be at risk on return
    to Sri Lanka. The judge determined that the first appellant  would  not
    be at risk on return to Sri Lanka and therefore  the  dependents  would
    not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

    Grounds of appeal

28. The Grounds of appeal set out  a  number  of  matters.  Firstly  it  is
    alleged that the judge misdirected himself as to his role and sought to
    assess "the plausibility of a counter narrative to  the  evidence  that
    the witness presented in court".

29. It was  suggested  that  the  judge  was  not  seeking  to  assess  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account but had to consider whether  or
    not such was credible. It was submitted that the only  circumstance  in
    which the "counter narrative" became relevant to the assessment of  the
    evidence was where the account was so overwhelmingly unlikely that some
    other account must be true. It is  alleged  that  the  judge  erred  by
    taking account of his own irrelevant speculations. It is  suggested  in
    the light of that that the judge  having  assessed  the  character  and
    history of the first appellant jumped from conclusions relating to that
    to conclusions that she would have  known  of  the  involvement  of  Mr
    Nilanka with the LTTE, if such had been true.

30. Similarly it is suggested that  the  judge  has  made  plausibility  or
    credibility findings which were unjustified in the culture  and  family
    circumstances that apply in Sri Lanka.

31. Secondly it is suggested that the judge has failed to make findings  on
    relevant evidence and it is impossible to know what if any evidence  he
    rejected or accepted, specifically with regard to the written  evidence
    from the first appellant's parents and sister.

32. Finally it is suggested that there was  inadequate  assessment  of  the
    court documents. For the reasons set out above it is submitted that the
    document verification report cannot be relied upon and that  the  judge
    has failed to act upon the evidence from the appellant's lawyer in  Sri
    Lanka.

    Error of law

33. In the hearing before me the appellant's  representative  commenced  by
    dealing with the third  ground.  The  presenting  officer  submitted  a
    document dealing with the process of verification of  documents,  where
    an appellant produced documents allegedly emanating from the Sri Lankan
    police or court.  The  appellant's  representative  did  not  take  any
    objection to the document being  submitted.  That  indicates  that  the
    verification method in most cases was to attend the police  station  or
    court that had purportedly issued the document and asked them to  check
    their records. It was suggested that where the court is too remote then
    a direct approach may be made to the police concerned but that redacted
    documents and information was provided to them.

34. The appellant's representative sought to allege that this was  not  the
    procedure followed in the present case. The representative pointed  out
    that the court in question was in Colombo but that  the  TID  had  been
    approached directly. The representative sought to suggest that the  TID
    would be unwilling to provide genuine information to the  embassy.  The
    representative claimed that in the light of the documentation submitted
    on the appellants' behalf and in light of the doubts as to  the  source
    of the information provided the document verification report could  not
    be relied upon. In the circumstances the findings  that  the  documents
    originally submitted by the appellants relating to the  court  and  the
    arrest warrant could not stand. It is  suggested  that  the  judge  has
    considered the documentation in isolation. That the judge  should  have
    considered the documents as an  integral  part  of  the  assessment  of
    credibility.

35. The report submitted by the presenting officer clearly  indicates  that
    redacted information is provided so as to protect the identity  of  the
    individuals that are allegedly  being  investigated.  The  report  also
    confirms that the relationships between the embassy and the  police  in
    Sri Lanka are good and that valid  information  is  obtained  from  the
    police as to the genuineness or otherwise of such documentation.

36. In paragraphs 24 through to 37 the judge has  summarised  the  evidence
    that was before him. Included in the summary of that  evidence  is  the
    issue of the arrest warrant. The judge was clearly aware of the  arrest
    warrant and the document verification report  which  alleged  that  the
    arrest warrant was not a genuine document. The  judge  also  considered
    the evidence on behalf of the appellants from  a  lawyer  presented  to
    answer the respondent's case. It is thereafter that the judge has  made
    his findings of credibility and fact.

37. The judge has to start somewhere in assessing the facts of the case and
    the judge was entitled to proceed  logically  through  the  appellant's
    account and deal with issues of credibility in respect thereof. Clearly
    having summarised the evidence including the evidence  with  regard  to
    the document verification report the  judge  was  mindful  of  such  in
    assessing the overall credibility of the appellant.

38. The judge had valid evidence before him upon which he could act to come
    to the conclusion that the documents produced by the appellant relating
    to a court case lodged by the TID were not a genuine  document.  Whilst
    it is suggested that the procedure advocated in the  guidance  produced
    at the hearing had not been followed in this case, in fact that is  not
    correct. The document merely suggest that in most cases contact is made
    with the court. Whilst the example is given that  where  the  court  is
    remote contact would not be made with the court  but  with  the  police
    department, that is not to say that that is invariably  followed.  Here
    for whatever reason direct contact with the TID was made. The  document
    clearly identifies that the  information  passed  from  the  police  is
    reliable information and that they have a good  relationship  with  the
    police in Sri Lanka. The judge has given valid reasons for finding that
    the documents submitted by the appellant were not genuine.

39. In dealing with the credibility of the first appellant and her  account
    the judge had noted that the first appellant was seeking to assert that
    she had been advised by a solicitor to delay claiming asylum until such
    time as her student leave had run out. The judge noted however that the
    first appellant student leave had been curtailed in April 2014. Despite
    that the appellant had made two further applications  for  leave  as  a
    student, which had been refused. It was only at  that  stage  that  the
    appellant sought for the first time to make  a  claim  with  regard  to
    asylum in April 2015, 12 months after her leave had been curtailed  and
    5 years after her problems in Sri Lanka had allegedly arisen. The judge
    was entitled on the basis of that evidence to conclude that the conduct
    of the appellant was material in assessing credibility.

40. The judge has thereafter gone on to assess  the  circumstances  of  the
    first appellant and  the  alleged  relationship  with  Mr  Nilanka.  In
    considering the facts the judge noted  that  the  first  appellant  was
    highly  educated  and  intelligent.  She  had  been  in   an   intimate
    relationship for a period of the year and a half. The judge clearly did
    not find the first appellant's account credible. In  assessing  whether
    or not the first appellant's account  was  credible  some  support  was
    provided by evidence from her parents and her sister. In rejecting  the
    appellant's account the judge was clearly aware of  such  evidence  and
    was rejecting the evidence of the sister and the parents. The judge has
    gone through in  a  logical  fashion  factors  which  led  him  to  the
    conclusion that the first appellant's account was not credible.

41. As is evident from  paragraph  19  the  judge  considered  all  of  the
    documentation submitted in support of the appellant's account including
    the letters from the lawyers and the statements  from  the  appellant's
    family members. That having been said the judge has given valid reasons
    for finding that the appellant's account was not  credible.  The  judge
    does not need to itemise each and every piece of evidence  and  why  he
    accepts or rejects such evidence. The judge only has  to  set  out  the
    valid reasons for rejecting the  account  given  and  for  finding  the
    account overall not credible. Just merely because  the  judge  has  not
    referred to a specific piece of evidence does not mean that  the  judge
    has not taken it into account. [see R (Iran) &  others  v  SSHD  (2005)
    EWCA Civ 982]

42. In the circumstances the judge has given valid reasons  for  coming  to
    the conclusions that he has.

43. In the circumstances there is no material error of law in the decision.
     I uphold the decision to dismiss these appeals on all grounds.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          25th October 2016


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellants or any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          25th October 2016
