


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01786/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham           |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On : 12 June 2017                   |On : 14 June 2017                     |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              shazaib muzaffar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, instructed by Hansan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  10
February 2016 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 January 1989.  He  entered
the UK on 25 January 2012 with a Tier 4 student visa  valid  until  16  June
2013 and was subsequently granted further leave until 30  October  2014.  He
claims to have returned to Pakistan on 15 May 2014 and  to  have  re-entered
the UK on 4 October 2015 using a British passport provided by an  agent.  He
claimed asylum on 28 October 2015 and  was  subsequently  interviewed  about
his claim. His claim was refused on 10 February 2016.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 30 August 2016 and was dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 3 October 2016. Permission was granted on 26 October 2016.

The appellant's asylum claim was based upon  his  alleged  involvement  with
the United Kashmir's People's National Party (UKPNP)  in  Pakistan  and  the
UK. The respondent, in refusing his claim, did not accept that he  had  been
involved in the UKPNP and did not accept his account of the problems he  had
experienced in Pakistan. The respondent concluded that he  would  be  at  no
risk on return to Pakistan and did not accept that his removal  to  Pakistan
would breach his human rights.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Colvin. The judge did not accept  the  appellant's  claim  to
have been involved with the UKPNP in Pakistan and concluded  that  he  would
be at no risk on return as a result of his limited  activities  in  the  UK.
She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge  Colvin's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on grounds challenging her adverse  findings  on  his  asylum
claim and referring to his marriage to a British citizen who  had  lived  in
the UK all her life. Permission to appeal was granted only  on  the  grounds
that the judge had failed to consider Article 8 which  had  been  raised  in
appellant's representative's skeleton argument. The grounds relating to  the
appellant's asylum claim were not considered to disclose any arguable  error
of law by the judge.

The appeal came before me on 12 June 2017.  It  was  agreed  that  the  only
issue was whether the judge had erred by failing to consider Article 8.

Mr Bradshaw submitted that the decision confirmed at [7] that the judge  had
before her evidence of the appellant's Islamic marriage to his British  wife
on 30 May 2016. He  advised  me  that  the  appellant  had  different  legal
representatives before the First-tier Tribunal and he therefore had  limited
knowledge of what had occurred at  the  hearing.  However  his  instructions
from the appellant and his wife were that counsel had drafted a  handwritten
statement from the wife and had  handed  that  up  to  the  judge  and  that
counsel had offered oral evidence from the appellant's wife  but  the  judge
had declined to hear from her due to lack of time. He did not  have  a  copy
of that statement, but submitted that in any event there was  a  strong  and
compelling  case  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the  immigration   rules,
particularly  as  the  appellant's  wife  was  now  pregnant,  although  the
evidence of that was not before the judge. Mr Bradshaw  submitted  that  the
judge therefore ought to have considered Article 8.




Mr Mills submitted that the appellant's grounds of appeal before the  First-
tier Tribunal did not raise Article 8 and therefore, in accordance with  the
amendments made by the Immigration Act 2014  the  Tribunal  could  not  have
considered such a ground without  the  appellant  having  first  applied  to
amend the grounds to include Article  8  and  the  respondent  having  given
consent to admit the ground. In any event, even if  consent  were  taken  to
have been given, the appellant could not have succeeded on  such  a  ground.
His marriage was not valid under UK law and there was no evidence at all  of
cohabitation. There was no evidence of insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
life continuing in Pakistan.  Therefore  the  absence  of  consideration  of
Article 8 was immaterial.

I advised the parties that I found no error of law in the  judge's  decision
and I now give my reasons for so concluding.

Consideration and findings.

As Mr Mills submitted, Article 8 was not raised at all  in  the  grounds  of
appeal before the judge. I have some reservations as to the  merits  of  his
submission that the judge had no statutory entitlement to  consider  such  a
ground without consent being given by the Secretary of  State,  particularly
when Article 8 was in fact considered in the refusal decision.  Nevertheless
the fact remains that, other than a  brief  mention  of  Article  8  in  the
skeleton argument produced for the appeal, there is no indication in any  of
the papers before me that Article 8 was actively  pursued  as  a  ground  of
appeal.  The  appellant  made  no  mention  of  Article  8  in  his  witness
statement. I am not prepared to accept  the  appellant's  claim  that  Judge
Colvin declined to hear from his wife owing to a lack of court  time  and  I
note that neither Mr Bradshaw nor Mr Mills had a  copy  of  any  handwritten
statement from the appellant's wife and neither was there  such  a  document
on the Tribunal file or any indication from the judge that such  a  document
had been adduced.  Indeed  Judge  Colvin's  clear  and  detailed  record  of
proceedings makes no reference at  all  to  such  a  witness  statement  and
clearly indicates that no submissions were  made  on  Article  8.  The  only
reference,  in  the  judge's  record  of  proceedings,  to  the  appellant's
marriage, was as part  of  examination  of  chief  when  the  appellant  was
explaining the documents he had submitted and the risk he  claimed  to  face
on return to Pakistan. That is reflected in [7] of the judge's decision.

On that basis alone I find no error of law on  the  part  of  the  judge  by
making no findings on Article 8. However, and in  any  event,  even  if  she
ought to have at least addressed Article 8, any arguable  failings  in  that
regard cannot possibly be considered as material given the limited  evidence
before her and the lack of any merit in such a  claim.   The  only  evidence
before the judge which could possibly be taken as relating to an  Article  8
claim consisted of a copy of the appellant's wife's  British  passport,  the
Islamic marriage certificate, his wife's payslip and one photograph  of  the
marriage ceremony, and some evidence of the appellant's past studies in  the
UK. There was no evidence of a valid marriage under UK law and  no  evidence
of cohabitation or of a  subsisting  relationship.  Neither  was  there  any
evidence of, or suggestion that there may be,  insurmountable  obstacles  to
family life continuing in Pakistan - on the contrary the evidence  was  that
the appellant's wife had ties  to  Pakistan.  Plainly  the  requirements  of
Appendix FM could not be met, nor those of paragraph 276ADE(1)  in  relation
to private life. I asked Mr Bradshaw to  show  me  any  evidence  suggesting
compelling circumstances outside the immigration rules and he was only  able
to suggest the fact that the appellant's wife was pregnant and that she  had
lived all her life in the  UK  but  he  also  conceded  that  there  was  no
evidence of the pregnancy before the judge. It is plain that  there  was  no
evidence  before  the  judge  (or   before   myself)   of   any   compelling
circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the rules and, again,  the
Article 8 case before the judge,  if  there  indeed  was  one  at  all,  was
hopeless and could not  possibly  have  succeeded.  Therefore  any  arguable
error by the judge in failing to make findings on Article 8 was immaterial.

In light of  the  cogently  reasoned  and  properly  made  findings  on  the
appellant's protection claim, and having regard to the above in relation  to
Article 8, the judge was unarguably entitled to conclude that the  appellant
was at no risk on return to Pakistan and that his removal would  not  breach
his human rights and to dismiss the appeal. The grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law. I  do
not set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity. I see no need  for
    anonymity in this case and I therefore discharge the order pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 12 June
2017
