
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/01974/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |                   Decision & Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                                |
|On 21 April 2017                  |                   On 3 May 2017           |
|                                  |                                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                     MZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rory O'Ryan of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abonie


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is an Iranian citizen who was born on 1 September,  1985.
     He left Iran illegally and  travelled  on  foot  to  Turkey  where  he
    remained for two days.  He then left Turkey by lorry and  travelled  to
    an unknown country.  Four lorries later he eventually  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom after some fifteen or  seventeen  days  and  he  claimed
    asylum on 25 August, 2015.

2.   The appellant applied for asylum, but his application was refused in  a
    letter dated 11 February, 2016 and he appealed  that  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard in Manchester on 9 November,
    2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge J J Maxwell.

3.    The  judge's  findings  appear  to  start  at  paragraph  28  of   the
    determination.  There, the judge quotes an extract  from  a  report  on
    Iranian Kurds compiled by the Danish Refugee Council and  published  in
    September, 2013.

4.   The appellant had, during his first asylum interview, been asked  about
    his membership of the KDPI  and  between  questions  131  and  151  the
    appellant explained that he became a  member,  but  did  not  have  any
    membership card, he simply issued a photograph to a friend of  his  and
    had been told that once two members of the KDPI recommend  a  candidate
    five or six months later you become a member.  He described himself  as
    being a low profile member in Iran and described the aims of the  KDPI.
    He confirmed that he had not undertaken any military activity  in  Iran
    and did not undergo any physical test before he joined.

5.   In paragraph 29  of  the  determination  the  judge  makes  an  adverse
    finding of credibility against the appellant, because the  passage  the
    judge quotes in  Paragraph  28  does  not  suggest  that  the  form  of
    recruitment described in it is limited to those who are joining in  the
    Kurdish Region of  Iraq  or  otherwise  outside  the  Iranian  borders.
    However, Mr O'Ryan has pointed out to me that in  fact  other  extracts
    from the Danish Refugee Council Report very clearly do confirm that the
    answers given by the appellant are correct  and  that  the  passage  in
    question relates only to those who join the KDPI in Iraq.  He  referred
    me to the fourth paragraph under section 1.2 on page 13 of the  report,
    where reference is made to the KDPI having camps in Iraq.  He  referred
    me to the last paragraph of section 1.2 at the top  of  page  15  where
    reference was made to  an  agreement  being  signed  with  the  Iranian
    government stipulating that  parties  should  stop  their  attempts  of
    sending members to Iran, in return for  which  the  Iranian  government
    would stop the bombardment of party camps in KRI.  He referred me  also
    to paragraph 7 under the heading 1.3.2  on  page  18.   This  quoted  a
    spokesman saying that most asylum seekers in Europe  claiming  to  have
    conducted activities for the KDPI  are  sympathisers  and  if  a  party
    sympathiser in Iran faces danger he may go to the KRI occasionally such
    sympathiser facing danger in Iran  may  be  advised  to  go  to  Europe
    instead since going to the camp in KRI may reveal his connection to the
    party.

6.   Next Mr O'Ryan referred me to the second and third full  paragraphs  on
    page 31.  In the second paragraph the spokesman  explained  that  there
    were different types of membership within the KDPI, all  predicated  on
    the basis that a member will receive a  training  course  and  possibly
    will remain in the camp for many  years.   The  spokesman  went  on  to
    describe that a person can become a member of  the  KDPI  and  take  on
    responsibilities in different countries so that a Kurd  from  Iran  can
    become a member even if he is in Denmark.

7.   I noticed that another spokesman explained that the KDPI  have  a  wide
    variety of members in Iran and that in order to be recruited  into  the
    KDPI in Iran there are filters which a person has to go through and the
    process is long.  A person will be under close scrutiny for between six
    months and a year before he or she can  join  a  secret  cell.   Having
    joined a cell the person will carry out activities corresponding to his
    or her qualifications.  A professor or student  might  be  assigned  to
    educational activities and teach people how the regime works  and  what
    the KDPI's policies are.  Others may contribute arranging protests  and
    demonstrations.

8.   Mr O'Ryan suggested that the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's account of recruitment  does  not  accord  with  the  known
    methodology of recruitment.  A careful reading of the whole report  and
    consideration of section 2.1.3 in context clearly shows  that  what  is
    discussed in the quotation referred to by the  judge  ,relates  to  the
    recruitment of members in Iraq, not in Iran.

9.   For the respondent the Presenting Officer suggested that the judge  had
    directed himself correctly and that his  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claimed recruitment to the KDPI were ones which  were  open
    to him on the basis of the report.

10.  Mr O'Ryan had drawn my attention to the first  paragraph  on  page  26,
    where an Iranian scholar specialising  in  ethnic  minorities  in  Iran
    explained that a large part of the party's organisation is outside Iran
    and  that  the  party's  organisational  presence  in  Iran  is  rather
    rudimentary.  He drew my attention to the first four paragraphs on page
    32 where according to a reporter, if a person in Iran wanted to  become
    a member of the KDPI he may contact his local party cell  and  ask  for
    it.  The source did not wish to go further into details on  recruitment
    of party members in Iran because of the party's security precautions.

11.  Next Mr O'Ryan referred me to evidence in the appellant's bundle  which
    comprised a letter purporting  to  come  from  the  KDPI  Paris  office
    confirming that the appellant is a member of the party and that because
    of oppression exercise by him against the regime, he has been forced to
    leave Iranian Kurdistan.  The  document,  which  follows  at  page  15,
    appears to confirm that the letter in question was  sent  by  facsimile
    from the Paris office of the KDPI.

12.  For the respondent the Presenting  Officer  suggested  that  while  the
    letter may in fact originate from the Paris office of the KDPI, it  may
    not have been sent by an official.  She referred me to paragraph  2.1.5
    of the Danish Report at the bottom of page 32 which explained that when
    the representation in Paris is requested to verify whether a person  is
    a party member or sympathiser, it will ask the party's headquarters  in
    Khoysanjak Camp in IRI to investigate  the  case.   Upon  receiving  an
    answer from Khoysanjak the representation in Paris will issue a  letter
    of recommendation.  In that letter in  addition  to  the  name  of  the
    person in question it is  stated  in  French  whether  the  recommended
    person is a KDPI member or sympathiser.  The letter  of  recommendation
    signed by the KDPI's representative  in  Paris  will  be  sent  by  fax
    directly to the asylum administration in the country in  question.   It
    will never be handed to the recommended person himself.  If the  asylum
    administration requests the original letter the KDPI representation  in
    Paris  will  send  the  letter  by  post  directly   to   that   asylum
    administration.  In the event that the letter of recommendation is sent
    from another KDPI representative or elsewhere KDPI in Paris cannot take
    responsibility.  The KDPI's representative in Paris added  that  if  an
    asylum court needs a KDPI testimony in an asylum case, it is the KDPI's
    representation in Paris that should appoint possible witnesses in  such
    cases.

13.  Mrs Abonie had pointed out that the letter in  question  had  not  been
    sent to the asylum administration in the United Kingdom.  It  had  been
    sent to representatives acting on behalf of the appellant and the judge
    was therefore correct in doubting its authenticity.

14.  Mr O'Ryan's next challenge was in relation to the finding at  paragraph
    33.  There the judge noted that according to  the  appellant's  account
    there was not the slightest prospect the police officers who he claimed
    observed him and his colleague flyposting, actually identified him.  It
    was at night and at best the officers were several hundred metres  away
    from him and he then  ran  instantly  into  the  darkness.   The  judge
    questions how he was subsequently identified with sufficient  precision
    to enable a raid to take place on  his  home  address,  mounted  within
    hours and  refers  to  the  fact  that  it  must  have  been  that  the
    appellant's colleague must have  been  captured  and  informed  on  the
    appellant but there was no evidence to suggest that was the  case.   Mr
    O'Ryan pointed out that it would have been impossible for the appellant
    to have explained how the police subsequently raided his house  and  it
    might well be  that  his  fellow  KDPI  sympathiser  was  captured  and
    identified the appellant.

15.  The next challenge was in respect of the judge's finding  at  paragraph
    34,  where  the  claimed  treatment  of  the  appellant's  family  upon
    discovery of further anti-regime documentation at the appellant's  home
    was not in accordance with the background material and he thought  that
    was a significant  inconsistency.   However,  the  background  material
    comprised in the Danish Report did not suggest that the members of  the
    appellant's family were always harassed and mistreated.  On page 21  of
    the Danish Report, it speaks of  how  the  regime  treats  families  of
    someone who is caught with a flyer.  The report speaks  of  the  regime
    sometimes detaining a family member and  interrogating  them  and  then
    releasing them or  possibly  holding  one  of  the  family  members  in
    detention.  Further on in  the  report  reference  is  made  to  people
    sometimes being put under pressure from the Iranian government  and  of
    course there is no means by which the appellant could know whether that
    may not have happened in his case because he has not been in touch with
    his family.  Finally, Mr O'Ryan suggested that the judge had failed  to
    take into account parts  of  the  appellant's  evidence  drawn  to  his
    attention,  which  were  consistent  with  the   country   information.
    Specifically these were KDPI celebrations and commemorative  occasions.
    Four of them were  drawn  to  his  attention  but  the  judge  made  no
    reference to this evidence and failed to make any findings of  fact  in
    relation to the appellant's knowledge of these matters.

16.  Mrs Abonie pointed out that the report did not say that family  members
    were arrested, but it does suggest that they  will  be  harassed.   She
    submitted that the judge  had  made  clear  findings  having  carefully
    examined the evidence and those findings were open to him to make.  She
    asked me to uphold the determination.

17.  I have concluded that this is a determination which cannot stand.   The
    first adverse credibility finding is at paragraph 29 and  is  based  on
    one quotation from an 84 page report prepared  by  the  Danish  Refugee
    Council.  It is clear why the judge fell into  error  in  quoting  this
    paragraph.  The Home Office had  been  relying  on  the  paragraph  for
    asserting that the appellant could not be a member of the KDPI  because
    he had not undergone physical tests  and  not  participated  in  social
    events.  However it is clear to me that from the report  the  paragraph
    in question deals with the recruitment of KDPI members in Iraq, not the
    recruitment of KDPI members in Kurdish Iran.

18.  Had the judge (and the Home Office) carefully  read  the  report,  that
    would have been obvious to him (and to them).  The judge then  went  on
    in paragraph 30 of his determination to refer to what the  report  said
    about letters  emanating  from  Paris  and  applying  Tanveer  Ahmed  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department* [2002] UKAIT 00439 did  not
    accept the letter as having any evidential value.  That was  a  further
    error of law.  As Tanveer Ahmed makes perfectly clear, the question  of
    a document's evidential value  should  be  assessed  after  credibility
    findings have been made but in this determination the only  credibility
    finding that was made is one which was unsafe because it  relied  on  a
    failure to consider  all  the  background  material.   The  finding  at
    paragraph 33 is also unsafe.  The judge suggests  that  it  would  have
    required K to have been captured and informed on the appellant  if  the
    events which the appellant claims transpired had actually taken  place.
    However simply because there is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  K  was
    arrested does not  mean  necessarily  that  he  was  not.   As  to  the
    treatment of the appellant's family, again I believe that the judge has
    simply not paid sufficient attention  to  the  Danish  Refugee  Council
    Report.

19.  I have concluded therefore that I must  set  aside  the  whole  of  the
    judge's determination.  I have considered whether this matter should be
    retained in the  Upper  Tribunal  or  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Unfortunately, those representing the appellant did not make
    clear to the Tribunal that an interpreter would be  required  until  24
    hours ago.  As a result, I am not able to proceed to  hear  the  appeal
    afresh myself today.  I  have  concluded  that  it  would  in  all  the
    circumstances be heard very much quicker  if  the  matter  were  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   A  Farsi  interpreter  would  be
    required and I would respectfully suggest that  at  least  three  hours
    should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Richard Chalkley
A          Judge          of          the           Upper           Tribunal
                          Date 30 April 2017
