
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01298/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2019                           |On 19th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     UQ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                  Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blundell promulgated on 16 March 2018, in which the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 13 January 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in 1999, who claims to
    have arrived clandestinely in the  United  Kingdom  on  29  July  2015,
    following which he claimed asylum on 8 August 2015 on the  basis  of  a
    fear of persecution on return to Afghanistan from the  authorities  due
    to his father's affiliation with the Taliban and because he worked with
    him for the Taliban.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Applicant's father worked for  the  Taliban  and  the
    Appellant  was  considered  to  have  given  a  vague  account  of  his
    involvement, training and arrests and it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    letter relied upon was clearly from the Taliban.   The  Respondent  did
    not accept that the Appellant was at risk on return to Afghanistan, nor
    that he was entitled to humanitarian protection, nor that  his  removal
    would breach Articles 2 and/or 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  There was no general risk on return under Article 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive and no specific factors giving rise to  a  risk
    over and above that.  The Appellant's human rights application was also
    refused on the basis that he did not meet any of the requirements for a
    grant of leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances.

 4. Judge Blundell dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  16
    March 2018 all grounds.  Although it was found  that  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal did not withstand scrutiny, it was found  that  the
    Appellant had given inconsistent evidence about his length of detention
    and when the police visited his home in  Afghanistan  looking  for  his
    father.  Even taking into account the Appellant's age (he is  a  was  a
    minor at the time  of  these  events)  and  vulnerability,  these  were
    considered to  be  fundamental  inconsistencies  which  undermined  the
    credibility of his claim.  Overall, the Appellant was found not  to  be
    at real risk of persecution in his home area and likely to be  able  to
    re-establish contact with his family on  return.   In  any  event,  the
    Appellant could internally relocate to Kabul.  The  Appellant  did  not
    pursue any human rights claims at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but in any event the appeal as dismissed on these  grounds  as
    well.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals with permission on two grounds.  First, that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law   in   failing   to   assess   the
    inconsistencies in the round against the available background  evidence
    and expert report.   More  specifically,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 40 of the decision did not  accept  that  there  had  been  a
    mistake in  the  Appellant's  written  statement,  but  the  solicitors
    representing the Appellant at the time have accepted that there was  an
    error as the discrepancy in the statement was not picked up.  Secondly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal made findings as to the Appellant's family
    and  circumstances  of  his  departure  from  Afghanistan  without  any
    evidential  basis  and  followed  only  from  the  rejection   of   the
    Appellant's protection claim.

 6. A hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 8 November  2018  was  adjourned
    with directions for the Appellant's solicitors  to  file  and  serve  a
    comprehensive witness statement in relation to the alleged error on the
    part of the Appellant's previous legal representatives,  with  relevant
    documentation to be attached, within 21 days.

 7. A statement from the Appellant's current solicitors was filed  late  on
    19 December 2018, with no explanation  for  the  delay  or  failure  to
    comply with the directions.  However, it is  clearly  material  to  the
    issues in this appeal and in the interests  of  justice  I  admit  that
    further evidence and return  below  in  more  detail  to  the  material
    submitted.

Findings and reasons

 8. In relation to the first ground of appeal, it is necessary to  set  out
    in more detail the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  first
    inconsistency  and  then  consider  the  subsequent  explanations   and
    evidence that has been given in relation to it.

 9. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are set out in paragraphs 38 to
    40 as follows:

         "38. The final point taken in  the  refusal  letter  requires  more
         detailed consideration, however.  It was said there, at  [65]-[68],
         that the Afghan  authorities  had  no  interest  in  the  appellant
         because they had visited the family home after the appellant's  two
         detentions and they had shown no interest in  the  appellant.   The
         respondent had  understood  from  the  interviews  and  the  asylum
         statement that the chronology of events was that the visits to  the
         family home took place after the appellant's two detentions.   That
         understanding seems to have been borne fairly squarely out  of  the
         appellant's  answer  to  question  129  of  the  asylum  interview.
         Neither  [14]  of  the  asylum  statement  nor  the  post-interview
         representations made by his solicitor gave a contrary impression.

         39. At  [10]  of  his  appeal  statement,  however,  the  appellant
         responded to this point in the refusal letter by stating: "I should
         have made clear in my Asylum Statement that he first two times that
         the police came looking for  my  father  were  both  before  I  was
         detained  for  distributing  Taliban   letters."    The   appellant
         confirmed, in adopting this statement, not only that  it  was  true
         and accurate but also that there was nothing in it that  he  wished
         to amend.  Mr  Entecott  cross-examined  the  appellant  about  the
         changed chronology,  therefore.   The  appellant  reverted  to  the
         account he had given initially, stating that  the  visits  occurred
         after he was arrested.   He  said  that  there  must  have  been  a
         misunderstanding when his appeal statement was prepared.

         40. I considered this discrepancy to  be  non-peripheral.   I  have
         considered it carefully, bearing in mind the appellant's status  as
         a vulnerable witness and the fact that he would have been  a  child
         when the matters in question occurred.  Ultimately, however, I  did
         not consider that the appellant's  age  and  vulnerability  was  an
         element  of  this  discrepancy  (I  refer  to  [14]  of  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note).  The appellant did not maintain in his
         statement  or  in  his  evidence  before  me  that  there  was  any
         difficulty in recalling the order of these critical events.  He was
         clear in his appeal statement that the  respondent's  understanding
         of the chronology was wrong, despite the fact that it was borne out
         of his own answer to question 129 of the interview.  Having adopted
         that statement and confirmed that there was nothing which he wished
         to amend,  he  stated  that  there  was  a  misunderstanding.   The
         appellant has been represented by  the  same  firm  of  experienced
         immigration  solicitors  throughout.   It  is  apparent  from   the
         statements, letters  and  Letters  Before  Action  that  they  have
         represented him diligently and with a constant eye on the fact that
         he was a minor until recently.  I do not accept that a mistake  was
         made in compiling the appeal statement.  I consider  the  situation
         to be, instead, that the appellant amended his account in  response
         to the point taken at [65]-[68] of the refusal letter but  that  he
         became muddled over that amendment when he gave evidence before me.
          Mr Hodson submitted that the appellant had remained resolute  when
         the problem was put to him but, as I observed during argument,  the
         appellant had two choices - obfuscation or  standing  fast  to  his
         last answer - and his choice of the latter does not show that he is
         telling the truth.  I consider this discrepancy to detract from the
         credibility of the appellant's account."

10. As recorded in the passages  above,  the  Appellant's  account  in  his
    asylum interview and asylum statement were that the  police  visits  to
    the  family  home  took  place  after  he  had  been  detained  by  the
    authorities on two occasions.  In contrast, in the Appellant's  written
    statement signed and dated 15 February 2018, he stated at paragraph 10:

         "At paragraph 67 of the Decision, the decision maker says  that  he
         does not believe that I am wanted by the Authorities.  He says that
         this is because the Authorities came to my home on  two  occasions,
         looking for my father without arresting me.   I  should  have  made
         clear in my Asylum Statement that the  first  two  times  that  the
         police came looking for my father were both before I  was  detained
         for distributing Taliban letters."

11. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that material has now been
    submitted which shows that a mistake was made either by  the  Appellant
    or by his legal representatives in relation to the chronology of police
    visits/detention  and  but  for  that  mistake,  there  would   be   no
    discrepancy and no reason for the adverse credibility finding  on  this
    basis.  The material now submitted shows that there was  an  unfairness
    to the Appellant  in  the  appeal  proceedings,  even  if  it  was  not
    available to the First-tier Tribunal and the Judge was unaware  of  it.
    It was submitted that a de novo hearing is required for this  Appellant
    to remedy the unfairness.

12. The response to the Appellant's solicitors from Elder Rahimi solicitors
    (the Appellant's previous legal  representatives)  is  exhibited  to  a
    written statement.  The documents include an  e-mail  (from  which  the
    date has been cut off) which includes the following:

         "An initial draft of the statement was prepared on  29.01.2018.   I
         have attached the attendance notes from this appointment.  I failed
         to notice the discrepancy between the AIR and the WS  paragraph  10
         which was later picked up by the Immigration Judge.  You  will  see
         from my  attendance  notes  that  [the  Appellant]  appeared  tired
         towards the end of the appointment, when the  second  half  of  his
         statement was read back to him.

         On 19.02.2018 the caseworker who had conduct of the appeal reviewed
         the draft statement and again, did not pick up on this discrepancy.
          I have attached his attendance notes.

         On 15.02.2018 a final draft of the statement was prepared with [the
         Appellant].  My annexed attendance notes  state:  "Second  half  of
         statement read back to  client  again  as  he  appeared  sleepy  at
         previous appointment."  Unfortunately  it  is  not  clear  from  my
         attendance notes whether the second half of the statement read back
         to [the Appellant], included paragraph 10 which  is  situated  just
         before the middle of the statement.  It could be  that  the  second
         read back of the statement started after paragraph 10 and that [the
         Appellant] did not spot the error in the first read back as he  was
         struggling to concentrate."

13. The attached attendance notes are  consistent  with  that  explanation.
    The first note dated 29 January 2018 more fully states:

         "Appeal Statement drafted, read back and signed.   Some  amendments
         to be made once we know more about what  has  been  done  to  trace
         family via Red Cross.  Client seemed tired when the final  part  of
         the statement was read back to him.  Re-read second  half  at  next
         app.  Have given him a copy of statement, told him to look over  it
         + email me with any mistakes."

14. There was no written statement from the Appellant about this  issue  or
    his understanding of what the misunderstanding or mistake was  and  who
    made it.  Mr  Bandegani  confirmed  that  in  the  absence  of  such  a
    statement, he had instructions from the  Appellant  on  this,  although
    they only went so far as to say that there had been a misunderstanding.
     When seeking to identify what the misunderstanding or mistake actually
    was, Mr Bandeganni suggested that it was the use of the  word  'before'
    in paragraph 10  of  the  witness  statement  which  should  have  said
    'after'.  However, it is clear, as found by the First-tier Tribunal  in
    paragraph 40  of  the  decision,  that  paragraph  10  of  the  witness
    statement is directly responding to the points in paragraphs 65  to  68
    of the refusal letter.  It can not be that a mistake was made  only  in
    relation to one word of  it,  the  claimed  mistake  can  only  be  the
    inclusion of the paragraph as a whole.  The  only  way  this  could  be
    explained by Mr Bandegani as to why paragraph 10 existed at all in  the
    statement was that it was not  composed  by  reference  to  the  asylum
    interview but only the appeal statement, however,  that  did  not  deal
    directly with the chronology.

15. Mr Bandegani maintained at the hearing that the Appellant was not aware
    of the inconsistency or mistake prior to the hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Appellant's legal representatives have admitted  an
    error and therefore the reliance by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    Appellant  being  represented  by  experienced  immigration  solicitors
    throughout falls away.  The First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in relation
    to this issue is predicated on there not being a mistake in the witness
    statement, but if there was, as shown by the later material, there  was
    no inconsistency and therefore no basis  for  the  adverse  credibility
    findings.

16. Although the First-tier Tribunal found in paragraphs 41 and 42 an 'even
    more significant error', it was submitted that the overall findings  in
    paragraphs 43 and 44 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  were  at
    least partly based on the first issue as to the  chronology  and  could
    not alone support adverse credibility findings for  the  appeal  to  be
    dismissed.

17. On behalf of the Respondent,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  there  was  a
    material discrepancy on the first  issue  and  the  Appellant  has  not
    established, even with the subsequent material submitted, that this was
    caused by a mistake.  In any event, it was  submitted  that  any  error
    would not be material  given  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate to  Kabul  which  is  wholly  consistent  with  the
    findings  in  the  country  guidance  case  of  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC).

18. I do not find that the Appellant has established  that  there  was  any
    error in his witness statement presented to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    for the reasons given by Judge Blundell set  out  above  or  otherwise.
    The material subsequently before the Upper Tribunal does  not  set  out
    specifically what the claimed mistake or misunderstanding was; there is
    no direct evidence from the Appellant on this point and the claim  that
    his previous legal representatives had admitted the  error  is  putting
    the response from them far too highly.  The only error that is accepted
    by  Elder  Rahimi  is  that  they  did  not  spot  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency between the answers given by the Appellant in his  asylum
    interview and the witness  statement  prepared  for  the  appeal.   The
    consequence of that is not that there was necessarily any error in  the
    content of the witness statement, but can only go so far as that in the
    course of preparation for the appeal, the matter was  not  raised  with
    the Appellant to address before the hearing.  There is no acceptance by
    Elder Rahimi that paragraph 10 or any part of it was wrong or  included
    in the written statement in error.  The witness statement was read back
    to the Appellant at least once and the Appellant  had  a  copy  of  the
    statement which he subsequently signed and  adopted  as  his  evidence.
    The Appellant himself has at no point said that he  did  not  give  the
    information in paragraph 10 to his  solicitors  to  form  part  of  his
    statement, only that there was some unidentified misunderstanding.  The
    fact that the second half of the statement was re-read to the Appellant
    at a later appointment because he seemed tired when  this  section  was
    dealt with previously takes the matter no further.  For these  reasons,
    there is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on
    the first ground of appeal.

19. There is no direct challenge to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    in paragraphs 41 and 42 as to the second inconsistency which was  found
    to be even more significant and taken together  with  the  findings  in
    relation to the first inconsistency, justify the  overall  findings  in
    paragraphs  43  and  44  of  the  decision  (which  it  is  noted,  the
    Appellant's representative at the  hearing  appeared  to  accept  would
    normally be sufficient to undermine the asylum claim).

20. The grounds of appeal further  claimed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to undertake a global assessment of the Appellant's  credibility
    and did not appropriately carry forward the findings that  his  account
    was consistent with the background evidence and the expert report,  nor
    the  findings  that  the  Respondent's   reasons   for   refusal   were
    unsustainable.  However, I find no error of law in the approach of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who reached  sustainable  and  cogent  findings  on
    credibility and therefore on the issue of whether the Appellant was  at
    real risk on return to his home area which were open to  the  Judge  on
    the evidence before him.

21. The second ground of appeal is that the findings in paragraphs 44 to 47
    of the First-tier Tribunal decision were without evidential  basis  and
    predicated  on  the  earlier  adverse  credibility  findings.   It   is
    difficult to see how any error on this ground could be material to  the
    outcome of the appeal given the clear findings in paragraph 44  of  the
    decision that the issue of internal relocation does not  arise  as  the
    Appellant is not at risk of return in his home area.  The challenge  to
    those findings has failed.

22. In any  event,  the  only  plausible  alternative  explanation  of  the
    Appellant's journey to the United Kingdom on the findings that  he  did
    not flee Afghanistan due to a real risk was that he  was  supported  in
    his journey by his family for a better life in the United Kingdom.   No
    evidential basis is required for such a finding,  there  is  simply  no
    other alternative in this sort of case.  In these circumstances, it  is
    reasonable to infer that the Appellant could contact  his  family,  but
    even if he could not, on the basis of the  findings  in  AS,  there  is
    nothing about this  Appellant  to  suggest  that  even  without  family
    support, internal relocation to Kabul would be unsafe or unreasonable.

23. For all of these reasons, I do  not  find  any  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which is therefore confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]    Date     15th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

