
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 20 October 2017                            |On 13 December 2017          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR AHMAD ZRAR BAHRAM
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Frantzis    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge LSL Mensah) whereupon she dismissed his
appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  3 September 2015
refusing to grant him international protection.

2.    After a hearing  of  8 August 2017  I  set  aside  the  decision  of
Judge Mensah but preserved many of  the  findings.   I  expressly  did  not
preserve the findings and reasoning relating  to  the  claimant's  assertion
(which he had made unsuccessfully before Judge Mensah)  that  he  could  not
take advantage of internal relocation alternative within Iraq. I directed  a
hearing, in the Upper Tribunal so that the internal relocation aspect could
be completely re-determined.

3.    By way of brief background, the claimant is a national  of  Iraq.   He
is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He is from Kirkuk.   None  of  that  is  disputed.
Nor is it  disputed  that  Kirkuk  was,  when  matters  were  considered  by
Judge Mensah, regarded as a "contested area".  The claimant,  however,  did
not simply rely upon those matters in seeking international  protection.  In
fact, a major aspect of his claim was his assertion that  in  February 2015
he had been discovered by the Iraqi police  "hugging  and  kissing"  with  a
female Iraqi national.  He says that this  came  to  the  attention  of  her
father who threatened him.  He says that his own parents, fearing  he  would
come to harm, sent him to live with a relative in Erbil which is located  in
the part of Iraq under Kurdish control ("the IKR").  But he  says  that  the
female Iraqi person's family members located him there causing him  to  flee
Iraq.  Having left Iraq he travelled  through  various  countries  prior  to
arriving in Austria where he claimed asylum falsely stating that he  was  an
unaccompanied minor and giving a date of  birth  of  1 January 1999.  That
differs from the date of birth he  has  given  to  the  authorities  in  the
United Kingdom. Prior to his  claim  being  decided  he  left  Austria  and
entered the UK, in a clandestine manner,  before  claiming  asylum  here  on
26 May 2015.  He argued, before the Judge, that in  light  of  the  above
history, if he were to be returned to Iraq  he  would  be  murdered  by  the
family of the female with whom he had had a liaison and also by  members  of
the Jaff Tribe, the female person and  her  family  being  members  of  that
tribe.  He also suggested that the  Iraqi  authorities  might  suspect  him,
upon return, of having  had  involvement  with  the  organisation  sometimes
called Islamic State or with the Kurdish Democratic Party.

4.    The Judge, like the Secretary of State, did  not  believe  the  above
account of events.  But she did accept that given Kirkuk's then status as  a
contested area he could not be expected to live there.  The basis  for  that
conclusion was that Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive applied to
contested areas in Iraq.  So,  it  became  necessary  for  her  to  consider
whether he might be able to safely relocate either  to  Baghdad  or  to  the
IKR.  She decided that he would be able to relocate.  Part of her  reasoning
was that since he could not be believed about  the  claimed  primary  reason
why he was seeking asylum, he could not be believed about  matters  such  as
his assertion he would not be able to obtain a CSID (an  important  identity
document about which I shall say more  below)  and  could  not  be  believed
about his claim that he would not have family support if he were to  attempt
to relocate.

5.    Put simply, I set aside Judge Mensah's  decision,  whilst  as  I  say
preserving a number of the findings,  because  whilst  the  written  reasons
were obviously very careful and  thorough,  the  reasoning  as  to  internal
flight was inadequate.  (A fuller explanation may be found at  paragraph 12
of my decision of 22 August 2017).

6.    In the above circumstances I directed that there should be  a  further
hearing so that new findings and conclusions could be reached  with  respect
to the issue of internal relocation either to Baghdad or to the IKR.   There
followed a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) which  took  place
on 20 October 2017 with a view to re-determining those limited and specific
matters.  Representation at that hearing was as indicated  above  and  I  am
grateful to each representative.

7.    In remaking the decision I have taken full account of  the  claimant's
oral evidence which I received at the hearing of 20 October 2017.  I  have
taken full account of the submissions  of  each  representative.   I  shall,
below, refer to what was said at the hearing where  necessary  or  otherwise
helpful. I had the documentation which had been before Judge Mensah and the
further documentation which had been sent  to  the  Upper Tribunal  by  the
parties.  That included, amongst other things, a  new  bundle  of  documents
filed on behalf of the claimant under covering letter of 6 October 2017 and
a skeleton argument prepared by Ms Frantzis.  I confirm that I  have  given
careful consideration to the documentation  before  me.   I  have  also  had
regard,  in  considering  internal  flight,  to  what  was   said   by   the
Upper Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG(2015) UKUT 00544 (IAC) and,
with respect to Baghdad, BA (returns to Bagdad) Iraq  CG(2017)  UKUT 00018
(IAC).

8.    The correct approach to the issue of internal flight  is  set  out  in
Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (2006)  UKHL5  [2006]
2 AC 426.  Essentially, as  part  of  the  assessment  of  entitlement  to
international protection a decision maker may determine that a claimant  is
not in need of such protection if in a part of the country of  origin  there
is no well-founded fear of persecution or no real risk of serious  harm  and
the claimant can reasonably  be  expected  to  stay  in  that  part  of  the
country.  That will involve  an  assessment  of  the  general  circumstances
prevailing in that part of the country and to the personal circumstances  of
a claimant.  The key question will be whether a claimant can  reasonably  be
expected to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him/her
to do so.  Also of potential relevance is  an  ability  on  the  part  of  a
claimant to be able to safely travel from any point of return to  any  place
of suggested internal relocation.  Of course, if there  is  for  example  an
Article 3 or an Article 15(c) risk in the place of return or in the  place
of suggested relocation then a claimant will in any event succeed.

9.    I have found it necessary, in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  to
address the  general  question  of  the  claimant's  credibility.   That  is
because I have taken the view that such an assessment  might  assist  me  in
deciding whether or not particular assertions he makes  which  are  relevant
to internal fight can or cannot be accepted.

10.   As to credibility, of course, the claimant was  disbelieved  regarding
the risk he claimed stemming from the claimed liaison  he  had  had  in  his
home area of Kirkuk in Iraq.  I preserved Judge Mensah's comprehensive  and
cogent reasons for disbelieving him.  The claimant, in a  witness  statement
prepared  for  the  hearing  of  20 October 2017,  asserted  that  he  had
nevertheless "told the truth about what happened to me in  Iraq".   However,
it  has  authoritatively  been  decided  that  he  deliberately  misled  the
Secretary of State and Judge Mensah in maintaining the claims he did and  I
conclude that his continued assertion as to this simply  represents  further
dishonesty on his part.

11.    The  claimant,  he  acknowledged  in   his   witness   statement   of
5 October 2017, has an aunt in Erbil.  Erbil is in the IKR which is an area
of suggested relocation.  He asserted,  as  part  of  his  false  claim  for
asylum, that members of the family of the woman  with  whom  he  had  had  a
liaison had been able to  trace  him  there.   So,  he  is  stuck  with  the
acknowledgement that he does have a  family  member  in  that  part  of  the
country.  That,  of  course,  might  have  potential  relevance  as  to  the
viability or otherwise of relocation though I  appreciate  there  are  other
issues to consider as well.

12.   Unsurprisingly, the claimant was asked about  his  aunt  in  Erbil  in
cross-examination before me.  In his written statement  he  had  said,  when
addressing the question of  whether  family  members  might  assist  him  in
obtaining a CSID, "I don't have contact with my aunt so cannot  contact  her
to vouch for me".  But in cross-examination he said that some six  or  seven
months ago he had contacted his aunt, as I understand  it,  by  means  of  a
"messaging APP" known as "Chat".  But he said that he had then lost  contact
because he had lost his mobile telephone  which  had  the  relevant  contact
details saved on it.  He also explained that he had had  some  contact  with
her via facebook but was unable to contact her via  facebook  again  because
he had had "lost her details" and because another  person  had  set  up  his
facebook account for him and  "I  can't  recall  my  account  number  or  my
password".  Mr Diwnycz suggested that all of that represented  "incredulous
explanations".

13.   I do not believe the claimant's contention  that  he  has  lost  touch
with his aunt in Erbil.  He was reticent about this recent contact with  her
in his witness statement of 5 October 2017.  He made no mention of  having
contacted her through an APP or through facebook.  I  consider  he  has,  in
this context, been economical with the truth.

14.   Further, I do not accept the claimant's  explanations  as  to  how  he
came to lose touch with his aunt in Erbil.  He  had  also  claimed  to  have
lost touch with his close family in Kirkuk. If that were right then I  think
he would have been most anxious to maintain contact with  his  aunt  as  the
sole relative he was in touch with and because she  might,  at  some  stage,
discover the fate of his close  family  and  pass  on  any  news.  In  these
circumstances I believe he would have  kept  a  separate  record  such  that
losing his mobile phone and forgetfulness  regarding  his  facebook  account
would not cause him to lose contact as he claims.

15.   There is then the question of whether or  not  he  still  has  contact
with his close family members in Kirkuk.  In answer to  question 8  of  his
substantive asylum interview he said that his parents  and  a  brother  were
living in Kirkuk but that he had no contact with them though  he  also  said
that there had been a degree of contact via a  paternal  uncle  in  Germany.
However, in my view he has  shown  a  willingness  to  mislead,  before  me,
regarding the claimed lack of contact with his aunt.  If he is  prepared  to
mislead about that it is but a small step, against  a  background  of  other
dishonesty addressed above, to conclude that  he  is  misleading  about  his
claimed lack of  contact  with  his  close  family  as  well.   In  all  the
circumstances I do not accept that he has lost touch with his  close  family
in Kirkuk.

16.   So, to be clear, I find that the claimant has an aunt  in  Erbil  with
whom he is in contact and that he has his parents and a  brother  in  Kirkuk
with whom he is in contact.

17.   As to internal flight to the IKR, as was noted in AA, Iraqi Kurds  not
from the IKR are able to gain  temporary  entry  into  the  IKR  and  formal
permission to remain can be obtained if, after a  short  period,  employment
is secured.  It is also  the  case  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
authorities in the IKR proactively remove  Kurds  whose  short-term  permits
have come to an end.  There is nothing about this particular claimant  which
would suggest that he would be disadvantaged  in  the  labour  market.   For
example, he has not indicated in any of his witness  statements  that  there
would  be  any  health  impediment  to  his   obtaining   some   employment.
Additionally and in any event, there is  no  reason  why,  on  the  material
before me, his aunt would not be capable of assisting him by  providing  him
with food and accommodation.  Although  mention  is  made  in  the  skeleton
argument of Ms Frantzis regarding unrest in the  IKR  "exacerbated  by  the
recent independent referendum held on 25 September 2017" the  material  to
which she refers does not indicate that that means  Kurds  from  outside  of
the IKR will not be admitted or will  be  subjected  to  any  ill-treatment.
Rather, the point  she  is  making,  is  that  such  gives  rise  to  travel
difficulties from outside the IKR to inside the IKR.

18.   As to travel, I would accept Ms Frantzis' contention  that  the  only
viable means would be via Baghdad which is  where  this  claimant,  his  not
being  from  the  IKR,  will  be  being  returned.   She  suggests  cost  of
travelling by air from Baghdad to the IKR is a  likely  difficulty  but  the
claimant had family assistance with the cost of leaving Iraq and,  given  my
findings that he does have close family in Kirkuk and an aunt  in  Erbil,  I
see no reason why family assistance cannot be provided  in  the  context  of
the cost of a flight from Baghdad to the IKR.  If there  is  a  need  for  a
"sponsor" in the IKR as Ms Frantzis suggests  then  the  claimant  has  his
aunt.  Although it is  contended  in  the  skeleton  argument  that  if  the
claimant is undocumented (and of course it is said that he is) he  will  not
be accepted on a flight from Baghdad to the  IKR  I  am  not  taken  to  any
background country material or other  evidence  to  confirm  that.   In  any
event he acknowledges that he did have  an  Iraq  ID card  albeit  that  he
claims  to  have  lost  it  (see  question 14  of  the  substantive  asylum
interview).  I do not accept that he has lost his ID card  because  he  has
been dishonest generally and because it is an  important  document  which  I
believe, notwithstanding  that  he  has  embarked  upon  much  travel  since
leaving Iraq, he would have taken steps to keep safe.  I also note  that  he
has not, at any point, sought to explain in any detail the circumstances  in
which its loss came about.  So, I do not accept that he would be  unable  to
board a plane.

19.   In light of all of the above I reach the conclusion that the  claimant
will be able to travel from Baghdad to the IKR and  will  be  able  to  take
advantage of an internal flight alternative. I conclude that  it  would  not
be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.  Having  reached  these  conclusions
then it follows that I dismiss his appeal  from  the  respondent's  decision
refusing to grant him international protection.  It is  not  then  necessary
for me to consider the alternative possibility which  is  relocation  within
Baghdad.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   In  remaking  the
decision I dismiss the claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
decision  of  3 September 2015  refusing  to  grant  him   international
protection.

I make no anonymity direction.  None has been made previously and  none  was
sought before me.


Signed:                           Date: 12 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date: 12 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

