
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/01127/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30th September 2019                    |On 2nd January 2020              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SFA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms I Hussain of Counsel instructed by Bankfield
Heath Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell dated 17 April
    2019. To ease following this decision, I shall  refer  to  SFA  as  the
    Claimant.  I was provided with a helpful bundle prepared  by  Bankfield
    Heath Solicitors which contains within it the important  documentation,
    including a Rule 24 response drafted by Ms Hussain dated 14 June 2019

2.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keith.  Judge Keith had said, insofar as is relevant, as
    follows:

    "The grounds of appeal assert that:


         (1)  The judge had applied an impermissibly high standard assessing
             that the Appellant would not  be  able  obtain  employment  if
             returned to the IKR; and


         (2)  that the judge had been inconsistent in  concluding  that  the
             Appellant's religion be a bar to his obtaining employment."

3.   In relation to ground 2 the judge referred at  {24]  to  it  not  being
    suggested that people of the Appellant's faith were  unable  to  obtain
    employment, despite suffering discrimination. This was in  the  context
    of a finding that he had historically obtained employment.  However  at
    [43] there was a finding that the Appellant's faith  could  hamper  his
    employment  prospects  and  that  this  was  a  balancing  factor,   in
    concluding that he was not satisfied that the internal relocation was a
    viable  option.  The  apparent  contradiction  in  the  two  statements
    discloses an arguable error of law.

4.   In relation to ground (1), this appears to be weaker as the  Judge  had
    reminded himself at  [44]  of  the  test  being  of  no  real  risk  or
    possibility of harm, which was  the  overall  test.  Nevertheless,  all
    grounds may be argued on appeal."

5.   In submissions before me today, Mr Mills said that there are  a  number
    of findings which were not challenged by the  Secretary  of  State  and
    there were other aspects which were indeed not  challenged  by  way  of
    cross-appeal by the Claimant either For example, Mr Mills said he would
    refer to paragraph 35 of the Judge's decision that there was an  aspect
    against the Claimant in relation to documents and CSID  or  the  modern
    equivalent.  Mr Mills said  the  issue  was  internal  relocation.   He
    referred to the case of AAH.   In the Claimant's Rule 24 response it is
    said at paragraph 2 that the recent case of SS v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2019] EWHC 1402 had been confirmed that  the  case
    of AAH ought to be followed.  That is a decision of  His  Honour  Judge
    Cole QC with which I am familiar.

6.   Mr Mills said that the question before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was whether it was unduly harsh for there  to  be  internal  relocation
    against a backdrop whereby there were hundreds and thousands  of  other
    internally displaced persons.  The complaint here  was  in  respect  of
    this aspect of what the judge had said is  that  because  the  Claimant
    said he was of a minority religion and so he would not be able to  find
    employment.

7.   Judge Keith had granted permission to appeal on what he said  were  two
    grounds but Mr Mills said it was, in  reality,  just  one  ground.   Mr
    Mills submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  wrong  when  it
    was said that there had to be a sufficiently high chance  of  obtaining
    employment and this was higher than reasonable.   It  was  also  highly
    relevant that this was a situation in which,  and  this  was  a  matter
    raised in the refusal, that despite being of a minority  religion  that
    this Claimant is able to rise to the ranks of being a bodyguard  for  a
    General in the Peshmerga.  There was no evidence to show  that  persons
    of the Kakai faith could not find employment but the  judge  had  found
    the exact opposite.   Mr  Mills  said  if  there  had  been  background
    evidence to show that there could  be  employment  problems  then  that
    would be different but indeed there was the opposite.  The  IKR  was  a
    haven for minorities and minority religions and now in  addition  there
    was legislative protection as well.  Therefore the  chance  of  finding
    employment needs to be assessed with that background and the judge  had
    not squared that circle.  It was right to say the effectiveness of  the
    legislation also needs to be  considered.   Mr  Mills  said  that  this
    appeal concerned a narrow area of challenge if I had concluded that the
    error of law was such that the decision ought to be set aside then  the
    appeal could be dismissed.

8.   Ms Hussain  in  her  submissions  said  that  she  disagreed  with  the
    Secretary of State's submissions.  She said there was no error of  law.
    The holding of the two views was not contrary.  The judge was  able  to
    find what he did.  The current situation is always changing in Iraq and
    the situation is insecure.  At the time that the decision  was  written
    there was no guarantee that the Claimant  will  be  able  to  find  his
    contacts.  In any event he could not go back to his area.

9.   Ms Hussain said that Mr Mills had admitted that the appeal  centred  on
    a narrow issue.  She said if I was against her then the matter ought to
    be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  there  to  be  a
    reassessment.  I asked Ms Hussain to deal  with  paragraph  44  of  the
    judge's decision which italicised what had been said in relation to the
    possibilities.   Ms  Hussain  responded  to  say  that  the  judge  had
    considered all of the case law and that was why the judge had used  the
    word "court".

10.  Mr Mills in reply said that it was wrong for it to  be  submitted  that
    the Appellant could not return to his home area because at paragraph 31
    the judge said he could.  The Claimant has connections to the  area  of
    relocation and indeed he has connections to the Peshmerga as  well  and
    that too would assist him.  If those of a minority faith are to  suffer
    some discrimination it had to go to a state of the  minority  being  so
    marginalised that they would not be able to  obtain  employment  and/or
    for example work for the authorities.

11.  Mr Mills said it just did not make sense that from  2008  until  around
    2014/15 and at a time prior to the passing of the legislation that  the
    Claimant was able to get the level of work that he did but now with the
    passage of time he could not do so.  Mr Mills said I should  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I should go on  to  dismiss
    the Claimant's appeal.

12.  I have carefully considered the rival submissions of  the  parties.  In
    coming to my decision I turn to the judge's decision and I consider  it
    as a whole and it is worthwhile making these observations in respect of
    it.  It is a well-crafted decision. It properly and fully refers to the
    burden and standard of proof. It sets out  the  latest  case  law.  The
    evidence is set out in a coherent  and  clear  fashion.   I  of  course
    remind myself that just because a decision presents  itself  well  does
    not necessarily mean that there is not an error of law within it.

13.  I then turn to the further detail in respect of the decision and it  is
    in my judgment very  clear  that  the  judge  carefully  analysed  both
    parties' positions.  At paragraph 31 the judge made it  clear  that  he
    was not accepting certain parts of the Claimant's case and at paragraph
    28 the judge  said  he  had  misgivings  about  certain  parts  of  the
    Claimant's case but ultimately applying the lower standard he  accepted
    that the Appellant was a bodyguard  as  claimed.   That  reassures  any
    reader of the decision that this was certainly not a one-sided decision
    in favour of one party or the other.  The judge clearly considered both
    respective parties' submissions and the evidence.

14.  In respect of the case law the judge clearly showed that  he  was  well
    aware of the latest position.  The judge after  dismissing  the  asylum
    claim at paragraph 31 then went on at  paragraph  36  to  consider  the
    humanitarian protection claim.  The judge  correctly  referred  to  the
    decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT  212
    (IAC) and set that out in some detail.  The judge said at  the  end  of
    paragraph 39 as to what he had to consider:

         "There is no clear or cogent evidence about conditions in that area
         which would enable me to depart from that country guidance and so I
         conclude that the risk in that area is still sufficiently  high  to
         deserve  humanitarian  protection  unless  internal  relocation  is
         available."

15.  The judge then quite properly referred to the  leading  authorities  in
    respect of internal relocation including Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.  The judge also dealt with
    his finding against the Claimant when he dealt with the issue of  being
    able to  access  the  IKR  relating  to  the  issue  of  documentation.
    Importantly at paragraph 42 the judge considered  at  some  length  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision  in  AAH  and  he  had  referred  to  various
    paragraphs within that those including  assessing  whether  or  not  an
    individual have family within the area of relocation, what the  options
    are in terms of short term and longer term, the costs  for  relocation,
    the issue of critical shelter arrangements, that  the  employment  rate
    for Iraqi IDPs is startling.  The judge considered  the  issue  of  the
    lawful employment and  the  possession  of  a  CSID,  family  or  other
    connections might be  of  substantial  assistance  in  obtaining  work,
    skills and experience are going to  be  an  advantage  for  those  with
    skills and experience and ultimately the question of where the returnee
    is from.

16.  The judge then in my judgment was very clearly applying that  case  law
    at paragraphs 43 and 44.  At paragraph 43  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    subjective matters, that the Claimant was a male, a  young  and  active
    male at that and that he would be returning  with  a  CSID.   That  the
    Claimant does not  have  family  connections  but  that  he  does  have
    connections through his military service with the  Peshmerga  and  this
    would  be  the  Claimant's  strongest  card,  enough  to  outweigh  any
    suspicions that he is from Diyala and that he is not an  ISIS  fighter,
    not least because the faith that the Claimant follows is of a branch of
    the Shia faith and therefore could not possibly be  part  of  the  ISIS
    which follow the Sunni faith.

17.  The judge also noted that it may  also  be  open  to  the  Claimant  to
    resume his military service.   At paragraph 44  the  judge  dealt  with
    matters to further explain his reasoning and the italicised quote is of
    importance here.  The  judge  said  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to
    conclude that he "could obtain employment within  a  reasonable  period
    and so avoid  falling  into  destitution  but  there  is  a  degree  of
    speculation about all this" and it is this which has to be  read  fully
    and in context.  So what the judge in my judgment  was  clearly  saying
    was although there is a possibility of a person such as this  obtaining
    employment there was a degree of speculation about  it  and  thereafter
    the judge then assessed whether or not  the  prospects  for  employment
    were realistic or not.

18.  The real complaint from the Secretary of State is  that  the  reference
    to the chance of obtaining employment has to be "sufficiently high" was
    well above the requirement to be a real  possibility.  In  my  judgment
    this argument is misconceived.  The  judge  had  fully  explained  from
    paragraph 42 onwards what the test was.  The judge had already referred
    to the Supreme Court decision  of  AH  (Sudan).   At  paragraph  40  he
    referred to the proper burden and standard of proof but the judge  then
    enumerated at paragraph 44 what the difficulties would be.   The  Judge
    clearly knew what the correct test was and he clearly  applied  it.  He
    referred to authority for the point.

19.  In my judgment therefore dealing with part 1 of the ground  of  appeal,
    that ground is misconceived  because  the  judge  was  not  saying  two
    different things.  He was explaining with the italicised quote the task
    he had to undertake in relation to the assessment that he had to  make.



20.  The other (part 2) ground of appeal is that, in effect,  why  would  it
    not be possible for this Claimant who had  worked  for  so  long  as  a
    minority for the general to now not be able to  use  his  contacts  and
    such like and his history and experience on return?  In my judgment the
    judge did deal with this and there is no conflict in his decision.   As
    the judge said, although the Claimant's  faith  may  protect  him  from
    suspicion of the ISIS involvement it  may  well  bring  with  it  other
    difficulties. Not least that he would still be a member of  a  minority
    religion in a predominate society where prejudice against non-believers
    was close to the surface.

21.  The judge therefore did consider this aspect.  I of  course  accept  Mr
    Mills' point that mere discrimination is not sufficient  to  support  a
    claim  for  protection  but  ultimately  the  judge  provided  adequate
    reasoning in his clear and detailed decision. It is clear why  he  came
    to the conclusion that he did.  He did so for lawful reasons.

22.  In my judgment the judge was entitled to come to the decision  that  he
    did.  It may well be  that  another  Tribunal  would  have  come  to  a
    different decision, but obviously that is not the appropriate test  for
    me to apply.

23.  In the circumstances I conclude that there is no error of  law  in  the
    judge's  decision  and  accordingly  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which had allowed the Claimant's appeal shall stand.


Notice of Decision

    There is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  That
    decision allowing SFA's appeal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
(Claimant) is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed: A Mahmood                       Date: 30 09 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed: A Mahmood                       Date: 30 09 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

