
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01641/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 December 2018                       |On 19 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               MOEIN EBRAHIMI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 10 June 1997 and is a male citizen  of  Iran.
    In a decision dated 19 January 2018, the Secretary of State refused the
    appellant's application for  international  protection.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    19 March 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to have converted from Islam to  Christianity.  He
    claims to have attended a house church in Iran and has attended  church
    in the United Kingdom since he arrived here. The judge found  that  the
    appellant's claimed  conversion  was  not  genuine.  Consequently,  she
    dismissed his appeal.

 3. The appellant challenges that decision. First, he claims that the judge
    has identified inconsistencies in his evidence where none  existed.  At
    [13], the judge wrote:

    ... in his asylum interview at question 83 [the  appellant]  was  asked
    whether he was looking for a new faith at the time [he accepted a Bible
    Christian woman whilst on about in Turkey]. ... His answer  was  'if  I
    say no, it's a lie. Because in  the  back  of  my  mind  I  was  always
    searching for an answer.' However, paragraph 5 of his witness statement
    he states, 'I was not actively looking for Christianity when  the  lady
    in Turkey gave me the Bible or doing research about it at the time.'  I
    find that these two statements are inconsistent, or at the very  least,
    the latter statement is incomplete as it should have  stated  that  the
    appellant was not actively looking to Christianity at the time but  was
    searching for an answer relation to a new faith. Only  then  would  his
    witness statement be fully in line with and consistent with his  asylum
    interview. I find that this inconsistency  goes  to  the  core  of  his
    account as it would have been a little more plausible for him  to  have
    accepted the gift of the Bible in Turkey if he had clearly said that he
    was searching for looking for a new religion  at  the  time.  In  other
    words, it would have been easier to understand his actions on the  boat
    in this context.

 4. That finding is problematic. Prima facie, the two  statements  are  not
    inconsistent; there is no clear reason why  the  appellant  should  not
    have been both 'always searching for an answer' but also not  'actively
    looking for Christianity' when he received the Bible from the woman.  I
    also do not understand why the judge considered it necessary  that  the
    appellant's witness statement should be 'fully in line with' his asylum
    interview. Very often, a  witness  statement  will  contain  much  more
    detail  than  an  appellant  has  provided  at  the  asylum  interview.
    Obviously, it may be damaging to an appellant's case if the contents of
    the witness statement and interview record  are  inconsistent  but  the
    very high level of consistency which the judge appears to demand is not
    appropriate nor should its absence have led the judge to find  that  an
    'inconsistency' which did not exist should 'go  to  the  core'  of  the
    appellant's  account.  Indeed,  that  latter  statement   removes   any
    possibility of viewing the judge's problematic finding discreetly  from
    the remainder of her analysis. I find  that  the  judge  has  taken  an
    unreasonable point which has infected her entire credibility  analysis.
    In the circumstances, her decision must be set aside. Other findings of
    fact are not challenged but the extent to which  the  unlawful  finding
    has influenced the outcome of the appeal cannot be  determined  so  all
    the findings have been vitiated. There will need  to  be  a  new  fact-
    finding exercise which is better conducted in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to which this appeal is now returned to remake the decision. As for the
    remaining grounds of appeal, I find  that  this  has  less  merit;  the
    judge's findings regarding the evidence of the clergyman appear to have
    been open to her on the evidence. However, I make no formal finding  in
    respect of that ground given that the appeal will need to be  heard  de
    novo in any event.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Monaghan) for that tribunal to remake the  decision
    (1.5 hours; Farsi interpreter; Bradford)


Signed                              Date 2 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
