
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01499/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |      Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 28 April 2017                      |      On 3 May 2017             |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     F E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr A Devlin (counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving  the  anonymity  direction  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal. No public interest is served by making the  appellant's
details known.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Gaskell promulgated on 5 December 2016, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 20 August 1993 and is a national of Iran. On  1
February 2016 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Gaskell ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 1  March  2017  Deputy  Upper
Tribunal Judge Davey gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      1. The grounds seeking permission to appeal the decision [D] of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Gaskell (the Judge) dated 5 December 2016 disclose
      an arguable error of law.


      2. The Judge raises a fair point about the appellant's claim [D27] not
      being credible. However, the Judge expresses a personal view about how
      he expects the  appellant  would  act  without  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the appellant's conduct in the UK [D27,28,29,30,31].


      3. The appellant raises other criticisms of the Judge's assessment  of
      the evidence, which appears to be founded upon what the Judge regarded
      as an  overwhelming  and  central  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
      account, namely the failure to take  steps  to  trace  V,  his  former
      lover, and go socialising on the gay scene in Glasgow.


      4. All grounds may be argued.

The Hearing

5. (a)  Mr Devlin, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds  of  appeal.
He told me that despite the length of the decision,  the  decision  contains
inadequate findings of fact and inadequate reasons.  He  told  me  that  the
decision is damaged by structural failing. He took me  to  [27]  &  told  me
that a fair reading of that paragraph of the  decision  indicates  that  the
Judge had made a decision on credibility as a whole before  considering  the
evidence in the case. He told me that from [28] to [32] the Judge  sets  out
what appears to be reasoning, but that  the  reasoning  contained  there  is
inadequate and in any event the order in which  the  Judge  deals  with  the
crucial aspects of the case indicate that the Judge  reached  in  unreasoned
conclusion before rejecting the appellant's evidence.

(b) Mr Devlin told me that the Judge  fell  into  an  error  of  the  nature
encapsulated by Lord Justice Wilson in Mbanga v  SSHD  [2005]  INLR  377  at
paragraph 24:

      What the fact finder does at his peril is to  reach  a  conclusion  by
      reference only  to  the  applicant's  evidence  and  then,  if  it  be
      negative, to ask whether the  conclusion  should  be  shifted  by  the
      expert evidence.

(c) Mr Devlin told me that the opening sentence of [32] indicates  that  the
Judge dealt with the appellant's evidence in isolation,  before  considering
the evidence of other witnesses.  Three  people  gave  evidence  before  the
First-tier, the appellant and his two  witnesses.  The  Judge  accepted  the
evidence  of  one  witness  and  rejected  the  evidence  of  another,   but
manifestly does not  consider  that  evidence  until  after  the  Judge  had
rejected the appellant's account in its entirety. Mr  Devlin  told  me  that
that is a clear material error of law

(d) Mr Devlin took me to [31] of the decision and told  me  that  there  the
Judge made a finding that no reasonable Judge would have  made.  There,  the
Judge focuses on the appellant's decision to socialise on the gay  scene  in
Glasgow within 10 months of fleeing from Iran. He told me that between  [27]
and  [32]  the  Judge  expresses  his  own  personal   opinion   about   his
expectations of the appellant, without  adequately  explaining  his  reasons
for rejecting the appellant's evidence. He told  me  that  the  decision  is
based on the Judge's speculation rather than on findings of fact drawn  from
the evidence presented to the First-tier.

(e) Mr Devlin told me that  at  [32]  the  Judge  simply  declares  that  he
rejects the appellant's evidence and does not adequately  set  out  reasons,
so that  the  informed  reader  has  no  idea  why  the  Judge  rejects  the
appellant's evidence. He described the findings  at  [32]  and  [33]  to  be
nothing more than cursory and indicative of structural  failing  undermining
the entire decision.

(f) He urged me to set the decision aside and  to  remit  the  case  to  the
First-tier to be determined of new.

6. (a) Mr Govan, for the respondent, told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. He  relied  on  the  respondent's
rule 24 note dated 14 March 2017, and told me that the  Judge  made  adverse
credibility findings at [27] after considering all of the evidence  in  this
case, and that at  [29]  and  [30]  the  Judge  explained  his  reasons  for
reaching that conclusion. He told me that the reasons for refusal letter  in
this case is detailed  and  attacks  the  appellant's  credibility  over  33
paragraphs. He told me that the Judge clearly took account of  the  contents
of the reasons for refusal letter, and  summarised  them  between  [28]  and
[31] of the  decision,  setting  out  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
appellant's account.

(b) Mr Govan told me that the decision as a well-rounded assessment  of  the
evidence; that the Judge correctly directed himself in law  before  reaching
his decision, and that the Judge  sets  out  why  he  accepted  one  of  the
appellant's witnesses to be credible and  why  he  found  the  other  to  be
neither a credible nor a reliable witness.

(c) Mr Govan told me that the decision does not contain a material error  of
law  and  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
disagreement with the conclusion reached  by  the  Judge.  He  asked  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.





Analysis

7. The Judge's decision contains 37 paragraphs.  Between  [1]  and  [3]  the
Judge sets out the background to the appeal. Between [4] and [10] the  judge
summarises the basis of the appellant's application. Between  [9]  and  [11]
(there is an error in the numbering of the paragraphs) the Judge  summarises
the respondent's reasons for refusal. Between [12] and [26] the  Judge  sets
out the relevant law.

8. It is only at [27] that the Judge starts to consider the evidence in  the
case. At [27] the Judge effectively sets out  a  conclusion.  He  ends  that
paragraph by saying

      I find there is an  overwhelming  and  central  inconsistency  in  the
      appellant's account; such that I find that it is not credible;  and  I
      reject it.

Before reaching that conclusion, the Judge does not set out any findings  of
fact, nor does he discuss the evidence.

9. At [28] the Judge summarises the appellant's account of the  events  that
caused him to flee from Iran. In the final sentence of [28] the  Judge  sets
out his expectation of the emotional effect forced separation from  a  lover
would have on the appellant. The Judge does not explain how he comes to  his
conclusion, nor why his expectation is formed. The final  sentence  of  [28]
may be little more than speculation.

10. The  speculation  contained  in  the  final  sentence  of  [28]  is  the
foundation for the reasoning set out in  [29]  and  [30].  In  essence,  the
Judge says that he would expect the appellant to be so upset  by  separation
from his lover in Iran that he would devote his  efforts  to  searching  for
his lover and be incapable of socialising in Glasgow.  The  Judge  does  not
adequately explain how he reaches the conclusion.

11. Despite the amount of evidence that was placed  before  the  Judge,  and
despite setting out the background to the application and the  law  over  26
paragraphs, the Judge's findings  of  fact  are  contained  in  three  short
paragraphs between [29] and [31]. At [32]  the  Judge  emphatically  rejects
the appellant's account, but does not adequately say why.

12. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

13.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law. A fuller fact finding exercise  might  have  resulted  in  a  different
outcome to this appeal. I must, therefore, set the decision  promulgated  on
5 December 2016 aside.

14. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the  decision  promulgated  on  5  December
2016. I therefore find exercise required to reach a just  decision  in  this
appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

17. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Gaskell.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

19. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  5  December  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



