
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/01477/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 July 2017                           |On 19 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                    [m s]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born in 1967.

 2. On 4 January  2016  the  Respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application for asylum and on human rights grounds.

 3. He appealed against the decision on 18 February 2016.

 4. The Respondent then produced a supplementary letter  on  29  July  2016
    which  certified  the  asylum  claim  under  section   94(1)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  'clearly  unfounded'.
    The human rights claim was similarly certified. The letter added  that,
    as a consequence, he 'may not appeal while in the United Kingdom.'

 5. Notwithstanding the certification the matter came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Mitchell at Taylor House on 18 November 2016.

 6. In a brief 'Decision and Reasons', having noted the history (above)  he
    stated:-

         '3.  ... As a consequence the  Appellant  cannot  bring  an  appeal
             against the refusal decision whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             The Appellant is clearly still in the  United  Kingdom  as  he
             appeared before the Tribunal.


          4. I therefore have no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  This was
             not disputed by either representative.  I dismiss  the  appeal
             for want of jurisdiction.'


 7. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 2 June 2017.

 8. At the error of law hearing (at which the  Appellant  was  present)  Mr
    Iqbal submitted that the judge erred in dismissing the appeal outright.
     It continues until he is removed.  The appropriate  course  of  action
    was to set aside the decision and relist it issuing  directions  for  a
    skeleton argument addressing the interpretation of section 92(6) of the
    2002 Act.

 9. Mr Singh's submission was that the judge should not have dismissed  the
    case outright. If the case was remitted to the First  tier  it  can  be
    heard if the Appellant leaves the country.


    Consideration

10. In considering this  matter  the  position  thus,  in  summary,  is  as
    follows.  The Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's  application  on  4
    January 2016.  It was not certified.  He appealed.  Before  the  appeal
    hearing on 18 November 2016 the Respondent  certified  the  asylum  and
    human rights claims under section 94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as 'clearly unfounded'.

11. Section 92 of the 2002 Act which is headed 'Place from which an  appeal
    may be brought or continued' was  substituted  by  section  17  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 from 20 October 2014.

12. Section 92(2) reads:-

         'In the case of an appeal under section 82(1)(a)  (protection claim
         appeal), the appeal must be brought from outside the United Kingdom
         if


               - (a) the  claim  to  which  the  appeal  relates  has  been
                 certified under section 94(1) ... (claim clearly unfounded
                 ...).'


13. Section 92(3)(a) is in the same terms in  respect  of  a  human  rights
    claim which has been certified as 'clearly unfounded'.

14. Section 92(6) reads:-

         'If, after an appeal under section  82(1)(a)  or  (b)  [refusal  of
         protection/human rights claim] has been  brought  from  within  the
         United Kingdom, the Secretary of State certifies the claim to which
         the appeal relates under section  94(1)  ...  the  appeal  must  be
         continued from outside the United Kingdom.'


15. There was no dispute from the  representatives  before  the  First-tier
    regarding the issue of certification in the appeal and that both  sides
    agreed that the Appellant 'cannot bring an appeal against  the  refusal
    decision whilst in the United Kingdom' as his claim had been certified.

16. Nothing stated by Mr Iqbal altered that situation.

17. The result is  that  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  were  a
    nullity. It might have been preferable had the judge  issued  a  notice
    stating no valid in country appeal. However, I do not see it  to  be  a
    material error of  law  to  have  dismissed  the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction (which as indicated was accepted at the First-tier hearing
    by both representatives).  The  result  of  that  decision  is  not  to
    terminate the Appellant's appeal rights. That is because there  was  no
    appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  such  an  appeal  is  not
    exerciseable in country but 'must be continued from outside the  United
    Kingdom'.  Should the Appellant leave the  UK  or  be  removed  he  can
    continue his appeal from outside the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
the decision stands.

No anonymity direction made






Signed                                  Date 18 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



