
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01871/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 August 2019                    |On 19 August 2019                   |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    V. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Smith, Counsel, instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hughes ('the Judge'), issued on 15 April 2019, by which the appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was dismissed.

 2. The appellant appeals with  permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Povey by way of a decision sent to the parties on 3 July 2019.



Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order. This is a matter  in  which
    the appellant has sought asylum. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013  No
    1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe that the starting point
    for consideration of anonymity orders in  this  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal as in all courts and Tribunals is  open  justice.  However,  I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal
    that an anonymity order is made in all appeals raising asylum or  other
    international protection claims. Pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an anonymity order:

         'Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings.  I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  content  of  the
         protection claim.'



Background

 4. The appellant is an Indian national who is  aged  36.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in or around November 2012  as  a  student  and  enjoyed
    leave until 1 January 2015. He  made  an  out-of-time  application  for
    further leave to remain on human rights (article  8)  grounds  and  the
    respondent refused this application on 3 June 2015. The appellant  made
    an asylum application on 15 March 2017, asserting that he faces a  real
    fear of  persecution  upon  his  return  to  India  consequent  to  his
    sexuality. He details that his family does not accept him as a gay man,
    and he is not able to live openly as a gay man around them. He  further
    asserts that he could not internally relocate within India  as  members
    of his family are connected to both the police and the authorities  and
    so he would not  enjoy  protection  from  any  threat  made  by  family
    members. The respondent refused the application by way  of  a  decision
    dated 6 February 2019, observing that  she  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's claimed sexuality was genuine. In any event, if he  is  gay
    there is no general risk for LGBT persons in India. Whilst there may be
    discrimination, this does not constitute persecution.

 5. The appellant's appeal came before the Judge  on  27  March  2019.  The
    Judge determined that the appellant was gay but found that he  was  not
    being truthful as to  problems  experienced  at  the  hands  of  family
    members and as to a maternal uncle having caught him in the act of  sex
    with another man at the family home.

 6. As to the later finding, the Judge reasoned at [40]:

         'However, I found the appellant's account of  him  meeting  another
         man for sex in the family home on a day when the family  were  away
         to be inconsistent,  contrived  and  untrue.  The  account  in  his
         statement dated 11 January 2019 was  that  'Anish'  was  a  distant
         relative and he thought it would be safe for him  to  come  to  the
         family home because if anyone asked who he was he could just say he
         was a relative. No one was home. When cross-examined, it was put to
         the appellant that it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  he  would
         invite a man to the family home to have sex just because he thought
         the family were going out. I found that his account thereafter  was
         contrived; he said that all of the family were  all  going  to  [a]
         marriage which was three hours [away], but after leaving his  uncle
         had to change his plans as one of the cashiers in the  family  shop
         had not turned up for work. I assessed not only what the  appellant
         said but how he said it and,  even  having  regard  to  his  mental
         health issues and any impact upon his ability to give  evidence,  I
         was satisfied that he  was  simply  making  up  this  explanation.'
         [emphasis added]

 7. The Judge proceeded to find that the appellant would be  able  to  live
    free and openly as a gay man in India.

 8. The appellant filed a notice seeking permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal, relying upon grounds drafted by Ms.  Smith.  Several  grounds
    were identified, including a complaint that the Judge erred in law:

         'by over-relying on the appellant's demeanour and the way  he  gave
         his evidence at  the  hearing  to  reject  his  account  about  the
         incident when his uncle caught him at home with a man called  Anish
         and/or failing to provide adequate reasons for rejecting this  part
         of the appellant's account as 'inconsistent, contrived and  untrue'
         at  [40]  and/or  by  making  a  material  mistake   of   fact   or
         misunderstanding the evidence about this incident.'

 9. JFtT Povey granted permission on all  grounds  observing,  inter  alia,
    that it was arguable that the Judge failed to adequately explain how he
    had assessed and weighed the appellant's demeanour in  concluding  that
    his account was fictitious at [40].

10. A rule 24 response was received from the respondent. It noted at [3]:

         'In response to Ground 1, the respondent submits  that  the  JFtT's
         adverse credibility finding at [40] was not  based  solely  on  the
         appellant's demeanour. It was open to the JFtT to  disbelieve  this
         part of the appellant's account  as  'inconsistent,  contrived  and
         untrue' based on its inherent implausibility ...'



Decision on error of law

11. At the hearing Mr. Tarlow accepted on behalf of the respondent that the
    Judge materially erred in law in relying upon the appellant's demeanour
    when  assessing  credibility  and  that  such  material  error  of  law
    adversely infected the decision as a whole.

12. The term 'demeanour' is used as a  legal  shorthand  to  refer  to  the
    appearance and behaviour of  a  witness  in  giving  oral  evidence  as
    opposed to the  content  of  the  evidence.   Lord  Shaw  in  Clarke  v
    Edinburgh & District Tramways Co Ltd 1919 SC (HL) 35, 36,  observed  as
    to the concept that:

         'witnesses ... may have in their demeanour,  in  their  manner,  in
         their hesitation, in the nuance of their expressions, in  even  the
         turns of the eyelid, left an impression upon the man  who  saw  and
         heard them which can never be reproduced in the printed page.'

13. It is well-established in asylum and immigration law that demeanour  is
    an unreliable indicator of credibility as the  judiciary  should  doubt
    its own ability to discern from demeanour as to whether  a  witness  is
    telling the truth: R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,  ex
    parte Patel [1986] Imm AR 208

14. The Tribunal has continued to warn as to the dangers  of  relying  upon
    demeanour in assessing credibility, observing in K (or B) (DRC)  [2003]
    UKIAT 00014 that judging demeanour across cultural divides  in  fraught
    with danger.

15. In KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017]  UKUT  491
    (IAC) the Tribunal confirmed  the  decision  in  K  (or  B)  (DRC)  and
    confirmed at [33] that it will rarely be  safe  to  attach  significant
    weight to demeanour as a factor.

16. The Court of Appeal has  recently  considered  the  appropriateness  of
    relying upon demeanour in SS (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1391; [2018] Imm.  A.R.  1348,  [33]  -
    [44]. At [36], Leggatt LJ confirmed:

         '... it  has  increasingly  been  recognised  that  it  is  usually
         unreliable  and  often  dangerous  to  draw  a  conclusion  from  a
         witness's demeanour as  to  the  likelihood  that  the  witness  is
         telling the truth.'

17. At [37] he further noted:

         'The reasons for distrusting reliance on  demeanour  are  magnified
         where the witness is of a different nationality from the judge  and
         is either speaking English as  a  foreign  language  or  is  giving
         evidence through an interpreter.'

18. At [38]:

         'Ms.  Jegarajah  emphasised   that   immigration   judges   acquire
         considerable  experience  of   observing   persons   of   different
         nationalities and ethnicities giving oral  evidence  and  suggested
         that this makes those judges expert in evaluating  the  credibility
         of testimony given by such persons based on their demeanour. I have
         no doubt that immigration judges do learn much  in  the  course  of
         their work about different cultural attitudes and customs and  that
         such  knowledge  can  help  to  inform  their  decision-making   in
         beneficial ways. But it would hubristic for any  judge  to  suppose
         that because  he  or  she  has,  for  example,  seen  a  number  of
         individuals of Tamil origin giving oral evidence this gives him  or
         her a privileged insight into whether a particular witness of  that
         ethnicity is telling the truth. That would be to assume that  there
         are typical characteristics shared by members of  an  ethnic  group
         (or  by  human  beings  generally)  which  can  be  relied  on   to
         differentiate a person who is lying from  someone  who  is  telling
         what they believe to be the truth. I know of no evidence to suggest
         that any such characteristics exist or that demeanour provides  any
         reliable indication of how likely it is that a  witness  is  giving
         honest testimony.'

19. Leggatt LJ concluded at [41]:

         'No doubt it is impossible,  and  perhaps  undesirable,  to  ignore
         altogether the impression created by the  demeanour  of  a  witness
         giving evidence. But to  attach  any  significant  weight  to  such
         impressions in assessing credibility risks making  judgments  which
         at best have no rational basis and at worst  reflect  conscious  or
         unconscious biases  and  prejudices.  One  of  the  most  important
         qualities expected of a judge is that they  will  strive  to  avoid
         being  influenced  by  personal  biases  and  prejudices  in  their
         decision-making. That requires eschewing  judgments  based  on  the
         appearance of a witness or on their tone, manner or  other  aspects
         of their behaviour in answering questions. Rather  than  attempting
         to assess whether testimony is truthful from the manner in which it
         is given, the only objective and reliable approach is to  focus  on
         the content  of  the  testimony  and  to  consider  whether  it  is
         consistent with other evidence  (including  evidence  of  what  the
         witness has said on other occasions) and  with  known  or  probable
         facts.'

20. Upon carefully considering the decision and reasons in this matter,  it
    is apparent that the Judge took great care  to  diligently  assess  the
    various strands of evidence before him. However, whilst  being  mindful
    that the appellant before him had mental  health  concerns,  he  placed
    weight upon his judicial evaluation as  to  the  appellant's  demeanour
    when assessing credibility. Whether significant weight was placed  upon
    it is unclear when considering [40] as a whole, but it is sufficient to
    be an error of law in the circumstances of this appeal.  Such  approach
    led to the Judge not accepting that the appellant was being targeted by
    a member of his family and so no true consideration was  given  to  the
    appellant's fear  that  his  family's  contacts  with  the  police  and
    authorities adversely impacted upon his ability to establish sufficient
    protection from those wishing to harm him or  to  internally  relocate.
    The error of law was therefore material. The Judge's  error  penetrates
    to the heart of his findings on  credibility  and,  as  a  consequence,
    there will need to be a determination of the appeal de novo.

21. Having found a material error of law as to ground 1, I do  not  proceed
    to consider grounds 2 to 5.



Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

22. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the error  of  law,  I
    accept the submissions made by both Ms. Smith and Mr. Tarlow that clear
    findings will have to be made on the evidence presented.

23. Ms. Smith requested that the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr. Tarlow observed that the matter could  properly  stay  in
    this Tribunal.

24. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:

         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is
                  necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to  be
                  remade is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal."

25. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate and  fair  consideration  of  his
    asylum claim to date.

26. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    a new fact-finding exercise is required.



Notice of decision

27. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    Judge's decision promulgated on  15  April  2019  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

28. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than
    Judge Hughes.

29. No findings of fact are preserved.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 12 August 2019

