
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01739/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2019                        |On 6 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     fh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By my decision promulgated on 10 December 2018 I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  I now remake that decision.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity born on 1 July
    2000.  His claim, in summary, is that:-

      a) he cannot be returned to his home area of Kirkuk because of the
         high level of indiscriminate violence in that area which meets the
         threshold of article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive; and

      b) it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh for him to relocate
         within Iraq, either to Baghdad or to the Kurdish region of Iraq
         (IKR), because he does not have his civil status identity document
         (CS ID) or the ability to obtain a new CSID without returning to
         Kirkuk.

 3. I did not hear oral evidence at the rehearing of the appeal as an
    interpreter was not available and both parties assured me that they
    were content to proceed in the absence of oral evidence. Mr Avery,
    however, made clear that this did not mean the evidence of the
    appellant was accepted.

 4. My starting point in considering this appeal is the factual findings at
    paragraphs 31 - 39 of the First-tier Tribunal decision which were
    preserved in my error of law decision.  In sum, the preserved findings
    are that:

      a) the appellant did not give a truthful account of the reasons for,
         and the circumstances leading up to, his departure from Iraq.

      b) The appellant's identification card was not seized by ISIS, as he
         claimed.

      c) The appellant has not lost contact with his family in Iraq.

      d) The appellant undertook a well-planned journey organised by someone
         who wanted him to reach the UK and not merely find a safe place.

 5. The judge did not make a finding as to whether or not the appellant is
    currently in possession of a CSID, passport, or any other identity
    documents. At paragraph 22 of the decision, under the subheading "cross
    examination" the judge stated that the appellant said that he left his
    old ID card in Iraq and has now obtained a new one. However it is not
    clear what type of identification card is being referred to and, in any
    event, this is not a finding of fact; it is a record of a response to a
    question in cross-examination.

 6. As I made clear in the error of law decision, the question of whether
    the appellant has a CSID or any other documentation was not determined
    by the First-tier Tribunal and therefore remains to be determined by me
    in this decision.

 7. The position of the appellant is that he does not have a CSID, passport
    or any other identification document. Mr Burrett argued that the
    appellant has been consistent, since coming to the UK, in saying he
    does not have identification documents and that given he was only 15
    when he entered the UK he should be given the benefit of the doubt.

 8. Mr Avery argued that, in determining whether or not the appellant is
    being truthful about his identification documents, I should have regard
    both to the record of cross examination at paragraph 22 of the First-
    tier Tribunal (as discussed above at paragraph 5) and to the fact that
    the First-tier Tribunal found the appellant to not be credible.

 9. It is difficult to resolve the question of whether or not the appellant
    has a CSID and/or passport. I have not had the benefit of hearing him
    respond to cross examination, which may have provided some assistance.
    Having carefully considered all of the evidence that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal, I am of the view that the appellant has been
    consistent about his identification documents and that his claim to no
    longer have them is plausible. Applying the lower standard of proof
    applicable in protection claims, I am satisfied that it is reasonably
    likely that the appellant does not have possession of a CSID or
    passport.  I therefore find as a fact that the appellant does not have
    these identification documents.

10. I now turn to the issue of whether the appellant can be expected to
    return to his home area of Kirkuk.  The appellant claims that the level
    of indiscriminate violence in that region is so high that he would,
    solely by being present there, face a real risk which threatens his
    life such that removal from the UK would be contrary to Article 15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive.  There is both case law and evidence
    that supports the appellant's claim about Kirkuk. This includes:

      a) The country guidance case AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT
         544 where it was found, based on evidence up to May 2015, that the
         degree of armed conflict in Kirkuk engaged Article 15(c).

      b) The respondent's refusal letter of 26 January 2018 where it was
         accepted at paragraph 99 that "the most up-to-date information
         available from the CPIN:SHS published in March 2017 confirms that
         your home area of Kirkuk currently meets the threshold of Article
         15(c)."

      c) The expert report of Alison Pargeter that was adduced by the
         appellant. Ms Pargeter is an analyst and consultant specialising in
         political and security issues in North Africa and the Middle East.
         In her report dated 21 February 2019 she discussed the current
         security situation in Kirkuk.  Her conclusion is that

             "the security situation in Kirkuk has deteriorated
             considerably and the governorate remains vulnerable to ongoing
             attacks and violence which the security forces are unable to
             contain.  Indeed, the situation has deteriorated since the
             country guidance case of AA which was issued while the Kurds
             were still in control of the governorate"

11. Mr Avery argued that the security situation in Iraq has changed
    dramatically since AA was promulgated and therefore notwithstanding the
    position taken in the refusal letter, I should find that the security
    situation in Kirkuk no longer meets the Article 15(c) threshold.  He
    relied on the Home Office CPIN Iraq: security and humanitarian
    situation November 2018 where it is said that there are strong grounds
    supported by cogent evidence to depart from AA's assessment that any
    areas of Iraq engage Article 15(c).

12. The evidence before me about Kirkuk indicates that the security
    situation is complex and frequently changing. The most recent evidence
    is that of Ms Pargeter, who expresses the view that the situation is at
    present worse than that which prevailed when AA was decided. In the
    light of her evidence, I am not satisfied that there are sufficiently
    cogent reasons to justify a departure from AA. Accordingly, I find that
    the appellant cannot be expected to return to his home area because of
    the risk of serious harm which meets the threshold of Article 15(c).

13. As the appellant cannot be expected to return to Kirkuk I must consider
    whether he can be expected to relocate within Iraq.

14. It is clear from AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018]
    UKUT 212 which was promulgated in 2018 that whether the appellant has a
    CSID or will be able to obtain one reasonably soon after arrival in
    Iraq is an important factor in assessing whether internal relocation
    would be unduly harsh. As explained by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)
    v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 [2018]

         "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities,  employment,  education,
         housing and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no  family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to fail and  face  a  real  risk  of  destitution
         amounting to serious harm if by the time any funds provided to P by
         the Secretary of State or agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
         exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID."

15. I therefore need to consider whether the appellant will be able to
    obtain a CSID within a reasonable timeframe.  It was raised by Mr Avery
    that the appellant may be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy
    in London.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG it was said that a person who
    is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or the book in
    page number for their family registration details may be able to obtain
    a CSID in the UK through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in
    London.  However, I have found that the appellant does not have
    possession of his passport. It follows from this that it is reasonably
    likely that the appellant will not be able to obtain a CSID in the UK
    and that he would be returned to Iraq without a CSID.

16. It is clear from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AA that there is
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that in order for the appellant to
    obtain a CSID he would need to travel to Kirkuk.  However, because he
    would be at risk in Kirkuk he cannot be expected to travel to that
    region, even for the limited purpose of obtaining his CSID.  I find,
    therefore, that the appellant will not be able to obtain a CSID within
    a reasonable timeframe of his return to Iraq.

17. Accordingly, the assessment of whether it is reasonable or unduly harsh
    for the appellant to relocate within Iraq must be undertaken on the
    basis that he would be doing so without a CSID.  Relocation to Baghdad
    was considered in AA.  Applying the criteria in that case to the
    appellant's circumstances it is clear that internal relocation would be
    unduly harsh because:

      a) he would not have a CSID or the means to obtain one without
         travelling to an unsafe area;

      b) he does not speak Arabic;

      c) he is from a minority community; and

      d) he does not have family to support him in Baghdad.

18. The alternative option is for the appellant to relocate to the IKR.
    The difficulty with this option is that he would be returned to Baghdad
    and without a CSID he would not be in a position to reach the IKR as he
    would not be able to take a flight and he could not safely travel by
    land. See paragraph 5 of the headnote to AAH.

19. The appellant's protection claim is therefore allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 5 June 2019                   |

