

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01067/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2017                          |    On 24 July 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  M J (+3)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appellant's  appeal,  on
   Article 8 grounds, against the decision of 22 January 2016  refusing  her
   asylum and human rights claim, it was found, at an error of  law  hearing
   on 25 January 2017, that the First-tier Tribunal had made errors  of  law
   in its decision. The decision was accordingly set aside.

2. The appellant, a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 19  July  1979,  arrived
   in the UK in December 2004 with leave to  enter  as  a  student  until  6
   December 2006. She made various  unsuccessful  applications  for  further
   leave as a student/nurse but then successfully applied for further  leave
   on 5 March 2007, and was granted leave until  31  May  2007.  Further  to
   that,  and  between  2007  and  2014,  she  made   several   unsuccessful
   applications for leave to remain as a student/nurse, for an EEA residence
   card and for leave to remain  on  family/  private  life  grounds.  On  4
   September 2015 she applied for asylum, with her husband and two  children
   being dependent on her claim. Her asylum claim was refused on 22  January
   2016.

3. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  Her  appeal  was  heard
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen on 1 November 2016. The  appellant
   did not pursue the asylum grounds of appeal but  appealed  on  Article  8
   human grounds only. She relied on her family life with  her  husband  and
   two children, her son J born in 2006 and her daughter Ja  born  in  2013,
   all nationals of Sierra Leone.  Judge  Cohen  found  that  the  appellant
   succeeded under EX.1(a) of Appendix FM on  the  basis  that  it  was  not
   reasonable to expect her son J to leave the UK, as he had lived in the UK
   for more than seven years and was entitled  to  British  nationality  and
   could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. He concluded that it was
   unreasonable to separate J from the rest of the family and that it was in
   the best interests of the children to remain in the UK. He dismissed  the
   appeal under the  immigration  rules  but  allowed  it  on  human  rights
   grounds.


4. The respondent sought, and was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal. At an error of law hearing on 25 January  2017,  I  found
   errors of law in the judge's decision and set it aside, as follows:

                            "DECISION AND REASONS


    9) I agree entirely with the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  I
       reject Ms Akinyinka's submission that the principles in the case  of
       MA were followed even if the case itself was not cited, when that is
       clearly not the  case.  The  judge  embarked  on  an  assessment  of
       reasonableness in respect to the appellant's son without any  regard
       to the principles in MA and made his findings purely on the question
       of his best interests  without  having  any  regard  to  the  public
       interest. Ms Akinyinka submitted that the judge focussed on the best
       interests of the child because the respondent had failed to  do  so,
       as he stated at [21], yet the respondent clearly  did  consider  the
       best interests of the children in some detail in her decision of  22
       January 2016  when  considering  "exceptional  circumstances"  under
       Article 8. In any event that was not a reason to ignore the guidance
       in MA and to fail to consider any of  the  public  interest  factors
       weighing against the appellant, which is what the judge did.


   10) Ms Akinyinka submitted that the judge had given due consideration to
       the public interest and she relied on his reference at  the  end  of
       [21] of his decision. However it is clear that the judge's reference
       at that point to the public interest  was  in  relation  to  section
       117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  having
       already decided that it was  unreasonable  for  appellant's  son  to
       leave the UK. Nowhere in the decision was  there  any  consideration
       given to the public interest  factors  in  assessing  reasonableness
       itself. What the  judge  did  was  to  assess  the  children's  best
       interests and treat his conclusion in that regard  as  determinative
       of the Article 8 claim, particularly in view of the fact that J  had
       resided in the UK for over seven years and was entitled to  register
       for British citizenship, but without placing that conclusion in  the
       overall proportionality assessment and without balancing it  against
       the relevant public interest factors. That was a material  error  of
       law and for these reasons Judge  Cohen's  decision  has  to  be  set
       aside.


   11) Ms Akinyinka asked that the  case  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to be heard  de  novo  in  the  event  that  Judge  Cohen's
       decision was set aside. Mr Duffy did not object, but also  submitted
       that the decision could be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  It  seems
       to me that a remittal for a de novo hearing is not appropriate since
       there is no challenge to the essential facts. Rather, the  re-making
       of the decision simply involves a consideration of the facts  within
       the correct legal framework, considering the best interests  of  the
       children and  then  balancing  those  against  the  relevant  public
       interest factors in considering the  question  of  "reasonableness".
       There is no reason why that should not be undertaken  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal. However I agreed to have the case  listed  for  a  resumed
       hearing rather than going on to re-make the decision at that  stage,
       so as to enable any further evidence to be produced and  considered,
       subject to Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008. I do not rule out any further oral evidence, but I would
       expect that the re-making of the decision  will  for  most  part  be
       undertaken on the basis of submissions from the parties."

5. The appeal then came before me again on 21 July 2017. By  that  date  the
   appellant's eldest child J had acquired British citizenship and had  been
   issued with a British passport on the basis of ten  years'  residence  in
   the UK.

6. Mr Singh advised me that it was accepted  that  J  had  acquired  British
   citizenship. He was aware that the Home Office guidance  on  Appendix  FM
   and family life cases stated that, in the absence of criminality, a  case
   should be assessed on the basis that removal of a British child would  be
   unreasonable. Whilst he submitted that  British  citizenship  was  not  a
   trump card, he accepted that it would  be  difficult  for  him  to  argue
   matters above and beyond the  guidance.  He  therefore  made  no  further
   submissions.


7. Ms Akinbola relied on the decisions of Kaur (children's best interests  /
   public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 14 and SF  and  others  (Guidance,
   post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 and asked me to find that the fact
   that there was a British child was sufficient in this case to  allow  the
   appeal.


8. I advised the parties that I was allowing the appeal. The  following  are
   my reasons for so doing.


9.  I see no need to make lengthy findings  in  view  of  Mr  Singh's  clear
   indication and in light of the terms of the Home Office guidance  in  the
   Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family  Migration  -  Appendix  FM,
   Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private  Life,  10
   year Routes" of August 2015 and the decision in SF.


10. The full terms of the relevant part of the guidance are set  out  in  SF
   at [7], but the most pertinent part states as follows at section 11.2.3:


      "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take
      a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British
      Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force that
      British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child.
      This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano...


      Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
      primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
      always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to
      expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or
      primary carer."


11. As in that  case,  the  appellant's  case  is  not  one  which  involves
   criminality and, other than the fact of the  appellant  and  her  husband
   being overstayers, there is nothing in their conduct giving rise to  such
   weight as to justify separation of J from his parents. In any event there
   is no suggestion that there is any other family member with whom he could
   reasonably be expected to live in the absence of his parents. Whilst  the
   First-tier Tribunal's decision in the appellant's appeal  was  set  aside
   owing to a failure to follow the approach in MA in regard to the question
   of reasonableness, it is clear that the Home Office guidance  provides  a
   full response to that question. This is clearly a  case  where  the  Home
   Office  itself,  in  its  own  guidance,  recognises  that  it  would  be
   unreasonable to expect the eldest child J to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
   The appellant's child, J, is therefore able to meet the  requirements  in
   paragraph 276ADE(iv) and, in  accordance  with  section  117B(6)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  public  interest  does
   not require the removal of the appellant and her husband from the UK.  As
   considered at [20] of  MA,  the  only  conclusion  in  the  appeal  must,
   therefore, be that Article 8 is infringed by the respondent's decision.

12. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is allowed on  the  basis  that  her
   removal and that of her husband and children, to Sierra  Leone  would  be
   disproportionate and in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION


13. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law. I  re-make
   the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.






Signed[pic]                                  Date: 21 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
