
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01624/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th January 2018                      |On 06th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     MMK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Knorr (instructed by Legal Rights Partnership)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
    Appellant who is a citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1992.  He  appealed  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his protection  claim  and  his
    appeal was heard at Newport by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eames on  27th
    April 2017.

 2. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  10th  May  2017  Judge  Eames
    dismissed the humanitarian protection claim but allowed the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The decision is a very careful recitation  of  what
    the claim was about, which was that the Appellant as a Shia Muslim  had
    suffered attacks in his home area  from  Sunni  militia  and  that  his
    sister, with whom he is very close, was at risk of being forced into  a
    marriage.  He and his sister both fled to the UK and both  have  mental
    health problems.  In the case of the Appellant he has PTSD.

 3. The sister's appeal had previously been allowed on  the  basis  of  the
    risk to her of forced marriage and due to her  religion.   The  factual
    basis of the claim was accepted in her appeal and also by Judge  Eames.
    The Judge accepted that  there  was  a  risk  of  persecution  in  this
    Appellant's home area, having accepted  that  he  and  his  sister  had
    previously been targeted by the militia.  The Judge  then  went  on  to
    consider whether internal relocation was possible  and  found  that  it
    was.  He thus refused the protection claim.

 4. However, when considering the Appellant's relationship with his  sister
    he found that that relationship was sufficiently strong with  a  mutual
    dependency to amount to family life for the purposes of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR and allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 5. The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision is on the basis  of
    the findings in respect to internal relocation.  Part of  the  evidence
    that was before the Judge was a medical report  by  Dr  Fairweather,  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 20th April  2017.   The  Judge  accepted
    that evidence was  entitled  to  be  given  weighty  consideration  and
    nothing in the report was rejected.

 6. The Judge, when considering internal relocation at paragraphs 72 an 73,
    having set out  the  various  relevant  pieces  of  law,  assessed  the
    Appellant's individual characteristic as required  and  concluded  that
    they were not characteristics such as  to  put  him  at  real  risk  of
    Article 15(c) harm.  He found also that he would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution due to his religion either  outside  the  areas  concerned.
    The Judge went  on  to  say  that  it  was  not  argued  that  internal
    relocation would be unduly harsh and found that the Appellant would  be
    a Shia in a Shia country; would face the same problems finding work and
    accommodation  that  others  would  face;  albeit  he  had  no   family
    sponsorship, but those factors did not amount to undue hardship.

 7. However, in that analysis, in an otherwise very  careful  and  reasoned
    decision, the Judge did not take  into  account  the  medical  evidence
    which he had previously found worthy of  weighty  consideration.   That
    medical evidence included the doctor's opinion as to the effect on  the
    Appellant of  return  to  Iraq.   It  opined  that  there  would  be  a
    deterioration in the Appellant's mental state and an increased  suicide
    risk.  There would be a lack of family support  and  the  loss  of  the
    relationship with his sister, his only meaningful  family  relationship
    and with whom there was mutual dependency.  The doctor also opined that
    as a  result  of  his  mental  state  he  would  be  unable  to  obtain
    employment.

 8. I find, without any meaningful challenge from the Secretary  of  State,
    that had those matters properly been  factored  into  the  analysis  of
    internal relocation it would have tipped the balance to a finding  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect that of this Appellant.  This is not
    a case where the Appellant is a fit and healthy  young  man  who  could
    make his way in his home country in another area.

 9. The Judge  having  found  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on account of his Shia faith in his  home  area,  it  being
    unduly harsh to expect him to relocate, means that he  is  entitled  to
    refugee status.  I therefore allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  to
    the extent that I set aside the findings only  on  internal  relocation
    and I re-decide it based  on  the  other  findings  which  are  clearly
    sustainable. I re-decide it on the basis that he is entitled to  asylum
    for the reasons that I have given.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


