
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02742/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 March 2019                              |On 20 May 2019                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Goodwin instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea.   She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 14 September 2017 and claimed asylum the next  day.   On  14
    February  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   appellant's
    application on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 1 October 2018 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judges  Davidge  and
    Clarkson) dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal.   Permission  was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but, on 4  January  2019  the  Upper
    Tribunal (DUTJ Davey) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 5. The respondent did not file a rule 24 notice.

 6. Relying upon the grounds of appeal, Mr  Goodwin,  who  represented  the
    appellant, submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  by
    concluding, in effect,  that  the  appellant  could  safely  return  to
    Ethiopia because she could acquire that nationality.

 7. First, Mr Goodwin submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had been wrong
    to take into account  that  the  appellant  had  not  attended  at  the
    Ethiopian Embassy in London in order  to,  in  effect,  use  her  "best
    efforts"  to  establish  that  she  was  not  entitled   to   Ethiopian
    nationality.  That point, Mr Goodwin  submitted,  was  based  upon  the
    decision of ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality  -  return)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00253 but ST was distinguishable as  there  the  individual
    was said to have lost his Ethiopian nationality.

 8. Secondly, Mr Goodwin submitted that under Ethiopian law  an  individual
    could not be a "dual national" and it was no part of the requirement to
    use "best efforts" that an individual should be  required  to  renounce
    their nationality  (here  of  Eritrea)  in  order  to  acquire  another
    nationality.

 9. Thirdly, Mr Goodwin submitted  that,  in  any  event,  the  appellant's
    ability to acquire Ethiopian  nationality  was,  under  Ethiopian  law,
    discretionary rather  than  an  entitlement.   As  a  consequence,  the
    appellant's situation fell within  category  (iii)  recognised  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in KK and others (Nationality:  North  Korea)  Korea  CG
    [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC) such that it could not be said that she is "of" or
    "has" Ethiopian nationality for the purposes of  applying  the  Refugee
    Convention.

10. In response, Mr  Howells,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    accepted that, in the  light  of  the  expert  report,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in its approach to the issue of  whether  the
    appellant could acquire Ethiopian nationality.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant's ability to acquire Ethiopian nationality was as set out  in
    Art 5 of the relevant Ethiopian law cited by the expert  (Dr  Campbell)
    at para 3 of his report at pages C2-C3 of the appellant's  bundle.   Mr
    Howells accepted that, even if  the  appellant  were  to  renounce  her
    Eritrean nationality, her  ability  to  acquire  Ethiopian  nationality
    involved discretion and was not an entitlement  in  the  light  of  the
    factors set out at Art  5.1-5.8.   He  accepted  that,  therefore,  the
    appellant's situation fell within category (iii) of  KK  and  that  her
    refugee claim could not, as a result, be determined on the  basis  that
    she was entitled to acquire Ethiopian nationality.

11. Having taken time to consider the Secretary  of  State's  position,  Mr
    Howells accepted that the First-tier Tribunal's determination should be
    set aside.  Further, he accepted that the decision  should  be  re-made
    allowing the appellant's appeal under the  Refugee  Convention  on  the
    basis that she is a national of Eritrea who is outside her  country  of
    nationality and has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention
    reason there - the risk to her in Eritrea was accepted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at para 16 of its  determination.   Mr  Howells  conceded
    that the appellant's appeal should, therefore, be allowed.

12. In the light of the position taken by Mr Howells, in  relation  to  the
    appellant's ability to claim Ethiopian nationality, even if she were to
    renounce  her  Eritrean  nationality,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    determine the first two points relied upon by Mr Goodwin.

13. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law by concluding that, in effect, the
    appellant was entitled to acquire Ethiopian nationality when, in  fact,
    as is clear from the Ethiopian law and the expert's report, her ability
    to acquire Ethiopian nationality (even if  she  were  to  renounce  her
    Eritrean nationality) is discretionary and not an entitlement  so  that
    it fell within category (iii) of KK.

14. Mr Howells, having advanced no other basis  upon  which  he  considered
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision could be sustained, I set aside
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal.
    I re-make the decision, and in accordance with the Secretary of State's
    concession, I allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That  decision  is  set
    aside.

16. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 17 May 2019
