
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/02656/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 September 2019                    |On 24 September 2019               |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                            ms syeda sabah khalid
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  made  an  application  for
    international  protection.  It  was  refused  and  she  appealed,   and
    following a hearing, and in a decision  promulgated  on  31  May  2019,
    Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal D S Borsada dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. This was granted by Judge of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Bird in a  decision  promulgated  on  5  August
    2019. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "1. As Judge of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the
         appellant, a national of Pakistan, brought against  a  decision  of
         the respondent dated 7 February 2019.

         2. The appellant seeks permission to appeal against  this  decision
         on the grounds that the judge made arguable error  of  law.  It  is
         alleged that in refusing the appellant's request  to  transfer  the
         appeal closer to her home, the Tribunal has acted unfairly. Further
         she was denied a fair hearing despite her  informing  the  Tribunal
         that she was having problems in her pregnancy, and evidence of  her
         having to have a scan. The judge went ahead in her absence.

         3. It is arguable that in failing to take into account the  medical
         evidence and the fact of the appellant's early  pregnancy  and  the
         distance between the appellant's home and the hearing  centre,  the
         Tribunal acted unfairly. There has been a procedural error which is
         an arguable error of law."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At 11.25 am there was no appearance from  the  Appellant.  I  asked  my
    Clerk to check the building to ensure that she was not  present.  That,
    he duly did and at 11.30 am I was told that she was neither present  in
    the building nor had reported to reception.

 5. I was satisfied that the Appellant had been properly served with notice
    of today's hearing. The notice was sent to the last  known  address  to
    the Tribunal by 1st class post on 14 August 2019. In the  circumstances
    I considered it just to proceed with the appeal.

 6. Ms Fijiwala relied upon the Respondent's response  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24. Therein it is submitted that the  Judge  set  out
    the Appellant's  immigration  history  and  the  long  list  of  failed
    applications. At paragraph 4  of  his  decision  the  Judge  considered
    whether he could safely proceed absent  any  representations  from  the
    Appellant's representatives. He also took into account a  request  made
    earlier in the  proceedings  to  move  this  appeal  hearing  from  the
    Birmingham hearing centre to another. It had been refused  and  at  the
    hearing before Judge Borsada there was no further  representation.  The
    Judge then went on at paragraphs 10 and 11 to consider  the  weight  to
    attach to evidence, looked at the totality of the documentary  evidence
    within the appeal and made findings which resulted  in  him  dismissing
    it.

 7. For completeness paragraph 4 of Judge Borsada's decision states: -

         "4. This matter came before me on 24th  May  2019  at  the  hearing
         centre in Birmingham, Priory Court. On this occasion the respondent
         was represented by Ms Tabassum, the Home Office Presenting Officer.
         The appellant was not present and there was no one present  on  her
         behalf either. I was able to confirm from information  provided  to
         me by the Tribunal that notice of the  hearing  had  been  sent  by
         first class post on 10th May 2019 and that it was sent to both  the
         appellant and her  legal  representative.  I  also  noted  that  an
         application to have the hearing transferred  to  the  Hatton  Cross
         hearing centre had already  been  rejected  by  Assistant  Resident
         Judge O'Brien and a copy of that decision sent to the appellant  on
         8th May 2019 at her last  known  address.  Judge  O'Brien  did  not
         accept that there was any medical evidence which clearly  indicated
         that either the appellant or her unborn would be endangered by  the
         hearing taking place in Birmingham as had  been  suggested  by  the
         appellant and her representative and that  in  those  circumstances
         the hearing was to remain listed in Birmingham. In default  of  any
         medical evidence  from  the  appellant  following  Judge  O'Brien's
         decision and in the absence of any further representations from the
         appellant and her representatives about her inability to attend the
         hearing I decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence of one
         of the parties in accordance  with  the  relevant  procedure  rules
         having considered it in the interest of justice and fairness so  to
         do.  The  respondent's   representative   then   made   submissions
         concerning the hearing and the appeal  hearing  concluded  with  my
         decision being reserved."

 8. The Judge was satisfied that there was no medical evidence,  either  at
    the time of the decision of Judge  O'Brien  refusing  transfer  of  the
    hearing venue, or at the time of the substantive hearing,  which  would
    indicate that either  the  Appellant  or  her  unborn  child  would  be
    endangered by the hearing proceeding in Birmingham as  listed.  In  the
    absence of any further representation it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
    proceed to hear the appeal. In so doing he did not materially err.

 9. The Appellant failed to attend today's hearing. There is no  indication
    from her as to why she is unable to attend.

10. There is here no material error of law.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                                 Date:   19  September
2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
