
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02236/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely by Skype for Business        |                              |
|                                              |On 03 March 2021              |
|On 18 February 2021                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    H A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp instructed by KB Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) I make an  anonymity  order  prohibiting
    the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members
    of the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 30 January 1976.  He
    is a Sunni Muslim and comes from the south of Iraq in Dhi Qar Province.



 3. The appellant claims to have left Iraq in 2007 when he went  to  Syria.
    In 2011, civil war broke out in Syria and  the  appellant  returned  to
    Iraq.  There, he claims, his home was attacked by Shi'a Militia.  As  a
    result, he went into hiding in the countryside for  about  five  months
    before going to Australia where he claimed  asylum  on  arrival  on  29
    October 2012.  He was issued with a temporary protection  visa  by  the
    Australian authorities, which was valid until 20 March 2020.  In  2019,
    the appellant left Australia as he claimed to be subject to racism  and
    was unemployed.  He travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  arriving  on  4
    September 2019 when he claimed asylum.

 4. The appellant claimed that he would be at risk from Shi'a Militia if he
    returned to Iraq and he relied upon the circumstances which had led him
    to leave Iraq initially in  2007  and  then  again  in  2011  after  he
    returned from Syria.

 5. On 19 February 2020, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.
     The decision letter of that date was subsequently  supplemented  by  a
    further decision letter dated 14 July 2020.  In essence, the  Secretary
    of State did not accept the appellant's account or that he would, as  a
    result, be at risk in his home area from Shi'a Militia.   Further,  the
    respondent concluded that the appellant could  internally  relocate  to
    Baghdad.  On that basis, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
    asylum claim.  In addition, the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was entitled to humanitarian  protection  under  Art
    15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  (Council  Directive  2004/83/EC)
    because he could not establish that there was a real risk that he would
    be subject  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  serious  harm.
    Finally, the respondent rejected the appellant's application to  remain
    in the UK based upon his private and family life under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard on 3 September 2020 by Judge Page.

 7. The appellant gave oral evidence before the judge and also relied  upon
    an expert report from Dr Giustozzi dated 19 July  2020,  a  psychiatric
    report from Dr Jayawickrama dated 19 August  2020  and  two  pieces  of
    background  evidence,  namely  the  CPIN,  "Notes  Iraq:  Sunni   (Arab
    Muslims)" (June 2017) and  UNHCR  document,  "International  Protection
    Considerations with Regard to People Fleeing the Republic of Iraq" (May
    2019).

 8. The appellant again relied upon the events that he claimed led  him  to
    leave Iraq initially in 2007 and finally in 2011.  He claimed to be  at
    risk as a Sunni Muslim returning to his home area from Shi'a Militia.

 9. Judge Page  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  and  rejected  the
    appellant's account, in particular, as regards the events in 2011  when
    he said his home had been attacked by Shi'a Militia which  had  led  to
    him leaving Iraq.  In addition, Judge Page  found  that  the  appellant
    could, in any event, internally  relocate  to  Baghdad.   It  does  not
    appear  that  the  appellant  specifically  pursued  the   humanitarian
    protection claim under Art 15(c).  Finally, Judge Page decided that the
    appellant's removal would not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  six
    grounds.  Those  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding, his conclusion that the appellant could internally relocate to
    Baghdad and his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

11. On 7 October 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Brien) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on all grounds.

12. The appeal was listed  at  the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice  Centre  on  18
    February 2021.  The appeal was heard with the UT  working  remotely  by
    Skype for  Business.   In  addition,  Mr  Fripp,  who  represented  the
    appellant, and Mr McVeety, who represented the respondent,  joined  the
    hearing remotely by Skype for Business.

The Appellant's Grounds

13. Mr Fripp, in his oral submissions, adopted and elaborated upon the  six
    grounds of appeal.

14. Grounds 1, 2 and 5 challenge the judge's adverse credibility finding.

15. Ground 1 contends that the judge failed properly to take  into  account
    Dr Giustozzi's report and the background evidence,  in  particular  the
    CPIN (June 2017) and the UNHCR document in reaching his conclusion that
    the appellant's account was not credible.

16. Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had reached an  adverse  finding,  in
    particular in relation to the 2011 incident without taking into account
    that the CPIN stated that Sunnis may face a real risk of persecution or
    serious harm from Shi'a Militia in areas where there is a Shi'a Militia
    presence and that Sunnis are unable to avail themselves  of  protection
    of the authorities (see paras 3.1.4 and  3.1.6).   Further,  he  relied
    upon the UNHCR document where - as set out in the grounds - it is  said
    that there were "waves of displacement due to  conflict  and  political
    and religious discrimination" and that  "Sunnis  are  reportedly  being
    targeted on account of their perceived  support  of  ISIS".   Mr  Fripp
    submitted that this background evidence was relevant in  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant's account, in particular  in  relation  to
    the events in  2011.   Mr  Fripp  submitted  that  the  judge  made  no
    reference to this background material.

17. Mr Fripp also submitted that Dr Giustozzi's report provided support for
    the credibility of the appellant's account both  as  regards  the  2007
    situation -  when  the  appellant  claimed  he  left  Iraq  because  of
    'cleansing' of Sunni Muslims by Shi'a - and also the events in 2011.

18. In his oral submissions, Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had made  no
    finding at all in relation to the 2007 event, only in relation  to  the
    2011 incident.

19. Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had fallen into error because he  had
    only referred to Dr Giustozzi's report at para 34 having  already  made
    an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the  appellant.   This,  he
    submitted, amounted to the so-called Mibanga error (see Mibanga v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367).

20. In relation to ground 5, Mr Fripp (linking it with ground 1)  submitted
    that the judge had failed to take into  account  the  relevant  country
    guidance decisions.  He relied upon BA (Returns  to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
    [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC)  and  SMO  and  others  (Article  15(c):  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

21. In relation to ground 2, Mr Fripp submitted that the judge has  wrongly
    down-played the relevance of Dr Giustozzi's  evidence  because  he  had
    said that the was a "risk" to the appellant on return  without  stating
    it was a "real risk".  This, Mr Fripp submitted,  was  a  strained  and
    artificial understanding of the evidence which was, read  as  a  whole,
    plainly that the risk to the appellant was relevant to  his  protection
    claim.

22. In relation to ground 3, Mr Fripp submitted that the judge, in para  33
    of his determination, had concluded that the appellant could internally
    relocate to Baghdad simply on the basis that  he  had  not  established
    that he would be at risk  of  being  kidnapped  or  murdered  by  Shi'a
    Militia.  Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had failed to consider,  in
    accordance with the test for internal relocation, whether (even in  the
    absence of such a risk) it would be 'unduly  harsh'  or  'unreasonable'
    for the appellant to live in Baghdad.  In that regard, Mr Fripp  relied
    upon the well-known decisions in Januzi v SSHD [2005] UKHL 5; SSHD v AH
    (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 and, most  recently,  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 873.

23. In relation to ground 4, Mr Fripp submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to address para 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  whether
    there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   appellant's
    integration on return to  Iraq  and  properly  to  consider  his  claim
    outside the Rules under Art 8.

24. Finally, under ground 6, Mr Fripp submitted that the judge  had  failed
    properly to consider the expert psychiatric report of Dr  Jayawickrama.
    Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had been wrong, in  para  35  of  his
    determination, to conclude that the report added little weight  to  the
    appellant's case in particular because there was no diagnosis that  the
    appellant was suffering from "moderate depressive episode".   Mr  Fripp
    submitted that was  inconsistent  with  the  report  and  the  expert's
    opinion as to the appellant's mental health.  In his oral  submissions,
    Mr Fripp accepted  that  the  psychiatric  evidence  was  not  directly
    relevant to an assessment of the appellant's evidence  and  credibility
    but was was rather relevant to the appellant's circumstances on return,
    including whether he could internally relocate.

Discussion

25. The appellant's case before Judge Page relied upon  past  incidents  as
    being relevant to whether, on return to Iraq, he would be  at  risk  in
    his home area as a Sunni Muslim.  Those events  occurred  in  2007  and
    2011.  In relation to 2007, the appellant claimed that he left Iraq and
    went to Syria because of 'ethnic cleansing' of Sunni Muslims  by  Shi'a
    Militia in his home area.  In relation to 2011, when he  returned  from
    Syria, he claimed that his home had been attacked by Shi'a Militia  who
    had said "the dog has come back".  He left because he  feared  for  his
    life.  His mother and elderly aunt remained in the family home but, the
    appellant's evidence was, that they were safe because "the ladies don't
    have fear and they are all over 60 years old".  As a  consequence,  the
    credibility of the appellant's account, both in relation  to  2007  and
    2011 was central  to  his  case.   As  Mr  Fripp  pointed  out  in  his
    submissions, past persecution is a "serious indication" of future  risk
    of persecution as para 339K of the Immigration Rules recognises.

26. In his judgment, Judge Page plainly  recognised  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was a crucial part of  his  claim.   In  relation  to  that
    issue, Judge Page found the appellant not to be credible and said  this
    at paras 27-32:

         "27. I am not satisfied to the  low  standard  of  proof  that  the
             appellant would face an individual risk in Iraq because he  is
             a Sunni Muslim.  This is not an at risk category per se.   The
             central issue in this appeal is the appellant's credibility.

         28.  I do not find it  credible  that  he  was  targeted  by  Shi'a
             Militia when he returned to Iraq in 2011 to  renew  his  Iraqi
             passport.  His evidence was discrepant later in  his  evidence
             when he said that the rock throwing incident took place  later
             than  the  first  day  when  he  arrived  back.   His  witness
             statement  that  he  made  both  to  the  respondent  and   in
             preparation for the appeal and  indeed  his  Asylum  Interview
             Record clearly was claiming that he came back  and  the  house
             was attacked on the very first day and he left immediately and
             went into hiding for five months.  It was  during  questioning
             by Mr Halt that the appellant changed his evidence and  I  was
             left with a clear impression that the appellant had  forgotten
             the detail of an invented story and reinvented it differently.

         29.  His evidence was evasive when he was asked about what property
             his family still had in Iraq.  I find that if the  appellant's
             family remained in the house  after  this  claimed  attack  it
             could only mean that they, as Sunni Muslims  themselves,  were
             not at risk by reason of their religion.  In any event,  if  I
             were to accept the appellant's account about the attack on his
             home, on his evidence he successfully  relocated  within  Iraq
             away from these attackers when he went  to  another  house  in
             another area and stayed there for five months.   If  this  was
             true he exercised an internal flight  alternative  to  seeking
             asylum in another country and had no need to go  to  Australia
             or the UK.

         30.  The appellant's immigration history is evidently  that  of  an
             economic migrant, not a refugee.  I do not accept his evidence
             that he was given US$6,000 by his colleagues in Australia  who
             were supporting him.  His evidence has been that  refugees  in
             Australia are not given work, are side-lined  and  effectively
             persecuted in Australia, which begs the question as to how the
             appellant could have had colleagues  who  were  refugees  with
             sufficient funds to give him Australian $6,000 to  bring  with
             him to the United Kingdom.  He brought that money with him  to
             re-establish himself here and the only sensible conclusion  is
             the appellant, was given a document entitling him to remain in
             Australia must have had employment there of some kind.

         31.  The appellant's family, that he  is  still  in  contact  with,
             particularly his mother that he speaks to  daily  are  in  the
             family home that he left when he went to Australia.  He  could
             return to them and obtain their support.  The fact that he has
             an Iraqi passport and his identity  documents  with  the  Home
             Office would enable the Iraqi Embassy in London to  issue  the
             appellant with an identity  document  if  he  needed  one.   I
             conclude therefore that if the appellant wanted to  return  to
             Iraq he would have no difficulty in doing  so.   However,  the
             fact is that the appellant does not want to return to Iraq but
             wishes to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  an  acquired
             immigration status.

         32.  I have made adverse credibility findings about the appellant's
             explanation for having the Australian $6,000 when  he  arrived
             in the United Kingdom and his account of having fled  Iraq  in
             2011,  which  I  find  to  have  been  an  invented  story  of
             persecution.  I ask whether the appellant could be returned in
             circumstances where he is in contact with his family  who  are
             still there and have come to no harm."

27. Then at para 33, the judge moved on to consider whether  the  appellant
    could, as he indeed he found was possible, relocate to Baghdad.

28. As  will  be  clear,  the  judge,  having  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence, rejected it and found the appellant not to be  credible.   He
    did so exclusively in the context of the 2011 incident.   As  Mr  Fripp
    submitted, the judge made no finding explictly on the 2007  events,  in
    particular whether he could have left at that time because of a fear of
    Shi'a Militia.  It will also be clear that in the reasoning in paras 27-
    32, the judge made no reference to Dr Giustozzi's  expert  report.   Mr
    Fripp placed reliance upon a  number  of  passages  in  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report.

29. First he relied upon passages in paras 5-7 which is  in  the  following
    terms:

         "5.  There is substantial evidence that if [the appellant] returned
             to Iraq, he would be at  risk  of  persecution  by  the  Iraqi
             state, or at least of rogue elements within  its  ranks.   The
             Sunni  Arab  community  in  Iraq  has  been   complaining   of
             discrimination in public sector employment for many years  now
             alleging that on the basis of the  de-Ba'athification  process
             many Sunnis have  been  prevented  from  obtaining  government
             jobs.  Although the government established in 2015 a committee
             to address the issues of sectarian and  ethnic  imbalances  in
             the ministry, it has been slow in taking action.  As of 2018 -
             2019, discrimination against Sunni Arabs continued.

                  'Some Sunnis said they were often passed over  for  choice
                  government  jobs  or  lucrative  contacts  by  the  Shi'a-
                  dominated  government  because  the  Sunnis  were  alleged
                  accused of being  Ba'athists  who  sympathised  with  ISIS
                  ideology.'

         6.   Specifically in Dhi Qar, reports  of  Shi'a  groups  targeting
             Sunnis have reduced in recent years, as the focus of the media
             and the Shi'a Militias had shifted to northern Iraq.  The last
             report of such threats dates back to 2014,  when  in  February
             Dhi  Qar  police  arrested  four  individuals   suspected   of
             distributing sectarian flyers demanding that Sunnis leave  the
             area  within  a  month  or  be  killed.   There  was  also   a
             substantial cleansing of Sunni Arabs in southern Iraq  already
             in previous years and relatively few targets are left.  A 2007
             poll showed that  26%  of  Sunni  Arabs  claimed  having  been
             displaced.  Although the pace of  the  cleansing  reached  its
             peak in 2006 - 2007, it continued later as well.

         7.   The feeling of discrimination by the Shi majority already  led
             to public protest by Sunni Arabs in 2011 - 2013, resulting  in
             violent repression by security forces.  Some  protestors  were
             killed, and others arrested or assaulted."

30. Then at para 30, Dr Giustozzi concluded as follows:

         "In conclusion, [the  appellant's]  account  is  plausible.   Sunni
         Arabs had been widely targeted by both government and the  militia,
         even when there was no indication that they had connections to  the
         Islamic State.  In the south, where [the appellant] is from,  there
         was sectarian cleansing by Shi'a  Militias.   The  seizure  of  the
         properties of Sunni Arabs occurred on a widescale throughout  Iraq.
         The fact that, as he claimed, his house is still under the  control
         of the affiliates  to  Shi'a  Militias  makes  it  risky  for  [the
         appellant] to return to Dhi Qar:  inevitably  those  occupying  his
         home will see his presence there as a risk to them, especially  now
         that sections of the population are   challenging  the  pro-Iranian
         militia even in Dhi Qar."

31. Mr Fripp accepted that, in para 30,  Dr  Giustozzi  had  misstated  the
    appellant's case which was not that his house had been seized by  Shi'a
    Militia because his evidence was that  his  mother  and  aunt  remained
    living there, albeit safely as older women.

32. Judge Page referred to Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  at  para  34  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "I will make reference to the expert report  of  Antonio  Giustozzi
         dated 19 July 2020 at pages 1, 11 of the appellant's  supplementary
         appeal  bundle  which  I  have  taken  as  my  starting  point   in
         determining this appeal.  I have not found it compelling, though  I
         accept  his  expertise.   Mr  Giustozzi  has  said  that  there  is
         substantial evidence if the appellant returned to Iraq, he would be
         at risk of persecution by the Iraqi state, or  at  least  of  rogue
         elements within its ranks.  The Sunni Arab community  in  Iraq  has
         been complaining of discrimination in public sector employment  for
         many years now.  The shortcomings of this assertion at  para  5  of
         his report is that he does not opined to the level of risk that  he
         is referring to.   This could be a fanciful risk below the level of
         risk necessary to meet the low standard of proof.  I accept all  of
         the historic antidotal (sic) evidence in his report.  At para 30 of
         his report he has opined 'relocation will lessen  the  danger'.   I
         agree that if the  appellant  was  in  danger  in  his  home  area,
         relocation would lessen that danger to the point that he would  not
         be in need of international protection.   I  have  made  the  clear
         finding that the appellant has invented the danger that he  claimed
         to have faced at his home  where  his  mother  still  lives.   This
         expert report is predicated upon a  false  asylum  story  which  Mr
         Giustozzi had instructions to opine upon.  It  was not his role  to
         make credibility findings for the Tribunal to follow."

33. Mr McVeety accepted that there were some difficulties with the  judge's
    approach to the expert report.  In particular, the judge may well  have
    fallen into the  Mibanga  error  of  reaching  an  adverse  credibility
    finding before considering the expert's report.  As  the  2007  events,
    and the claim of ethnic or religious cleansing, McVeety  accepted  that
    it was a "struggle" to see any finding on that part of the  appellant's
    claim. However, Mr McVeety submitted that the  expert  report  was  not
    particularly persuasive and therefore the error was not  material.   He
    submitted the expert evidence only showed that 26% of Sunni Arabs claim
    to have been displaced so, he submitted,  74%  remained.   Further,  Dr
    Giustozzi could only identify a single incident in and around 2011  and
    this was when four protestors were arrested.

34. In my judgment, Judge Page  did  fall  into  the  error  identified  in
    Mibanga.  In that case, Wilson J (as he then  was)  identified  what  a
    judge should, and should not do, when assessing a person's  credibility
    in the light of expert evidence.  He said this at [23] - [24]:

         "23. In the light of my view as to  the  proper  despatch  of  this
             appeal, it would be wise for me to keep my own views about the
             effect of the evidence to a minimum.  The basis of the  appeal
             is not that the weight of the  appellant's  evidence,  coupled
             with that  of  the  two  experts,  should  have  driven  every
             reasonable fact-finding body to  accept  his  account  and  to
             uphold his appeal but that he has been the victim of a  flawed
             fact-finding exercise on the part of the adjudicator and  that
             the tribunal fell into legal error in failing to recognise  it
             and to remit the appeal for redetermination.  In  this  regard
             Miss Braganza  relies  heavily  upon  the  way  in  which  the
             adjudicator folded the doctor's report into her  enquiry  only
             at a point after she had reached her conclusions and upon  the
             way in which she  jettisoned  the  focussed  comments  of  the
             professor.

         24.  It seems to me to be axiomatic that  a  fact-finder  must  not
             reach his or her conclusion before surveying all the  evidence
             relevant  thereto.   Just  as,  if  I  may  take  a  banal  if
             alliterative example, one cannot make a  cake  with  only  one
             ingredient, so also frequently one cannot make a case, in  the
             sense of establishing its truth, otherwise than by combination
             of a number of pieces of evidence.  Mr Tam, on behalf  of  the
             Secretary  of  State,  argues  that  decisions   as   to   the
             credibility of an account are to be taken by the judicial fact-
             finder  and  that,  in  their  reports,  experts,  whether  in
             relation to medical  matters  or  in  relation  to  in-country
             circumstances, cannot  usurp  the  fact-finder's  function  in
             assessing credibility.  I  agree.   What,  however,  they  can
             offer, is a factual context in which it may be  necessary  for
             the fact-finder to survey the allegations placed  before  him;
             and such context may prove  a  crucial  aid  to  the  decision
             whether or not to accept the truth of  them.  What  the  fact-
             finder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by reference
             only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be  negative,
             to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the  expert
             evidence.  Mr  Tam  has  drawn  the  court's  attention  to  a
             decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely HE (DRC
             - Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT  00321  in
             which, in para 22, it said:

                  'Where the report is specifically relied on  as  a  factor
                  relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with
                  it as an integral part  of  the  findings  on  credibility
                  rather than just as an add-on, which  does  not  undermine
                  the conclusions to which he would otherwise come.'"

35. Buxton LJ agreed with that  approach  and  said  at  [30]  -  [31]  the
    following:

         "30. ....  The Adjudicator's  failing  was  that  she  artificially
             separated the medical evidence from the rest of  the  evidence
             and reached conclusions as to credibility without reference to
             that medical evidence; and then, no doubt inevitably  on  that
             premise, found that the medical evidence was of no  assistance
             to her.  That was a structural failing, not just an  error  of
             appreciation, and demonstrated that the  Adjudicator's  method
             of  approaching  the  evidence  diverted  from  the  procedure
             advised in para 22 of HE, set out by my Lord.


         31.  Further, though perhaps lest obviously, I  agree  that  if  an
             expert's view is  to  be  rejected  in  the  conclusive  terms
             adopted by the adjudicator in this case, then proper procedure
             requires that at least some explanation is given of the  terms
             and reasons for that rejection."

36. Subsequent cases have sought to identify the true nature of  the  legal
    error in Mibanga.  So, in HH  (medical  evidence:  effect  of  Mibanga)
    Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164, the AIT said this at [21]:

         "The Tribunal considers that there is a  danger  of Mibanga being
         misunderstood.  The judgments in that  case  are  not  intended  to
         place judicial fact-finders in a form of  forensic  straightjacket.
         In particular, the Court of Appeal is not to be regarded as  laying
         down any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders
         are to approach the evidential  materials  before  them.   To  take
         Wilson J's "cake" analogy, all its  ingredients  cannot  be  thrown
         together  into  the  bowl  simultaneously.   One   has   to   start
         somewhere."

    That approach was subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal in  S  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 at [32].  At  [24]  in  S,  Rix  LJ  at  [24]
    recognised that the  Mibanga  error  lies  in  the  "structure  of  the
    Immigration Judge's reasoning" and the "artificial separation"  between
    a judge's reasoning and finding in relation to credibility  and  taking
    into account the expert evidence.

37. As has been said on a number of occasions, this structural  error  does
    not require a judge to consider the evidence in  any  particular  order
    providing that all the relevant evidence is considered.  In its  recent
    decision, the UT in QC (verification of documents; Mibanga duty)  China
    [2021] UKUT 33 (IAC) (Lane  J,  President  and  Ockleton  V-P),  having
    referred to the case law beginning with Mibanga, said this at [57]:



         "57. To sum up, the judicial fact-finder has a duty to make his  or
             her decision by reference to all  the  relevant  evidence  and
             needs to show in their decision that they have done  so.   The
             actual way in which the fact-finder goes about this task is  a
             matter for them.  As has been pointed out, one  has  to  start
             somewhere.  At the end of the day, what matters is whether the
             decision contains legally adequate reasons  for  the  outcome.
             The greater the apparent cogency and relevance of a particular
             piece of evidence, the greater is the need  for  the  judicial
             fact-finder to show that they have  had  due  regard  to  that
             evidence; and, if  the  fact-finder's  overall  conclusion  is
             contrary to the apparent thrust of that evidence, the  greater
             is the need to explain why the evidence has not brought  about
             a different outcome."


38. Here, Dr Giustozzi's evidence was, perhaps, to borrow Mr  Fripp's  word
    used  in  his  submissions,  not  "perfect".   There  is  certainly   a
    difficulty with  his  premise  in  para  30  of  the  report  that  the
    appellant's house has been seized by Shi'a Militia.  Nevertheless,  the
    report does provide some support for the appellant's claim why he  left
    Iraq in 2007 (upon which Judge Page  made  no  findings)  and  also  in
    relation to his leaving in 2011.  The judge had to take  that  evidence
    into account and reach an assessment of  it  as  part  of  the  process
    leading to his  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account.  Whilst, of course, it was not for Dr Giustozzi to
    determine the appellant's credibility - that was a matter for the judge
    - evidence going to the plausibility of his account was a  matter  upon
    which Dr Giustozzi was entitled, as he in  fact  did  at  para  30,  to
    express his  view  based  upon  his  expert  knowledge  concerning  the
    situation in Iraq.  Perhaps the judge meant no more than that  when  in
    the final sentence of para 34 of he said:

         "It was not his role to make credibility findings for the  Tribunal
         to follow."

39. However, if the judge were discounting Dr Giustozzi's report,  when  it
    stated that the appellant's "account is plausible" because that was not
    a matter upon which Dr Giustozzi was entitled to comment, that would be
    a misdirection.

40. However, the real issue in respect of this  challenge  to  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding turns  upon  the  structural  issue  as  to
    whether or not he took Dr Giustozzi's report into account in  assessing
    the credibility of the appellant's account, albeit (given  his  limited
    findings) in respect of the 2011 incident.  It might well be that, this
    experienced Immigration Judge could be taken to have had regard  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's report if he had said no more than he did at the  beginning
    of para 34, namely  that he had taken that report "as my starting point
    in determining this appeal".  However, reading on in  para  34,  it  is
    plain that the judge did not actually  adopt  that  approach.   In  the
    penultimate and pre-penultimate sentences the judge clearly  identifies
    that, without having regard to Dr Giustozzi's report, he has found  the
    appellant's account not to be credible.   Indeed,  in  the  penultimate
    sentence he rejects Dr Giustozzi's report  on  the  basis  that  it  is
    "predicted upon  a  false  asylum  story".   That  is,  as  Mr  McVeety
    acknowledged in his submissions, to 'put the cart  before  the  horse'.
    Whether the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  to  be  believed  was  an
    assessment that had to be  made  taking  into  account  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report, not without having regard to it and then discounting the report
    because it must be based upon a false story.  That is the Mibanga error
    (see, e.g. Buxton LJ at [30] in Mibanga; and Rix LJ at [24] in S).

41. Whilst, as I have said, Dr Giustozzi's  report  would  not  necessarily
    establish the truth (or credibility) of the  appellant's  account,  the
    judge was required to grapple with it as it was  relevant  and,  in  my
    judgment, it amounted to a error of law to reach an adverse credibility
    finding without considering it.  It may be that the  appellant's  case,
    even taking into account Dr Giustozzi's  evidence,  was  not  one  that
    necessarily would succeed.  Not every fact-finding would inevitably  be
    driven to accept his account.  I am unable, however, to  conclude  that
    the appellant would inevitably have failed in establishing the relevant
    facts and so, rejecting Mr McVeety's submission, I  am  satisfied  that
    the error was material.

42. As I have said, the judge did not make any findings at all in  relation
    to the 2007 event, focusing instead upon the 2011 incident.   That  was
    also an error.

43. It follows, to that extent, I accept, based upon  ground  1,  that  the
    judge materially erred in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
    finding.

44. Of course, that error would not be  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal if the judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate to Baghdad was sustainable.  Mr McVeety, in  his  submissions,
    did not seek with any conviction to support the judge's  conclusion  in
    para 33 of  his  determination  that  the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.  There the judge said this:

         "The appellant could relocate to Baghdad without any risk of  being
         kidnapped or murdered by Shi'a Muslims (sic).  He has  a  passport,
         he could obtain identity documents and work in Baghdad.  If he  did
         not want to return to his home  area.   Sunni  Muslims  are  not  a
         generally recognised at risk category,  though  there  is  evidence
         that Sunni Muslims have  been  persecuted  in  Iraq  by  the  Shi'a
         majority.  There is no arguable  case  that  the  appellant  should
         obtain humanitarian protection in Iraq by reason of being  a  Sunni
         Muslim per se."

45. Mr McVeety  accepted  that  in  order  to  determine  whether  internal
    relocation was open to the appellant the judge  also  had  to  consider
    whether,  even  if  the  appellant  could  establish  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm in Baghdad, it would  be  unduly  harsh  or
    unreasonable for him to live  there.   He  accepted  on  the  basis  of
    headnote (19) of SMO and others that that was a  question  of  fact  in
    each case and that, despite the UT's view that it  was  "likely  to  be
    reasonable" for  a  Sunni,  single,  able-bodied  man  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad, all the appellant's circumstances had to be taken into account
    and the judge had not done so.

46. In my judgement, Judge Page did err  in  law  by  failing  to  consider
    whether it would be "unduly harsh" or "unreasonable" for the  appellant
    to relocate to Baghdad.  It was  not  sufficient  simply  to  determine
    whether he would be at risk of serious harm or persecution in  Baghdad.
    Paragraph (19) of the  judicial  headnote  in  SMO  and  others  is  as
    follows:

         "Relocation to Baghdad.  Baghdad is  generally  safe  for  ordinary
         civilians but whether it is safe for a  particular  returnee  is  a
         question of fact in the individual case.   There  are  no  on-entry
         sponsorship requirements for  Baghdad  but  there  are  sponsorship
         requirements for residency.  A documented individual of working age
         is likely to be able to satisfy those requirements.  Relocation  to
         Baghdad is likely to be reasonable for Arab Shia and Sunni  single,
         able-bodied men and married couples of working age without children
         and without specific vulnerabilities.  Other individuals are likely
         to require external support, ie a support network of members of his
         or her family, extended family or tribe, who are willing  and  able
         to provide genuine support.  Whether  such  a  support  network  is
         available is to be considered with reference  to  the  collectivist
         nature of Iraqi society, as considered in AAH (Iraq)."

47. Whilst para (19) does say that it is "likely to be  reasonable"  for  a
    Sunni man who is single and  able-bodied  to  return  to  Baghdad,  the
    country guidance decision also notes that it is a "question of fact  in
    the individual case".  Here, Mr  Fripp  submitted  that  there  were  a
    number of factors that had to  be  taken  into  account  including  the
    appellant's mental  health.   There  was,  in  this  case,  the  expert
    psychiatric evidence of Dr Jayawickrama.  That, of course,  formed  the
    basis of ground 6 and the judge's assessment of that evidence  at  para
    35.  The judge did not make that assessment, however, in the context of
    internal relocation.  Suffice it  to  say  that  I  accept  Mr  Fripp's
    submission that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  Dr  Jayawickrama
    had not diagnosed the appellant as suffering from "moderate  depressive
    episode".  That remains an issue that needs to  be  considered  in  the
    context of internal relocation along with  other  issues  such  as  the
    length of time that the appellant  has  been  away  from  Iraq.   Here,
    again, although it was not inevitable that the appellant would  succeed
    in establishing it would be "unduly harsh" or "unreasonable" for him to
    live in Baghdad, equally it was not inevitable that he would fail to do
    so and, of course, the judge did not engage with the issue at all.  For
    these reasons, therefore, I am also satisfied that the judge materially
    erred, as set out in ground 3, in concluding that the  appellant  could
    internally relocate to Baghdad.

48. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law
    and its decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.

49. In the light of the material errors I  have  identified  above,  it  is
    unnecessary to consider in further detail issues raised in the grounds.
     I would, however, say this.  In relation to ground 1,  the  background
    evidence relied upon and the CG decision  in  SMO  and  others   (which
    replaced all existing CG decisions on Iraq) were relevant  to  risk  on
    return now but  may  have  had  limited  importance  to  assessing  the
    credibility of events in 2007 and 2011. In relation to  ground  2,  the
    judge's interpretation of Dr Giustozzi's  evidence  was  essentially  a
    matter for him and the proper reading of it - whether or not supporting
    a "real" a risk to the appellant engaging the  need  for  international
    protection - will be a matter for the judge re-making the decision.

50. Both representatives  acknowledged  that  if  the  internal  relocation
    finding could not stand, and the decision had  to  be  remade,  it  was
    appropriate also that the remaking should include Art 8  of  the  ECHR.
    The judge's brief reasoning and finding in para 37 of his determination
    cannot be sustained.

Decision

51. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of a material error of law.   That  decision
    cannot stand and is set aside.

52. In the light of the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing to remake the decision before a  judge
    other than Judge Page.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            22 February 2021

