
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02397/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     AL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, instructed by SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Fowell who, in a determination  promulgated  on
    25 July 2018, dismissed her appeal against a decision of the  Secretary
    of State made on 1 February 2018, to refuse to grant asylum.

2.    The appellant, an Albanian citizen, arrived in Britain on  2  December
    2014 and claimed asylum the following  day.   She  said  that  she  had
    married her husband, K, in 2012 without the consent of her parents.   K
    had borrowed money from a friend called L.  While  K  was  out  of  the
    country L asked her for repayment and offered her a job in  his  coffee
    shop so that she could earn the money to repay the loan.  In April 2014
    he had spiked her drink and thereafter raped her  and  took  her  to  a
    building where he told her she would have  to  work  as  a  prostitute.
    After four days she managed to escape through an open window.  She  met
    a woman, M, who called K to tell him  what  had  happened  and  K  then
    disowned her.  She stayed with M for eight or  nine  months,  realising
    after some time that she was pregnant.  M said she could no longer look
    after her and M's son-in-law arranged for her to leave Albania and come
    to Britain.  Her daughter was born in January 2015.  The appellant  was
    unsure who the father of the child was.  It was the  appellant's  claim
    that she would be re-trafficked or killed by L and  his  group  if  she
    returned.

3.   The Secretary of State, who took  into  account  a  Conclusive  Grounds
    Consideration Minute by a Competent Authority  caseworker  which  found
    that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking, and other documents
    provided, considered that the appellant's claim was  not  credible  and
    she did not have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Albania.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  considered  background
    documentation including the details set out in the letter  of  refusal.
    He considered that the appellant was a victim of trafficking  but  that
    if she were returned to Albania she  would  have  the  support  of  her
    family and would therefore not face persecution on return.

5.   The grounds of appeal argued that the judge having found that  she  was
    a victim of trafficking should have found that there was  a  real  risk
    that  she  would  be  re-trafficked  on  return  and   therefore   face
    persecution and that therefore his decision was illogical.

6.   This is an unusual decision because it was not, as Ms  Iengar  accepted
    at the hearing before me, the case that the appellant was claiming that
    she was a victim of trafficking.  She had not claimed that she had been
    brought to Britain by traffickers.   What  she  claimed  was  that  she
    feared L and his friends who would ill-treat her on  return  and  might
    then traffic her.  The determination is unusual in that the judge  made
    a finding that the appellant was a victim of  trafficking  despite  the
    fact that that was not what she had  claimed.   Indeed,  in  his  first
    sentence the judge states:-

         "The fact of arriving in Croydon heavily pregnant usually indicates
         that the person has in fact been trafficked to the UK and  released
         when heavily pregnant, but not only does Ms L deny that, there  has
         been a Conclusive Grounds  decision  under  the  National  Referral
         Mechanism, to the effect she is not a victim of trafficking".

    I consider that there is nothing  to  back  up  the  assertion  that  a
    heavily pregnant woman arriving in  Croydon  is  likely  to  have  been
    trafficked to the UK and released when heavily pregnant.

7.   The judge in the second paragraph goes on to set  out  quite  correctly
    the appellant's claim and why it was not accepted  that  the  appellant
    would face persecution on return.  He states in paragraph 6:-

         "According to the Directive, the essential test is whether Ms L has
         a well-founded fear of persecution if returned to Error!  Reference
         source not found by reason of her membership of a particular social
         group, i.e. as a victim of trafficking,." (sic)

     The judge went on to state that he was  entitled  to  depart  from  the
    conclusions reached in the National Referral Mechanism and then set out
    the head note in the country guidance case of  TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).

8.   Having referred to further documentary evidence and oral evidence  from
    the appellant, and noted the submissions made, the judge  set  out  his
    conclusions in paragraph 33 onwards.  He stated that he does not accept
    the Conclusive Grounds decision stating that he could not  accept  that
    as alleged by the respondent who had considered the evidence  from  the
    appellant's passport, that the appellant had travelled in  and  out  of
    Britain, making numerous journeys in Europe after making the  claim  to
    asylum.  He then also stated that he did not  accept  the  terms  of  a
    letter from Sandwell Women's Aid who were  supporting  the  appellant's
    claim and said that all this meant that he was entitled  to  reconsider
    the issue of trafficking.  In effect, he went on to conclude  that  the
    appellant had been trafficked although he did not state in terms how or
    where she had been trafficked. He also stated that he  did  not  accept
    the appellant's claim that a woman she had met had privately funded her
    legal representation suggesting that again was an  indicator  that  she
    had been trafficked to Britain and remained in contact with  those  who
    had trafficked her.  He stated  that  much  of  the  appellant's  story
    strained credibility, before making findings of fact  which  were  that
    the appellant was a woman of 30 from Tirana where she  had  studied  at
    university for four years, that she remained in contact with her family
    there and that her mother was aware of her asylum application  and  had
    taken steps to help her with her appeal. The judge then found that  she
    was not at risk from her own family and that "she arrived in the UK  on
    an unknown date, having one way or another fallen under the control  of
    traffickers".   He  then  went  on  to  say  that  being  a  victim  of
    trafficking was not sufficient as there would need  to  be  a  risk  of
    persecution.  He referred to the issue of past persecution  and  stated
    that, as emphasised by the relevant guidance case,  re-trafficking  was
    a reality but he stated that she would not be returned as a lone  woman
    or reliant on shelters and that there would be family support  for  her
    and therefore he considered that it was unlikely that she would face  a
    real risk on return. He therefore dismissed her appeal.

9.   The grounds of appeal on which Ms Iengar  relied  argued  that  as  the
    judge had found that the appellant was a victim of trafficking and that
    the Conclusive Grounds decision was perverse, and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant remained in contact with her traffickers -  although  he  was
    silent as to how the appellant was trafficked and who  her  traffickers
    were - the judge had erred by not explaining "in clear and brief terms"
    how the appellant came to be trafficked  and  whom  she  identified  as
    possible traffickers, although he had said that he did not believe  the
    appellant's actual account.  However,  the  judge  had  said  that  re-
    trafficking was a reality and if that was his belief then he had  erred
    in not allowing the appeal.  The grounds also seemed to argue that  the
    judge had erred in his consideration of the medical  evidence  produced
    and had not taken that into account when assessing the  return  of  the
    appellant to Albania.

10.  Mr Bramble accepted that the  lack  of  a  coherent  narrative  in  the
    determination amounted to an error of law although he stated  that  the
    reality was the judge did not believe the appellant's story as  it  was
    put forward and therefore was  entitled  to  find  that  she  could  be
    returned without fear of persecution.

Discussion

11.  I consider there are material errors of law in the determination.   The
    reality that the judge did not make clear findings on the facts as  put
    forward by the appellant and therefore there is  no  clear  conclusions
    thereon as to whether or not  they  would  mean  that  she  would  face
    persecution in the future.  Moreover, and  somewhat  eccentrically,  he
    appears to decide that the appellant had been trafficked,  despite  the
    fact that that was not what she claimed, and he does not say how or  in
    what way or by whom or when he believed she was trafficked,  let  alone
    had he any basis for finding that she must still be in touch  with  her
    traffickers. Much of the determination is conjecture or speculation  on
    facts on which the appellant has not based her claim.  The appellant is
    entitled to a determination in which clear findings of fact are made on
    her claim as made by her, and as it stands that has not been done.   In
    these  circumstances  and   indeed   with   the   agreement   of   both
    representatives I consider that the decision of  the  First-tier  Judge
    does contain clear errors of law and that it is  appropriate  that  the
    appeal be remitted to the First-tier for a hearing de novo.


Decision

      The determination of the Judge in the First-tier  is  set  aside  for
      error of law and the  appeal  is  remitted  to  a  fresh  hearing  in
      Birmingham.


Directions

   1. The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh in the First- tier on all
      issues.


   2. Hearing Centre: Birmingham. Time estimate 3 hours.


   3. The appellant to state whether  or  not  she  requires  and  Albanian
      interpreter.


   4. The appellant's representative to  file  a  skeleton  argument  cross
      referenced to a paginated bundle of documents which must include  all
      relevant documents  including  the  Conclusive  grounds  report,  the
      report from Sandwell Women's Aid and the Psychological assessment and
      other background documentation at least 21 days before the hearing.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 29 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
