

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02676/2015 &
PA/03581/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 17 January 2017                    |on 24 January 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  C Z & J G
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGavin, promulgated on 2 November 2016.

 2. The grounds of appeal, in summary, are as follows.

      Ground 1. At paragraph 20 the judge said it had not been explained why
      the evidence of the 1st  appellant  about  his  involvement  with  the
      organisation Free Tibet was materially different after refusal of  his
      claim, and that there  had  been  no  evidence  "other  than  his  own
      assertion  and  that  of  his  co-appellant"  that  he  had   attended
      demonstrations or was an active member. This  overlooked  evidence  in
      the form of photographs showing  both  appellants  taking  part  in  a
      demonstration; overlooked evidence dated  8  December  2015  of  their
      membership of Free Tibet; and erroneously  imposed  a  requirement  of
      corroboration.

      Ground 2. At paragraph 21 the judge noted the 2nd  appellants'  claims
      of attending protests, distributing leaflets and attending talks,  and
      said that if she been involved to the extent of distributing  leaflets
      it was reasonable to suppose that someone  else  in  the  organisation
      would have been responsible for giving her  leaflets  and  might  have
      given evidence. This was another error of seeking corroboration  where
      then there is no such onus.

      Ground 3. At paragraph 24 the judge said there was no evidence of  the
      appellants'  renewing  their  subscriptions  to  Free   Tibet,   which
      overlooks the evidence dated 8 December 2015.

      Ground 4. At paragraph 25 the judge said that there  was  no  evidence
      from Feng Zhang, who was said to have  introduced  the  appellants  to
      Free Tibet, and that it was not explained why he could not have  given
      a statement to the appellant's solicitors  following  refusal  of  the
      claims and prior to December 2015 [when he left the UK for China].  As
      Feng Zhan had been detained on return to China, this should  not  have
      been used to make a negative finding.

      Ground 5. At paragraph 31 the judge said that neither appellant was in
      a position to explain how the Chinese police might identify them  from
      photographs [taken at demonstrations  in  the  UK]  or  ascertain  the
      addresses of their parents. It was not for the appellants  to  explain
      the workings of the Chinese police force. The judge used an immaterial
      matter to make an adverse credibility finding.

 3. In a written response to the grant of permission  the  respondent  said
    that at paragraph 22 the photographs were taken into  account;  that  a
    judge is entitled to draw adverse inferences from absence  of  evidence
    which ought to be available; and that ground 5 missed  the  point  that
    there is no background evidence that the Chinese authorities  have  any
    interest in or method of identifying protesters in the UK.

 4. Mr Matthews helpfully acknowledged at the outset that the  evidence  of
    renewal of membership had been overlooked.

 5. Mr Katani submitted along the lines of the grounds, and as follows. The
    judge overlooked 3 significant items - the photographs; the renewal  of
    membership; and the statement of the 1st  appellant.  It  was  accepted
    that there is some case law to the effect that judges  may  comment  on
    absence of evidence which appellants might have produced, but there was
    a limit on what was to be expected. In this case the  judge  gone  much
    too far and ignored the  principles  of  Kasolo.  The  case  should  be
    remitted to the FtT.

 6. Mr Matthews submitted along the following lines. At paragraph  20,  the
    subject of ground 1, the judge's  principal  point  was  that  the  1st
    appellant changed his  evidence.  The  ground  did  not  challenge  the
    identification  of  inconsistency.  The  photographs  did  nothing   to
    undermine that finding, and nor did renewal of membership on 8 December
    2015. This ground missed the point. The theme of incorrectly  requiring
    corroboration running through the grounds was ill-founded. There is  no
    legal requirement of corroboration,  but  there  is  an  obligation  on
    appellants to substantiate their claims as far as they reasonably  can.
    There was  nothing  wrong  in  the  judge's  observation  that  if  the
    appellants had been as active in Free  Tibet  as  they  claimed,  there
    might have been some better evidence from the  organisation  than  mere
    renewal of membership. The evidence overlooked showed a minor  slip  of
    fact, but not amounting to error of law requiring the  decision  to  be
    set aside. The judge for multiple reasons would plainly  have  come  to
    the same conclusion.  Ground 4 showed no lack of logic. Feng Zhang,  if
    he existed, could have made a statement before returning to  China.  If
    he was detained after returning, that made no difference. Ground 5 also
    missed the point, as pointed out in the written response.  The  judge's
    observation was that there was no objective evidence of such activities
    by the Chinese police. She did not expect the appellants to be  experts
    on police procedure.

 7. Mr Katani in  response  said  that  the  judge  must  have  thought  it
    significant that there was no evidence of renewal of membership, or the
    matter would not have been mentioned. It could therefore not  be  known
    what the judge might have made of the  case,  absent  that  issue.  The
    judge should not have expected  the  appellants  to  corroborate  their
    case, which amounted to pure speculation  as  to  what  evidence  might
    exist. On ground 5, the judge expected the appellants to see  into  the
    minds of the authorities.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. The criticism of "requiring corroboration"  is  regularly  advanced  in
    this jurisdiction as an alleged error of law, but it is seldom if  ever
    shown that judges do fall into a misconception in that category.

10. The obligation on appellants to substantiate their cases is to be found
    in many sources, including the UNHCR Handbook, the  Immigration  Rules,
    and case law.

11.  This  is  article  4  of  the  Qualification   Directive,   2004/83/EC
    (transposed into the rules at paragraph 339L):


      Assessment of facts and circumstances


      1. Member States may consider it the duty of the applicant  to  submit
      as  soon  as  possible  all  elements  needed  to   substantiate   the
      application for international  protection.  In  cooperation  with  the
      applicant it is the duty of the Member State to  assess  the  relevant
      elements of the application.


      2. The  elements  referred  to  in  of  paragraph  1  consist  of  the
      applicant's  statements  and  all  documentation  at  the  applicant's
      disposal regarding the applicant's age, background, including that  of
      relevant  relatives,  identity,  nationality(ies),  country(ies)   and
      place(s) of previous residence, previous asylum  applications,  travel
      routes, identity and travel documents and the reasons for applying for
      international protection.


      3. The assessment of an application for international protection is to
      be carried out  on  an  individual  basis  and  includes  taking  into
      account:


      (a) all relevant facts as they relate to the country of origin at  the
      time of taking a decision  on  the  application;  including  laws  and
      regulations of the country of origin and the manner in which they  are
      applied;


      (b)  the  relevant  statements  and  documentation  presented  by  the
      applicant including information on whether the applicant has  been  or
      may be subject to persecution or serious harm;


      (c)  the  individual  position  and  personal  circumstances  of   the
      applicant, including factors such as background, gender and age, so as
      to  assess  whether,  on  the  basis  of  the   applicant's   personal
      circumstances, the acts to which the applicant has been  or  could  be
      exposed would amount to persecution or serious harm;


      (d) whether the applicant's activities since leaving  the  country  of
      origin were engaged in for the sole or main purpose  of  creating  the
      necessary conditions for applying for international protection, so  as
      to assess whether  these  activities  will  expose  the  applicant  to
      persecution or serious harm if returned to that country;


      (e) whether the  applicant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  avail
      himself of the protection of another country  where  he  could  assert
      citizenship.


      4. The fact that an applicant has already been subject to  persecution
      or serious harm or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm,
      is a serious  indication  of  the  applicant's  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless  there  are
      good reasons to consider that such persecution or  serious  harm  will
      not be repeated.


      5. Where Member States apply the principle according to  which  it  is
      the  duty  of  the  applicant  to  substantiate  the  application  for
      international  protection  and  where  aspects  of   the   applicant's
      statements are not supported by documentary or other  evidence,  those
      aspects shall not need confirmation, when the following conditions are
      met:


      (a) the applicant has  made  a  genuine  effort  to  substantiate  his
      application;


      (b) all relevant elements, at  the  applicant's  disposal,  have  been
      submitted, and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of  other
      relevant elements has been given;


      (c) the applicant's statements are found to be coherent and  plausible
      and do not run counter to available specific and  general  information
      relevant to the applicant's case;


      (d) the applicant has applied  for  international  protection  at  the
      earliest possible time, unless  the  applicant  can  demonstrate  good
      reason for not having done so; and


      (e) the general credibility of the applicant has been established.

12. The following is excerpted from TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40:

      [16] Where evidence to support an account  given  by  a  party  is  or
      should readily be available, a Judge is, in my view, plainly  entitled
      to take into account the failure to  provide  that  evidence  and  any
      explanations for that failure. This may be a  factor  of  considerable
      weight in relation to credibility where there  are  doubts  about  the
      credibility of a party for other reasons.

      [21] The circumstances of  this  case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
      independent  supporting  evidence  which  is  available  from  persons
      subject to this jurisdiction be provided  wherever  possible  and  the
      need for an Immigration Judge to adopt  a  cautious  approach  to  the
      evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence, as  it
      was in this case, is readily available within this  jurisdiction,  but
      not provided. It follows that where a Judge in  assessing  credibility
      relies on the fact that there is no  independent  supporting  evidence
      where there should be supporting evidence and  there  is  no  credible
      account for its absence commits no error of law when he relies on that
      fact for rejecting the account of an appellant.

13. The judge in this case found that the appellants had not done all  they
    might have done to substantiate their claims, if they were  true.   She
    made no error of law by relying, as far  as  she  did,  on  absence  of
    evidence.  That accounts for most of the grounds.

14.  The  submission  that  paragraph  20  of  the  decision  is  based  on
    inconsistency was well taken. No error has been alleged in  identifying
    that inconsistency.

15. Ground 3 is based on a misinterpretation. The detention of  Feng  Zhang
    in China, if it happened, had nothing to do with the judge's point that
    he might have made a statement before he went there.

16. Ground 5 is also based on a misconception. The judge did not expect the
    appellants of their own  knowledge  to  explain  the  workings  of  the
    Chinese authorities. The underlying point was the absence  of  evidence
    that Chinese authorities scrutinise demonstrators in the UK or,  having
    identified them, make that known to their families in China.

17. The proposition is particularly unlikely at the minor level of activity
    claimed by these appellants.

18. The best point found for the appellants is that  the  judge  overlooked
    the renewal of their memberships of Free Tibet, and that she must  have
    thought non-renewal  of  some  significance,  or  she  would  not  have
    mentioned it.

19. The significance which attaches to a slip of this nature is a  question
    of fact and degree.

20. Reading the decision fairly and as a whole, it contains  numerous  good
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's account, and apart from this,  no
    error of fact or of law has been made out.  The slip is  a  minor  one.
    It realistically makes no difference.  It may safely be said that  upon
    its excision the judge must have come to the same conclusion.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            23 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




