
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02590/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|on 5 October 2016                        |on 6 October 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [E T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Ms K Jurkun, of Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard, promulgated on 18  May  2016,  dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of recognition as a refugee from Eritrea.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the UT are directed against  paragraph  21  of
    the FtT decision, where the judge found that as the appellant  said  he
    was born in Assab, then an Ethiopian city, of Ethiopian parents, he was
    in Ethiopian law a national by descent.  The grounds say:

         [The judge] failed to take into account the actual position of  the
         appellant's parents due to the separation of Eritrea from  Ethiopia
         ... the separation  of  both  countries  raised  several  intricate
         points of nationality law ... not engaged with by the  judge  [who]
         oversimplified a matter that is rather complex.

         The article by Jennifer Riggan ... in the appellant's bundle  dealt
         with some of the intricacies .... This was not referred to  in  the
         judgment.  It would appear the judge did not engage fully with  the
         objective evidence available to [him].

 3. Ms Jurkun submitted further to the grounds that the appellant's parents
    considered themselves Eritrean, and therefore were Eritrean,  and  that
    the judge's failure to consider the article before  him  was  an  error
    such that the case should be remitted to a different judge of the  FtT.
    She placed before me further printouts of information  about  Ethiopian
    nationality, but she did  not  suggest  that  these  were  relevant  to
    whether the judge made any error on the case before him.

 4. Ms  Isherwood  submitted  thus.   The  documents  produced  today  were
    irrelevant.  The  grounds  overlooked  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    establish any of his assertions on contested  matters.   There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's detailed reasoning or to his  overall  adverse
    conclusion.  That included rejection of the appellant's account of  his
    attempt to obtain confirmation from the Ethiopian Embassy that he would
    not be regarded as a citizen.   The  decision  was  brief  but  legally
    sufficient.

 5. Ms Jurkun submitted in reply that although  the  further  evidence  now
    available was not before the judge, the article by Jennifer Riggan was,
    and had the judge looked at it properly, he would have referred to  it.
    The appellant explained in his witness statement how he had  taken  all
    reasonable steps in relation to the Ethiopian Embassy.   It  was  known
    that the Embassy did not issue written responses.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. The appellant has had legal representation throughout.  If an appellant
    says that the law of another  country  does  not  recognise  him  as  a
    national, that is a matter for him to establish.  If  the  position  is
    complex, then so much the greater the obligation on him  to  state  his
    case clearly.  It is of no use to say that there is an issue with which
    a judge did not engage, without specifying any basis on which the judge
    was invited to resolve it  in  the  appellant's  favour,  or  even  any
    discernible basis on which the judge might have found  for  himself  an
    argument for the appellant.

 8. The notion that there may have been an oversight requiring remit to the
    FtT is misconceived.  If the materials before the FtT about  Ethiopia's
    recognition or non-recognition of nationals  established  the  case,  a
    decision should simply be substituted in the appellant's  favour.   The
    grounds and submission identified nothing in  the  article  which  must
    have led to another outcome (and now having read it, I see  nothing  in
    it to that effect).

 9. The judge found against the appellant for reasons which have  not  been
    shown to be less than legally adequate.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            6 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman





