
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th September 2019                         |On 19th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     ROO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant promulgated on 14 June  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 30 January 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, who has been assigned a date of
    birth of 1 January 1990.  She has two children, both born in the United
    Kingdom, in 2017 and 2018, both of whom are dependents  on  her  claim.
    The Appellant was trafficked to the  United  Kingdom  from  Nigeria  in
    2011, as found in a conclusive grounds decision from the  NRM  dated  1
    February 2017, in which it was accepted that the Appellant was a victim
    of modern slavery.  On 1  February  2017,  the  Appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain based on her personal  circumstances  and
    need for counselling and emotional support.  It was  confirmed  to  the
    Appellant on 21 January 2018 that the Respondent would  not  grant  any
    further period of discretionary leave to remain and the formal decision
    refusing her protection  and  human  rights  claims  was  made  by  the
    Respondent on 30 January 2018.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that  although  the
    Appellant, as a trafficked woman, was accepted as part of a  particular
    social group, it was not considered that she had any objective risk  on
    return from either her trafficker or members of their family and  there
    would be no risk of persecution on return to Nigeria.   In  any  event,
    the Respondent considered that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to the Appellant and  that  she  would  have  the  option  of
    internal relocation, with support available to her through shelters and
    charities.  For essentially the same reasons her claim for humanitarian
    protection and under Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights were refused.

 4. In relation to her family and private  life  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, the Respondent found that she  did
    not meet any of the requirements for a grant of leave to remain  either
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or under paragraph 276ADE of
    the same.  Specifically, the Appellant's son was not a qualifying child
    (at the time of decision the Appellants second child had not  yet  been
    born), her relationship with a partner had broken down and there  would
    be no very significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  into  Nigeria.
    The best interests of the Appellant's child were  taken  into  account,
    with a decision that  the  best  interests  were  to  return  with  the
    Appellant to Nigeria, where education and healthcare was available  and
    given the child's young age, reintegration was likely.  The  Respondent
    did not consider that  there  were  any  exceptional  or  compassionate
    circumstances to justify the grant of leave to remain.

 5. The Appellant's appeal against  refusal  of  her  claim  was  initially
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Martin in a  decision  promulgated
    on 11 July 2018.  An error of law was found in that decision  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Freeman on 18 September 2018 and ultimately  the  matter
    came back before First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant for a de novo  hearing
    on 13 December 2018 and 30 April 2019.

 6. Judge Grant dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  14  June
    2019 on all grounds.  Although  the  Appellant's  history  and  current
    circumstances appear to have, in the main, been accepted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal, it was nonetheless considered that she would not  be  at
    risk on return of being re-trafficked and  that  prior  to  return  the
    Respondent would first make  arrangements  with  NAPTIP  (the  National
    Agency for the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons,  a  national  body
    which in part supports victims of trafficking, including  provision  of
    counselling and rehabilitation services) to ensure  the  Appellant  has
    direct access to the specialist support available.  It was not accepted
    that the circumstances which led  to  the  Appellant  being  trafficked
    previously continue to remain, because she was now an older woman  with
    two children who would be sufficiently  supported  on  return,  by  the
    support network she relied upon as she  grew  up  as  well  as  through
    charitable organisations.  In any event, the Appellant could internally
    relocate and there was a sufficiency of protection  available  to  her.
    Separately, the Appellant's mental health did not reach the  very  high
    threshold for breach of Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights and the removal of the  Appellant  together  with  her  children
    would not be a breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on five grounds.  First,  that  contrary  to  the
    express acceptance by the Respondent that the Appellant has  no  family
    or support in Nigeria and would be returning  as  a  lone  female,  the
    First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the opposite basis, in the absence  of
    any supporting evidence, that she had an old support network with  whom
    she could reengage, on the basis that she had been  looked  after  from
    early childhood following the death of her parents.

 8. Secondly, that in  relation  to  support  from  NAPTIP,  there  was  no
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to   how   long   that
    organisation would or could assist the Appellant and her  children  and
    the conclusions reached were contrary to  the  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the country guidance case of HD (Trafficked Women)  Nigeria
    CG [20160] UKUT  454  (IAC)  which  showed  only  short-term  temporary
    support  would  be  available.   Further,   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    discounted the expert evidence on the basis that no  contact  was  made
    with  NAPTIP,  however,  the  expert  made  contact  with  all  of  the
    organisations expressly referred to by the Respondent  in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter.

 9. Thirdly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  apply  the  country
    guidance in HD, ignoring both the  Appellant's  accepted  vulnerability
    and the relevant risk factors.

10. Fourthly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  parts  of  the
    evidence before it, but not properly engaging with the evidence itself,
    nor giving proper reasons for the weight attached to the evidence.

11. Finally, that the First-tier Tribunal reached  conclusions  which  were
    perverse in relation to  trafficking,  with  the  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant had been taken advantage of  for  the  purposes  of  domestic
    servitude but that was not of itself trafficking.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 5  August
    2019.

13. In her rule 24 response, the Respondent, save for one point,  does  not
    oppose the appeal for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  above.
    Specifically, the Respondent accepted that it was not properly open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  had  family
    and/or a support network to return to in  Nigeria,  it  having  already
    been accepted that she would be returning as a lone  woman.   The  only
    point which was not agreed was in relation  to  the  second  ground  of
    appeal and the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  expert  report.   The
    Respondent further indicated that a fresh continuance hearing would  be
    required to remake the decision under appeal and  at  that  time  would
    make an application under Rule 15(2A) to  adduce  the  latest  CPIN  on
    Trafficking Victims from Nigeria dated 5 July 2019.

14.  At  the  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Kotas  confirmed  the
    Respondent's position as set out in the  Rule  24  response,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision contains material  errors  of  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside and remade.

15. As to the remaking of the decision, both parties agreed that this could
    be done within the Upper Tribunal in reliance on the evidence that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal subject to one further point.  Mr  Kotas
    drew to my attention the latest Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    "Nigeria: Trafficking of women" dated July  2019  (the  "CPIN"),  which
    post-dated the previous appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  It  was
    submitted that  this  contained  information  of  some  improvement  in
    conditions in Nigeria for women who had been  trafficked,  although  it
    was not suggested that there was any material  difference  relevant  to
    the issues raised in the present appeal  and  no  submission  that  the
    information  contained  in  this  latest  report  would   provide   any
    sufficient basis for departure from existing country  guidance  in  HD.
    Ms Nazimi was concerned that in part the latest CPIN could be  read  as
    suggesting a departure from the country guidance case  and  offered  to
    make further written or oral submissions on  it  if  needed,  otherwise
    reliance was placed on the existing country guidance to be  applied  to
    the facts in evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

Error of law

 1. As properly conceded by the Respondent in  this  case,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision contained material errors of law which require  the
    decision to be set aside.   On  the  basis  of  that  acceptance  ideal
    relatively briefly with the errors of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In summary, the decision of Judge Grant is perverse  on
    the basis of the objective and country guidance evidence before her and
    on the accepted facts in relation to this Appellant.

 2. First, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant would be returning to
    Nigeria as a lone woman with two children and  without  any  family  or
    prior support network with whom she could reengage.  Contrary  to  that
    accepted  position,  Judge  Grant  found  in  paragraph  128  that  the
    Appellant does have a support network available to her  in  Nigeria  as
    demonstrated by her history in having been looked after  from  earliest
    childhood after the alleged death of both parents.  There has  been  no
    dispute in this case that the Appellant's parents are both deceased and
    what is described by Judge as a support network in her early years, has
    in fact been accepted by the Respondent  as  a  situation  of  domestic
    slavery, the circumstances of which were that the Appellant  was  moved
    from household to household to  undertake  domestic  tasks  and  street
    hawking, for no pay and poor treatment, sometimes  being  homeless  and
    unable to attend school on a regular basis.  The Appellant did not know
    the people within these households beforehand and there is  nothing  to
    suggest this was organised by or living  with  any  family  members  or
    other support network.

 3. Further, the Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  supported  herself  by
    working as a domestic worker in Lagos and was only then taken advantage
    of by being trafficked to the United Kingdom.  In paragraph 126 of  the
    decision, the Judge commented that the "Appellant was not trafficked in
    the usually accepted sense, rather she was taken advantage of by family
    who wanted a domestic servant to care for the home and a baby."

 4. The Appellant's history and circumstances, which have been accepted  by
    the Respondent, cannot on any view be considered as a  support  network
    or as genuine  employment  and  wholly  misunderstands  the  nature  of
    domestic slavery and trafficking, in the Appellant's early years within
    Nigeria before being trafficked transnationally to the United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant's history cannot on any view be considered to be  one  in
    which she had successfully  found  employment  previously  in  domestic
    settings in Nigeria, nor of a situation  in  which  she  had  supported
    herself.  The Appellant's accepted history is one of  being  internally
    trafficked for domestic  servitude  and  then  traffic  to  the  United
    Kingdom for the same purpose.  This fundamental misunderstanding in the
    absence of any evidence supporting the findings, and  contrary  to  the
    conclusive grounds decision that the Appellant had been trafficked, has
    a material impact on the outcome of the decision given the relevance to
    risk on return of whether a person has support on return to Nigeria.

 5.  Secondly,  in  relation  to  alternative  support  from  charities  or
    otherwise, in paragraph 97 of the decision, Judge Grant  was  satisfied
    that if the Respondent  returns  the  Appellant  and  her  children  to
    Nigeria, he will first make arrangements with NAPTIP in order to ensure
    the Appellant is met at the airport and taken to the specialist support
    available for women in her position.  It was further found that  whilst
    in the care of NAPTIP, the Appellant was not at risk of  re-trafficking
    by anyone, including her previous traffickers and it was  not  accepted
    that  the  Nigerian  authorities  would  discard  the  Appellant   from
    specialist care 16 weeks have elapsed after return.  Reference is  made
    to the evidence before the Court of Appeal in PO (Nigeria) [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 132 which did not suggest that any support from  NAPTIP  was  time-
    limited.

 6. However, this completely ignores the evidence before the Upper Tribunal
    in HD that support provided by NAPTIP was on average for  a  period  of
    two weeks and only in exceptional circumstances could this be  extended
    beyond six weeks, usually by provision of  assistance  through  another
    charitable organisation.  The other options of charitable organisations
    relied upon by the Respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  were
    the subject of detailed  evidence  from  Adaobi  Nkeolkelonye;  to  the
    effect that there was no such  appropriate  support  available  to  the
    Appellant with two young children; but this was essentially rejected in
    its entirety by the First-tier Tribunal because  there  was  no  direct
    approach to NAPTIP for further evidence beyond that which was available
    to the Upper Tribunal in HD.  That is not a sufficient  or  sustainable
    reason for rejecting wholescale the evidence contained in the report.

 7. There is nothing to suggest that the Respondent's position  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  they  would  specifically  ensure  the
    Appellant's support by NAPTIP from the moment of her return to Nigeria;
    nor that any such support that was provided by NAPTIP would be anything
    other than short-term or temporary.  The  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the contrary are without any evidential basis  and  ignored
    the likely long-term position for the Appellant in  Nigeria  which  was
    specifically evidenced and largely unchallenged before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. In these circumstances it is an error of  law  to  find  the  Appellant
    would have appropriate and sufficient support  on  return  to  Nigeria,
    which clearly has a material impact on the outcome of the  decision  as
    to whether the Appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to  Nigeria  in
    accordance with the factors set out in the country guidance of HD.

 9. Further errors of law can be identified the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but are not necessary  to  set  out  here  as  those  already
    identified are sufficient and material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal
    such as to require the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  set
    aside and remade.  As above, subject to the points in relation  to  the
    CPIN, the parties were agreed that the appeal could be  remade  on  the
    papers of the evidence that was already available before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Re-making the decision

10. The starting point in this appeal is to identify the applicable country
    guidance, as set out by the Upper  Tribunal  in  HD,  which  states  as
    follows:

         4.   Whether a woman returning to Nigeria  having  previously  been
             trafficked to the United Kingdom faces on return to real  risk
             of being trafficked afresh will require a detailed  assessment
             of her particular  and  individual  characteristics.   Factors
             that will  indicate  an  enhanced  risk  of  being  trafficked
             include, but are not limited to:

               a. Of the absence of a supportive family willing to take back
                  into the family unit;

               b. Visible or discernible characteristics  of  vulnerability,
                  such as having no social support network  to  assist  her,
                  there were little educational  vocational  skills,  mental
                  health conditions, which may  well  have  been  caused  by
                  experiences of abuse when originally trafficked,  material
                  and financial deprivation such as to mean that she will be
                  living in poverty or in conditions of destitution;

               c. The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is  likely
                  to mean that she was then identified by the traffickers as
                  someone disclosing characteristics of  vulnerability  such
                  as to give rise to a real risk of  being  trafficked.   On
                  returning  to  Nigeria,  it   is   probable   that   those
                  characteristics of vulnerability will be enhanced  further
                  in the absence of factors that suggest otherwise.

         5.   Factors  that  indicate  a  lower  risk  of  being  trafficked
         include, but are not limited to:

             a.    The availability of a supportive family willing to  take
                  the woman back into the family unit;

               b.   The  fact  that  the  woman  has  acquired  skills   and
                  experiences since leaving Nigeria the better  equipped  to
                  have access to a livelihood on  return  to  Nigeria,  thus
                  enabling her to provide for herself.

         6.   There will be little risk of being trafficked if received into
             a NAPTIP shelter or a shelter provided by an NGO for the  time
             that she is there, but that support is likely to be temporary,
             possibly just for just a few weeks, and there will need to  be
             a careful assessment of the position of  the  woman  when  she
             leaves the shelter.

         7.   For a woman who does face a real risk of being  trafficked  if
             she returns were home area, the question of  whether  internal
             relocation  will  be  available  as  a  safe  and   reasonable
             alternative will  not  be  unduly  harsh  require  a  detailed
             assessment of her particular  circumstances.   The  woman  who
             discloses the characteristics of vulnerability described above
             their indicative of a real risk of being trafficked,  internal
             relocation is unlikely to be a viable alternative.

16. Further, at paragraph 141, the Upper Tribunal held:

         "The  mode  of  trafficking  in  Nigeria  is  not  predicated  upon
         abduction; those targeted are targeted because of their  particular
         vulnerability on such vulnerability is not, on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence before us, reduce following a six weeks stay in  a  NAPTIP
         shelter.  The Nigerian government  has  not  made  any  discernible
         efforts to decrease the demand for  commercial  sex.   Whilst  this
         demand remains,  combined  with  continued  prolific  provision  of
         trafficking in human beings in Nigeria, there exists a real risk of
         internal  transnational  trafficking   of   those   identified   as
         vulnerable."

17. In relation to the sufficiency of protection, the Upper  Tribunal  held
    at paragraph 174 and following:

         "174. We have referred above to the particular characteristics that
         may render  an  individual  at  risk  of  being  trafficked.   That
         vulnerability presents on not being able  to  access  the  services
         provided by NAPTIP and NGOs.  If a woman presents as vulnerable  to
         abuse,  away  from  NAPTIP  or  a  supporting  NGO,  the   Nigerian
         authorities, including NAPTIP and  the  instruments  of  State  are
         unable to provide sufficiency of protection.  The lack of  adequate
         monitoring of those who leave NAPTIP or an NGO shelter,  the  short
         period of time where an individual is in a shelter unless there are
         exceptional reasons (which in itself  implies  that  such  a  young
         woman is vulnerable and  open  to  abuse)  renders  the  protection
         available to an individual vulnerable to abuse insufficient.

         175. In making an assessment whether an individual is vulnerable to
         abuse a careful analysis of all  her  personal  characteristics  is
         required to assess whether the indicators of  risk,  including  any
         mistreatment  in  her  previous  exploitative  situation  and   the
         consequences of that for her personally.

         176. This vulnerability combined with the inability of the state to
         provide the protection as set out in particular  in  paragraph  174
         above will render a returned victim of trafficking at real risk  of
         being trafficked again."

18. In  relation  to  internal  relocation,  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  at
    paragraph 186:

         "It is not possible to state,  on  the  evidence  before  us,  that
         internal relocation  is  never  a  viable  option.   An  individual
         factual  analysis  will  always  be  required  of   a   victim   of
         trafficking's vulnerability and its impact on  the  possibility  of
         internal relocation if she is at real risk of being  persecuted  in
         her home area.  However the evidence before us indicates that where
         an individual has been identified as being at real  risk  of  being
         trafficked, the possibility of internal relocation will be severely
         limited; particularly where she is vulnerable to abuse  because  of
         lack of skills, mental and psychological problems and isolation."

19. Mr Kotas drew  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  attention  the  Home  Office
    'Country Policy and Information Note, Nigeria:  Trafficking  of  Women'
    dated July 2019 as containing the  most  recent  information  available
    which suggested some improvement in the position.   However,  Mr  Kotas
    did not suggest that anything contained within this report  provided  a
    sufficient basis for departure from the country guidance  contained  in
    HD and accepted that  that  remained  the  applicable  guidance  to  be
    applied in this appeal.  At its highest, the CPIN  states  that  NAPTIP
    have  increased  the  number  of  shelters  available  to  victims   of
    trafficking which  provide  short-term  shelter  and  access  to  other
    support.  There is nothing in this report to suggest  any  longer  term
    support available to victims, with shelter being described as temporary
    or transitory, in the same way as it was in  the  evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in HD.   I  therefore  continue  to  apply  the  country
    guidance when determining this appeal.

20. The Appellant's circumstances and history is largely  not  disputed  by
    the Respondent, it being accepted that she is a victim  of  trafficking
    who would be returning to Nigeria  as  a  lone  woman  with  two  small
    children; who is vulnerable because of her poor mental health and  past
    experiences and whose credibility has not been substantively challenged
    at all.  On this basis, I summarise the evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant, so far as is relevant to the issues of  risk  on  return  to
    Nigeria and as to a right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life,
    rather than setting it out in full.

21. The Appellant thinks that she was born in Lagos but does not  know  her
    date of birth or who her parents are.  She was told that her mother had
    passed away when she was born and that her father died sometime  later.
    The Appellant does not know of any other family members.  When she  was
    young, she moved to Ilesa in Osun state and lived with different people
    for varying lengths of time  for  whom  she  did  domestic  work,  went
    hawking and attended school on and off.  The Appellant would not always
    have a place to stay, sometimes sleeping on the streets and begging and
    even when staying with a family, she  was  not  treated  well  and  was
    beaten.

22. About two years before the Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  she
    moved to Lagos with a family who had relatives in  the  United  Kingdom
    that she was told could send her to school there,  pay  her,  help  her
    obtain permanent residence and in return the Appellant would look after
    the children while the parents were at work.  The Appellant worked  for
    the family in Lagos for around two years before being  brought  to  the
    United Kingdom; during which time she was required to do domestic  work
    seven days a week, was only rarely able to leave the house on specified
    errands and was beaten regularly and deprived of food.   The  Appellant
    was not paid and was only able to use items in  the  house  or  clothes
    that were being discarded.  During  the  time  with  this  family,  the
    Appellant was also sexually assaulted by the husband.

23. On arrival in the United Kingdom, the Appellant was subjected to forced
    labour and treatment even worse than she had  experienced  in  Nigeria,
    not being allowed out alone, not being able to  interact  with  others,
    not being paid and being regularly beaten.  When this family  travelled
    to the US, the Appellant was sent to stay with a cousin  for  whom  she
    was not required to work and ultimately with  initial  help  from  this
    person, the Appellant was able to escape the situation, report  matters
    to the police, be  referred  to  the  NRM  as  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking and claim asylum.

24. The Appellant was in a relationship for some time with  the  father  of
    her two children, but they never cohabitated  and  it  was  an  abusive
    relationship which ended for  that  reason.   There  is  little  or  no
    ongoing contact between the Appellant and this  man  and  he  does  not
    provide any material or financial support for the two children.

25. In 2016, the Appellant was raped in the United Kingdom.

26. In the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant  has  engaged  with  and  been
    supported over time by the Helen  Bamber  Foundation,  the  NHS  mental
    health service, including the psychological service, Connect and Change
    (an organisation providing counselling), Home Start, health visitors, a
    family support worker and the pastor as well as members of  the  church
    she attends.  The Appellant in the past has received financial  support
    from Hestia and  social  services,  as  well  as  welfare  and  housing
    benefits.  There is nothing to suggest the Appellant has been  able  to
    undertake any paid employment in the United Kingdom.

Psychological report, Dr Christina Curry, Helen Bamber Foundation, 29  April
2019

27. The Appellant was assessed at the Helen Bamber Foundation on 4 February
    2019, 11 April 2019 and at the Mother & Baby Parenting Community  group
    on 4 March 2019; who had access to her medical and home office records.
     The Appellant was found to meet the criteria for a diagnosis of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder, experiencing  many  symptoms  in  excess  of
    those required for a diagnosis and resulting in a marked impairment  in
    functioning  across  most  areas  of  life.   Further,  the   Appellant
    fulfilled the criteria for major  depressive  disorder,  with  symptoms
    lasting for some years, causing significant distress and impairment  in
    social  functioning.   The  Appellant  is  currently  prescribed  anti-
    depressant medication.  At the time of the report, the Appellant was on
    the waiting list for stabilisation therapy and behavioural  activation,
    followed by trauma therapy, which will not commence until a later  date
    as she is unable to access this therapy until her children are older as
    she does not suitable childcare.

28. The assessment of the  Appellant's  current  functioning  concluded  as
    follows:

         "54. [the Appellant] stated that she finds  her  daily  functioning
         challenging.  Following her recent asylum hearing in December  2018
         she was referred by HBF to Brent Early Help as  she  did  not  feel
         that she could safely care for her children.  She has now  obtained
         support at home for her children from both  Brent  Early  Help  and
         Home Start,  a  parental  support  charity.   Professional  support
         workers continue to be concerned about her recent  appearance;  she
         looks thin and tired; she is frequently in  poor  physical  health;
         she has not been  eating  sufficiently  and  is  having  difficulty
         coping with her children.

         55. The psychological impact of her unresolved  immigration  status
         has contributed to daily feelings of depression  and  helplessness.
         She has  felt  unable  to  do  anything  about  her  situation  and
         describes self-critical beliefs of being "worthless".  She has been
         actively worrying about the possibility of return to  Nigeria,  and
         experiences   frequent   intrusive   thoughts   about   the   past,
         dissociative symptoms, low energy and poor sleep."

29. Dr Curry concludes that the Appellant's  mental  health  is  likely  to
    deteriorate if returned to Nigeria, with worsening symptoms of PTSD and
    depression as well as an increased risk of suicide due to  the  removal
    from her support network and at least  subjective  fear  of  risk  from
    traffickers and generally in Nigeria.   The  Appellant's  mental  state
    would also deteriorate without  access  to  specialist  support,  which
    would also affect her children and the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to
    support herself and her children as well as putting her at high risk of
    re-exploitation.

30. The Appellant's bundle  before  the  Tribunal  also  contains  numerous
    letters from the Helen Bamber Foundation about their specialist support
    for the Appellant since 2017 and their concerns  for  her  welfare  and
    that of her children; as well as letters from other  organisations  who
    have or are involved in supporting the Appellant and her children.

Expert report, Adaobi Nkeokelonye, 12 March 2018

31. The report from Ms Nkeokelonye sets out detailed information about  the
    socio-economic position in  Nigeria  generally  and  more  specifically
    about the issues facing women and trafficked women in  particular.   In
    relation to the vulnerability of this Appellant to trafficking or other
    exploitation, Ms Nkeokelonye concludes:

         "131. The above relate directly to [the Appellant] who if  returned
         to Nigeria as a young unmarried woman with  a  child  and  pregnant
         with another,  a  former  victim  of  multiple  episodes  of  human
         trafficking with long history of domestic servitude, weak  economic
         status, extremely low potentials for formal  employment,  witnessed
         threat from her employer [...], suffering from mental health issues
         as a result of her past history and lacking family support,  is  in
         my view vulnerable to  be  re-trafficked  and/or  exploited  and/or
         subject to other forms of gender-based violence in the future.

         132. It is my opinion that the interplay of  the  factors  of  [the
         Appellant's] particular characteristics  coupled  with  the  socio-
         economic situation in Nigeria as detailed in  the  country  profile
         section of this report makes it more  likely  that  the  risk  will
         occur upon her return to Nigeria.  With reference  to  the  country
         section profile and the documents available to be me in relation to
         [the Appellant] it is my view that  she  will  likely  be  a  prime
         target for exploitation and trafficking.  In the event that she  is
         returned to Nigeria, in my opinion, the only viable way to  make  a
         living for her will in the informal sector exposing her to  further
         risks of exploitation."

32. Ms Nkeokelonye sets out the potential government and charitable sources
    for protection and support to trafficked women in the circumstances  of
    this Appellant and  concludes  that  the  only  organisation  providing
    shelter services and programmes specifically  designed  for  trafficked
    women is NAPTIP, but their capacity is unclear and the  maximum  period
    of stay in a shelter there is six weeks.  Ms Nkeokelonye questions  the
    adequacy of six weeks to facilitate rehabilitation or reintegration  of
    a returning traumatised victim of trafficking, particularly  for  those
    such as the Appellant with young children, high support  needs  and  no
    family to return to.  She concludes as follows:

         "215. Bearing in mind that [the Appellant] is a mother and is  also
         expecting, it is worth noting that organizations that confirm  that
         they offer shelter services have also  shown  an  aversion  against
         women with children, as they do not have the facility  or  capacity
         to accommodate them.  Both the Government Agencies and the NGOs who
         offer shelters alike are unlikely to have facilities for childcare.
           Nigerian  shelters  in  their  designs  are  not  known  to  have
         facilities such as creche or spaces for women with children.

         216. In view  of  the  findings  established  from  review  of  the
         services and programmes focused on trafficking women victims  (both
         by organizations listed in the refusal letter and  additional  ones
         reviewed), it is my opinion that by  virtue  of  [the  Appellant's]
         characteristics, none of the existing services have a  sufficiently
         comprehensive programme for her to be adequately rehabilitated  and
         reintegrated.  Whilst admission into a  shelter  in  Nigeria  might
         seem like a success, it is worth noting that mere admission into  a
         temporary and institutional-style  shelter  without  the  essential
         facilities necessary for rehabilitation and reintegration, will not
         provide adequate  care,  assistance  or  protection  to  her  as  a
         returning victim of trafficking."

33. The report also covers the availability and cost of specialist care and
    treatment, the cost of urban living, employment opportunities,  minimum
    wage, and the availability and cost of housing.

34. In  relation  to  internal  relocation,  Ms  Nkeokelonye  concludes  in
    paragraph 245 as follows:

         "It is my view that  [the  Appellant]  cannot  achieve  safety  and
         secure  a  livelihood  through  relocating  internally   with   her
         characteristics.  Being  a  lone  women  who  has  never  relocated
         anywhere in Nigeria of her own volition, but rather was  trafficked
         internally,  means  she  will  encounter  significant  barriers  in
         respect of achieving safety  and  a  secure  livelihood.   This  is
         further made difficult by the fact that she will be with child(ren)
         and  has  support  and  recovery  needs  due  to  her  history   of
         exploitation since childhood.  In this case, [the  Appellant]  will
         not just be another internal migrant moving from one  area  of  the
         same country to another; she and her child(ren) should be  seen  as
         international migrants relocating back  to  a  country  she  barely
         knows  and  have  been  away  from  for  seven  years.   For   [the
         Appellant], relocation to any part of the country outside the  ones
         she is family with will certainly require a lot of  linguistic  and
         socio-cultural  adjustment,  as  well   as   financial   resources.
         Although Nigerians are  known  to  speak  English  as  an  official
         language, and more do  communicate  with  hybrid  English  language
         (pidgin) across regions, relocation to any new state or region will
         require that you speak a little of the dominant local  language  to
         aid interaction with the residences.  Also,  bearing  in  mind  the
         inherent cultural diversity in the country, relocation to  anywhere
         especially away  from  the  major  cities  will  entail  a  lot  of
         adjustment which will require a lot of  financial  resources,  time
         and emotions.  There will however always  be  consequences  on  her
         overall well-being."

35. At the hearing before me, in addition to the Respondent's acceptance of
    the primary factual basis of the Appellant's claim, the Respondent  did
    not substantively challenge any of the further evidence set  out  above
    and I find no reason not to attach significant weight to  it.   I  find
    the Appellant's circumstances are as set out above.

36. In these circumstances, I find that the Appellant  has  a  well-founded
    fear on return to Nigeria in accordance with the guidance given  in  HD
    and is at risk of being trafficked afresh for  the  following  reasons.
    First, the Appellant does not have any family members in  Nigeria,  nor
    any kind of  social  or  support  network  to  assist  her  on  return.
    Secondly, the Appellant has only very limited education  or  vocational
    skills and has never been in paid  employment  in  Nigeria  or  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Thirdly, the Appellant has significant  mental  health
    conditions for which some treatment  has  been  available  but  further
    treatment  is  recommended  and  planned  for  when  the  Appellant  is
    practically able to access it.  Fourthly, apart from the possibility of
    an assisted voluntary return package, the Appellant  has  no  financial
    resources in the  United  Kingdom  or  in  Nigeria  to  assist  in  re-
    establishing herself.  Fifthly, the Appellant's vulnerability which led
    to her initial trafficking, including the lack of any family or support
    in Nigeria, will continue to exist on return now.  Finally,  there  are
    no factors to indicate any lower risk  of  being  trafficked  for  this
    Appellant.

37. Further, in addition to the risk factors identified, I  find  that  the
    Appellant's vulnerability is also increased by her return with two very
    young children to a country which she has been  absent  from  for  over
    seven years and where she has no experience of normal life at all, as a
    child or as an adult, her only real experience being of  situations  of
    domestic servitude.  Those are significant further  factors  which  are
    themselves only made  more  serious  by  the  Appellant's  poor  mental
    health.

38. For these reasons, the Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum  grounds
    and for essentially the same reasons, on Article 3 grounds.  It is  not
    necessary to further go on to  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  but  for  the
    avoidance of doubt, the appeal is also allowed on human rights  grounds
    for this reason.  For the same reasons as set out above, the  Appellant
    would face very significant obstacles to reintegration on her return to
    Nigeria, thus satisfying the substantive requirements for  a  grant  of
    leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules
    such that there would be no public interest in  her  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom, even taking into account the factors in section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Appellant's
    removal would therefore be a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
    right to respect for private and family life.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     16th September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

