
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02520/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2021                     |On 10 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     YOH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

       1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, has appealed against a  decision
          of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 20 September 2020,  which
          dismissed his appeal on international protection and human  rights
          grounds.


       2. The grounds of appeal were drafted by Ms  Cleghorn,  who  appeared
          both before the FTT and at  the  hearing  before  me.   The  first
          ground of appeal contends that the FTT failed to consider how  the
          appellant could safely make his way back from his point of  return
          (Baghdad airport) to his home area in  Kirkuk  without  possession
          of the requisite identity documentation.   The  second  ground  of
          appeal submits that the FTT made an error of fact  which  infected
          its overall adverse credibility finding.  Mr  Tan  relied  upon  a
          rule 24 notice in opposing the appeal.

       3. After hearing submissions I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          give with reasons.  I deal with each ground  of  appeal  in  turn,
          but in reverse order.  This is because if the  ground  seeking  to
          impugn the overall credibility finding is made out, then  it  will
          be unnecessary to examine the  alternative  ground  based  upon  a
          claimed lack of access to documents.

Mistake of fact - credibility finding

       4. This ground of appeal was drafted in such a way as to only  impugn
          one aspect of the FTT's  numerous  adverse  credibility  findings.
          Although, Ms Cleghorn initially  attempted  to  challenge  another
          aspect of the FTT's credibility findings at the hearing,  she  did
          not make an  application  to  amend  her  grounds  of  appeal  and
          focussed her oral submissions entirely upon the pleaded grounds.


       5. The appellant's claim that he was  obliged  to  leave  Kirkuk  was
          based upon his fear of his neighbour, a man  called  Salah  Ahmed.
          The appellant  explained  in  his  witness  statement  that  Salah
          worked for the Badr  organisation  which  was  part  of  the  Shia
          militia.  After 16 October 2017 Kirkuk was overtaken by  the  PMF.
          This led to  the  withdrawal  of  the  peshmerga  forces  and  the
          increased power of the PMF.   The  appellant  claimed  that  Salah
          "became high in the intelligence of the Shia militia" and  wielded
          his power to kidnap and  attack  others.   The  appellant  further
          claimed that Salah became embroiled in a  land  dispute  with  his
          family and this led to his detention and ill-treatment.

       6.  The  respondent  regarded  the  appellant's  account   of   these
          difficulties as "fundamentally inconsistent" for the  reasons  set
          out in her decision letter dated 1  March  2020  at  [33-46].   As
          part  of  his  response  to  this,  the  appellant   relied   upon
          photographs from Facebook said to show Salah in his full  uniform,
          which indicated he had "Colonel status".

       7. The FTT addressed these photographs at  [18]  and  found  them  to
          "have no probative value" because:  they  are  publicly  available
          online and do not establish any connection between Salah  and  the
          appellant / his family; they purport to show Salah  as  a  Colonel
          in the Iraqi Army, which contradicts the  appellant's  claim  that
          he was a member of the Shia militia.  The grounds of  appeal  take
          no issue with the  former  reason  and  focus  entirely  upon  the
          latter.  The grounds claim that  the  FTT  was  wrong  to  find  a
          contradiction because the Shia militia were incorporated into  the
          Iraqi army and a person could therefore be a member of both.

       8. Mr Tan drew my attention  to  the  pages  within  the  appellant's
          bundle  containing  translations  of   the   Facebook   photograph
          entries.  These refer to a Colonel Salah and give  specific  times
          and dates (20 August 2015 and 17 October 2015).   Mr  Tan  pointed
          out that  as  at  those  dates  the  Shia  militia  had  not  been
          incorporated into the Iraqi army and as such the FTT  was  correct
          to make the observations it did.

       9. I therefore invited  Ms  Cleghorn  to  take  me  to  the  specific
          evidence said to support  this  ground  of  appeal.   Ms  Cleghorn
          acknowledged  there  was  no  evidence  to  undermine  the   dates
          provided in the Facebook photographs.   She  therefore  needed  to
          establish that it was plausible,  in  the  light  of  the  country
          background evidence, for Salah to have been a member of  the  Shia
          militia as well as part of the Iraqi  army  in  August  2015.   In
          this regard, Ms Cleghorn simply  relied  upon  the  references  to
          SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]
          UKUT 400 (IAC) in the grounds.  She submitted  that  although  the
          law incorporating the Shia militia into  the  Iraqi  armed  forces
          was not passed  until  December  2016,  they  were  already  well-
          integrated prior to this.  Ms Cleghorn took me to no  evidence  to
          support this proposition.  Whilst I accept that the  Shia  militia
          had been working alongside the Iraqi army for many years,  in  the
          absence of firm evidence I am not prepared  to  accept  that  they
          were working so closely that a member of the Shia militia  was  an
          integral part of the Iraqi army in August 2015.

      10. Ms Cleghorn sought to argue that the FTT made a  mistake  of  fact
          that gave rise to unfairness and therefore  constituted  an  error
          of law.  The burden fell upon the appellant to establish that  the
          existing  fact   or   evidence   (said   to   be   mistaken)   was
          "established",  "in  the  sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and
          objectively verifiable" - see MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014]
          UKUT 105 (IAC).  I am not satisfied on the evidence  available  to
          me, that the FTT made a mistake of fact in the sense  required  by
          the authorities to give rise to an error of law.

Documentation

      11. Mr Tan acknowledged that  the  FTT  erred  in  finding  that  this
          appellant (i) who did not originate from the  KRI,  would  not  be
          returned to Baghdad and (ii) could obtain a  replacement  identity
          document whilst in the UK.  This is because  SMO  makes  it  clear
          that non-KRI residents would be returned to Baghdad  (headnote  7)
          and that as a former resident of Kirkuk, the appellant  would  not
          be able to obtain a replacement  document  without  attending  the
          office in Kirkuk himself - see [431] of  SMO.   Mr  Tan  submitted
          that these errors were not material because the FTT found  in  any
          event that the appellant would be able to call upon  his  family's
          assistance to help him to obtain his old CSID, which he could  use
          to travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk, and  once  in  Kirkuk  he  could
          make an application for a new identity card.


      12. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the errors were  material  because  the
          FTT's focus  was  upon  "replacement  documents",  when  this  was
          simply impossible from the UK.  Although  the  FTT  was  wrong  to
          refer to the possibility of "replacement"  documents  at  [32-34],
          [38] and [41], its other un-appealed findings  of  fact  are  such
          that I agree with Mr Tan's submission.  The appellant  was  issued
          with a CSID in Iraq and left this in his house in  Iraq,  when  he
          fled in 2018 (Q 22).  Although the  appellant  claimed  that  this
          was inaccessible (Q 23), the FTT rejected this  evidence,  finding
          at [37] and [38] that his family remained in Kirkuk and  would  be
          able to assist him.  Although the FTT  did  not  specifically  say
          so, this must have included sending him his CSID.

      13. I note the assertions in the grounds at [2] that  the  appellant's
          claims regarding his family contact and their inability to  assist
          him regarding documentation have not  been  challenged.   However,
          those matters were clearly disputed before the  FTT  and  the  FTT
          made adverse findings of fact contrary to  the  appellant's  case,
          which have not been the subject of any challenge  in  the  grounds
          of appeal.  The suggestion  in  Ms  Cleghorn's  skeleton  argument
          that  the  appellant's  claim  that  his  family  left  Kirkuk  is
          plausible and consistent with the country background  information,
          is probably correct.   However,  the  pleaded  grounds  of  appeal
          completely omit to challenge the clear adverse  findings  at  [37]
          and [38], beyond stating (correctly) that  the  family  could  not
          assist the appellant to obtain "replacement" documents.   Contrary
          to the submission in the grounds that  the  "only  alternative  is
          for him to return to Kirkuk and obtain a replacement card  there",
          I  accept  Mr  Tan's  submission  that   there   was   a   further
          alternative: his family could send him his CSID card.  Whilst  the
          FTT made errors of law when  making  findings  as  to  replacement
          documentation and route of return, these  were  not  material  for
          the reasons I have provided.

      14. It follows that the two  grounds  of  appeal  relied  upon  by  Ms
          Cleghorn do not identify material errors of law  and  I  therefore
          do not set aside the decision of the FTT.

Notice of Decision

      15. I dismiss the appellant's appeal because the grounds of appeal  do
          not disclose a material error of law.

Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 30 April 2021
