
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA029712016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 27 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     m q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu instructed by Crowley & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on [ ] 1989.  He  comes
    from Mosul and is a Shi'a Muslim of Shabak ethnicity.

 3. The appellant claims to have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  26
    September 2015 when he claimed asylum.  On 3 March 2016, the  Secretary
    of State  refused  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and under the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated  on  13  December  2016,  Judge  G  Clarke  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. The judge did not accept the appellant's account that he had previously
    been kidnapped in Mosul.  For that  reason,  therefore,  the  appellant
    could not succeed in his asylum claim. However, the judge accepted that
    there was a risk of indiscriminate violence falling within Art 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) in his  home
    area.  As a result, the judge went on to consider whether the appellant
    could safely and reasonably internally relocate within Iraq.  The judge
    found that, as had occurred earlier in  relation  to  his  family,  the
    appellant would not be permitted to enter Baghdad as he came from Mosul
    and also that he would not be permitted to relocate to the  IKR  as  he
    was not Kurdish.  However, the judge went on to find that the appellant
    could safely and reasonably be expected to relocate  to  the  "southern
    governorates" of Iraq.  On that basis, therefore, the  appellant  could
    not succeed in his humanitarian protection claim under Art 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio) on 17 March 2017.

 7. On 30 March 2017, the Secretary of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 8. Mr Dieu, relied upon the grounds of appeal  before  us.   He  submitted
    that the judge had erred in law in two respects.

 9. First, the judge had accepted that  the  appellant's  family  had  been
    unable to travel to and live in the southern governorates because  ISIS
    were in control of the surrounding area and, as a result, now lived  in
    a refugee camp between Baghdad and Erbil.  It was, therefore,  Mr  Dieu
    submitted illogical for the judge to find that the appellant could,  on
    return, relocate to those southern governorates.

10. Secondly, Mr Dieu submitted that, in any event, the respondent had only
    relied upon the appellant being able to internally relocate to Erbil in
    the IKR or Baghdad.  It was not, therefore, open to the judge to decide
    the appeal on the basis of internal relocation to an  area  not  relied
    upon by the respondent.

11. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to make the finding that he  did,  namely  that  the
    appellant  could  safely  and  reasonably  relocate  to  the   southern
    governorates.  Further, he submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision letter, although stating that it would not be unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant to internally relocate to "Erbil or Baghdad"  (see
    para 66), also concluded that there were "no  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that there is a real risk of serious harm on return to  Iraq"
    (at para 67) which left open the  possibility  of  internal  relocation
    elsewhere in Iraq.

12. Dealing with the second point first,  it  is  clear  from  the  refusal
    letter that the respondent was only contending that the appellant could
    internally relocate to either Erbil in the IKR or to  Baghdad.   We  do
    not accept that para 67 of the determination, in asserting  that  there
    was no real risk of serious harm to the appellant on  return  to  Iraq,
    was anything other than a statement of the ultimate conclusion  of  the
    Secretary of State having rejected the appellant's claim  and  that  he
    could safely and reasonably internally  relocate  to  either  Erbil  or
    Baghdad.  Those are  the  places  of  relocation  referred  to  in  the
    decision letter at paras 57, 62, 63, 65 and in  para  66  where  it  is
    stated:

         "Therefore, it is not considered to be unreasonable to  expect  you
         to return to Erbil or Baghdad and as such you do  not  qualify  for
         international protection."

13. It was  not,  in  our  judgment,  open  to  the  judge  to  propose  an
    alternative place of relocation not relied upon by  the  respondent  in
    the decision letter or raised, so far as we can tell  (and  Mr  Diwnycz
    did not suggest otherwise), by the Secretary of State's  representative
    before the judge.  The appellant was, in effect, taken by  surprise  on
    this point and not given an opportunity to deal with it at the hearing.

14. Further, in any event, we accept Mr Dieu's submission that the  judge's
    finding that the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate to  the
    southern governorates was wholly inconsistent with his acceptance  that
    the family had been unable to move to the southern area of Iraq because
    of the presence of ISIS controlling the surrounding  area.   The  judge
    clearly accepted the appellant's evidence that his  family  had,  as  a
    result, had to live in an IDP camp between Erbil and Baghdad (see paras
    63, 64 and 66).  There  was  nothing  in  the  evidence  to  which  our
    attention was drawn which sought to contradict that  accepted  evidence
    that travel to the southern governorates was simply not safe.  In those
    circumstances, there  was  only  one  finding  which  the  judge  could
    reasonably reach, namely that the appellant could not safely reach  the
    southern governorates and therefore relocate there on return to Iraq.

15. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  finding  that
    the appellant could safely and reasonably internally relocate on return
    to Iraq.

16. Turning now to remake the  decision,  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant could not internally relocate to Erbil or Baghdad stand.   We
    also find, based upon the judge's acceptance that the family could  not
    move to the southern governorates  because  of  the  presence  of  ISIS
    controlling  the  surrounding  area,  that  the  only  proper   finding
    available to the judge (and which  we  ourselves  make)  was  that  the
    appellant could not safely and reasonably  relocate  to  that  area  in
    south Iraq.

17. For those reasons, therefore, the appellant has established  his  claim
    to  humanitarian  protection  under  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

Decision

18. Accordingly, we allow the appellant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by
    substituting a decision allowing his appeal on humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

19. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

20. In the light of our decision, we need say no  more  about  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8 which was not raised  before
    us.




                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  26 July 2017








