
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02449/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 12 October 2016                       |on 18 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [C N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 2 August 2016, dismissing her
    appeal against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Nigeria.

 2. These are the grounds of appeal to the UT:

         "In refusing the appeal the tribunal concluded "it may be that  her
         husband is also opposed to FGM". It concludes that  he  may  be  of
         assistance to the daughter.

         ... this finding is speculative and appears  to  misunderstand  the
         essence of the case. The appellant claimed to fear FGM because  her
         husband had given indications in fact he supported  FGM.  He  is  a
         traditional man who respects the  traditions  of  his  family.  His
         family are very  much  in  favour  of  FGM.  The  Home  Office  had
         indicated  that  [the  appellant]  could  relocate  because  "vague
         information" had been provided as to  how  [her]  husband's  family
         could locate [her] (refusal letter,  paragraph  23).  The  tribunal
         appears to accept that this is precisely what will happen, that the
         husband and family will find the proposed  victim.  Having  already
         concluded  there  is  no  sufficiency  of  protection,   in   those
         circumstances, the tribunal should simply have allowed the  appeal.
         There was no evidence  to  support  a  finding  that  the  proposed
         persecutors family would be "of assistance"."

 3. In a written response to the grant of permission the SSHD submits thus:

         "It  is  far  from  clear  whether  the  judge's   conclusions   on
         sufficiency of protection are adequate. However, on the presumption
         that he concluded that there was no sufficiency  of  protection  in
         her home area it is clear that he went to on  to  consider  whether
         there was  an  internal  relocation  option  and  reached  reasoned
         conclusions on this aspect.

         It is plain that the judge concluded that  the  appellant  has  the
         support of educated parents in Nigeria.  Paragraph  16  refers.  It
         also appears clear that the appellant's husband is not in favour of
         FGM.

         ... when read in  the  round  the  judge  has  reached  sustainable
         conclusions on the matter of internal relocation."

 4. Mr Bradley submitted along the following lines. The case was based on a
    risk of FGM being inflicted on one of  the  appellant's  children.  The
    claim was accurately recorded in the respondent's refusal  letter,  but
    was vaguely and inconsistently described in the judge's  decision.  The
    nub of the case was the  ability  of  the  family  of  the  appellant's
    husband to locate the appellant in Nigeria. She has separated from  her
    husband  who  has  other  representation  in  relation  to  immigration
    matters. His status is understood to depend  on  the  presence  of  the
    children here, so their return to Nigeria would  imply  that  he  would
    also be expected to return. He is not a dependent in these proceedings.
    The judge appeared to accept that there was  a  risk  of  FGM,  against
    which the authorities in Nigeria do not provide  legal  sufficiency  of
    protection (paragraph 13). The decision showed that there was  a  local
    risk, from which the appellants might be required to relocate, if  that
    were possible. The decision at paragraph 16 implied that there could be
    no relocation. The final 3 sentences of that paragraph were written  on
    the basis that the husband of the appellant was also  opposed  to  FGM,
    but that was not to be understood as an  alternative  finding.  On  the
    findings, there was a local risk and no possibility of relocation,  and
    so the outcome should be reversed. If any other interpretation could be
    placed on the decision, then its findings were inadequately  explained,
    and there should be a remit to the FtT.

 5. Mr Mullen submitted thus.  It was not  necessarily  implicit  that  the
    judge  accepted  even  a  localised  risk  to  the  appellant's  child.
    Paragraph 16 was far from clear in holding that there was a  real  risk
    from the father or his family. The evidence cited  was  rather  to  the
    effect that he is against FGM, although some family  members  may  have
    taken a different attitude. However, it was not possible to  know  from
    paragraph 16 or from the decision as a whole what was found as a matter
    of fact. A number of readings could be put upon it. The decision failed
    to make clear why its overall conclusion was reached. Mr  Mullen  could
    not go so far as to submit that whatever other findings  were  reached,
    the case was bound to fail on internal relocation. That  might  be  the
    final outcome, but it required to be reach on clear  specific  findings
    of fact.  The case therefore required to be remitted.

 6. The decision of the FtT is set aside, for absence of sufficiently clear
    findings and reasons, as conceded by the respondent.

 7. There are no findings which may be preserved so as to lead to  the  FtT
    decision being simply reversed.

 8. No findings are to stand.

 9. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

10. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to rehear the case are not  to  include
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            18 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




