
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/02050/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 10 January 2019                   |on 31 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 MUKHTAR [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT  Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 August 2017.

 2. The appellant sought permission from  the  FtT  to  appeal  on  various
    grounds.  That  application  was  refused.   By  application  dated  30
    January 2017, the appellant asked the UT for permission to  appeal  "on
    the sole ground ... that the FtT has misdirected itself with  reference
    to the tests of reasonableness of return to Iraq".

 3. On 11 January 2018, the UT granted permission, on the view that it  was
    "arguable that the FtT  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  question  of
    internal flight ...".

 4. The appellant's skeleton  argument  seeks  to  update  the  appellant's
    position by reference to country guidance published after  the  hearing
    in the FtT, AAH CG UKUT [2018] 00212.  It is contended at [23] that the
    FtT based its conclusions  on  the  appellant's  "inability  to  adduce
    reliable or credible evidence", rather  than  on  "the  fact  sensitive
    assessment required", which is an error of law.  From [24]  onwards  it
    is argued that AAH reinforces the conclusion that the FtT's decision is
    inadequate, and that further findings are needed, for which the  appeal
    "should be remitted to a differently constituted FtT."

 5. In a rule 24 response the respondent says that the findings  on  return
    come after unchallenged adverse credibility findings; at [69] the judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant had no family members  to  support
    him regarding documentation; that finding was open on the basis  of  no
    credibility; the judge at [72] referred to  AA,  and  at  [73]  to  the
    appellant having fortitude and family  support;  and  those  amount  to
    sustainable findings on internal flight.

 6. The main points which I noted from the submissions  for  the  appellant
    were these:

      i) The country guidance, both before and after amendment, prescribes a
         detailed list for factors affecting risk  on  return,  on  each  of
         which a tribunal is bound to make reasoned findings.

     ii) The FtT's decision deals principally with the appellant's  account,
         up to [69].  That account is found not credible, a matter  not  now
         in issue.  Thereafter, at [70 - 71], the judge refers correctly  to
         the framework for a further decision, as the case law  then  stood.
         The resolution, found only at [73], is inadequate in terms of  what
         those templates required.

    iii) It is not clear whether when referring to documents the judge meant
         a CSID.  If she did, the  finding  that  he  could  obtain  one  is
         irrational, or inadequate.  If she did not mean a CSID, there was a
         failure to apply country guidance.

     iv) The exact nature of identity documents is crucial to feasibility of
         return and risk of destitution.  The reasoning is so confused as to
         amount to error of law.

      v) It was irrational to infer from the appellant's evidence, otherwise
         rejected, that he had family in Jalawla.

     vi) "In the absence of any accepted evidence from  the  appellant,  the
         FtT has simply decided the case on the basis that the appellant has
         failed to displace the assumptions it has created. It  is  accepted
         that where the appellant has been unbale to adduce any reliable  or
         credible evidence, it would take little to entitle the FtT to  find
         that ... travel and employment might be feasible.  However,  making
         such a decision in the absence of any evidence on those  points  is
         not the fact sensitive assessment required by AA (Iraq).   This  is
         an error of law." - Skeleton argument, [22 -23].

    vii) Anticipating the reply that it was for the appellant to  prove  his
         case, and the finding that he was not credible was fatal,  the  FtT
         in a human rights appeal had a responsibility to ensure  there  was
         no breach.  An "argument from silence" was insufficient.  It  might
         not take much to justify a negative outcome, but there  had  to  be
         something.

   viii) The decision was inadequate, as guidance stood at the time, and was
         even more so on light of the further guidance, which required  more
         detailed findings on ability  to  obtain  documents.   An  "omnibus
         finding" did not suffice.

     ix)  The  FtT's  finding  at  [73]  that  the   appellant   had   shown
         "considerable  personal  fortitude"  was  perverse.   The  evidence
         showed the contrary,  that  he  was  vulnerable.   That  point  was
         implicit in the grounds going to the reasonability of return.

 7. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    it has not been established that the making of the decision of the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law.

 8. In terms of the main heading of the grounds, the FtT did not  misdirect
    itself about the tests of reasonability of return.  It was accepted  in
    submissions that the FtT set those out correctly.

 9. The argument for the appellant was presented clearly and in detail but,
    at bottom, the case turned simply on onus.  Mr Govan submitted that the
    appellant was seeking the benefit of the doubt, to  which  he  was  not
    entitled.  Mr Haddow in his reply said  that  was  a  variation  on  an
    "argument from silence" which did not apply to an article 3 case, where
    the FtT is under a positive duty and bound to make findings.

10. The SSHD has of course a responsibility to consider all claims, and  to
    apply known background information - see paragraphs  339HA,  339J,  and
    339JA of the immigration rules.   Although  proceedings  are  primarily
    adversarial, tribunals also  have  a  limited  inquisitorial  capacity,
    being under a duty of fairness - see e.g. Macdonald's  Immigration  Law
    and Practice, 9th ed., 20.101.

11. Paragraph 339I of the immigration rules provides thus:

         When the Secretary of State  considers  a  person's  asylum  claim,
         eligibility for a grant of humanitarian protection or human  rights
         claim it is the duty of the person to submit to  the  Secretary  of
         State  as  soon  as  possible  all  material  factors   needed   to
         substantiate the asylum claim or establish that they are  a  person
         eligible for humanitarian  protection  or  substantiate  the  human
         rights  claim,  which  the  Secretary  of  State  shall  assess  in
         cooperation with the person.

         The material factors include:

             (i) the person's statement on the reasons for making an asylum
             claim or on eligibility for a grant of humanitarian protection
             or for making a human rights claim;

             (ii)      all documentation at the person's disposal regarding
             the person's age, background (including background details  of
             relevant relatives), identity, nationality(ies),  country(ies)
             and  place(s)   of   previous   residence,   previous   asylum
             applications, travel routes; and

             (iii)     identity and travel documents.

12. The responsibility may be on the respondent or on a tribunal to justify
    a human rights decision, but that does not  involve  an  obligation  to
    bring evidence to establish the primary facts.  The responsibility  for
    establishing those remains with the appellant.

13. The appellant claims that his case was decided  on  his  "inability  to
    adduce reliable or credible evidence".  More accurately, it was decided
    on his positive choice not to provide evidence of that nature.  That is
    a position from which an appeal fails, not from which an obligation  on
    a tribunal to seek out a case for an appellant begins.

14. It was far from irrational to  accept  that  part  of  the  appellant's
    evidence which was to the effect that he had family  in  the  IKR.   An
    admission against interest may well be true, and does not automatically
    fall to be  rejected  because  other  claims  have  been  found  to  be
    invented.

15. The FtT did not have to make point-by-point findings.  The  appellant's
    failure to substantiate  his  claim,  as  found  at  [73],  covers  all
    relevant matters.

16. If error had been shown in terms of the grounds,  there  would,  as  Mr
    Govan argued, be no need to remit to the FtT.  There was no  scope  for
    revisiting the adverse credibility findings.   The  appellant  did  not
    apply to lead any further evidence.  It would have been apt for the  UT
    to make a fresh decision, based on everything before it.  I would  have
    had no difficulty in finding that based on all that he  has  disclosed,
    the appellant may reasonably be expected  and  required  to  return  to
    Iraq.  There would be no sensible reason to make findings in his favour
    on his claim not to have a CSID, not to have the information or  family
    contacts to assist  him  in  obtaining  one,  or  otherwise  to  be  at
    disadvantage compared to other returnees.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      22 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




