
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02346/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2019                 | On 18 October 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Stuart-King of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on the 25th July 2019,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 26th February 2019 was dismissed.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted on a number of grounds all  of  which
    were relevant to the credibility findings made by the FtTJ and were set
    out in the grant of permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Murray  on
    the 27 August 2019.

3.    At the oral hearing,  after  hearing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, Ms Everett appropriately conceded that there was a  material
    error of law as set out in the grounds when  read  with  the  grant  of
    permission. I find the  Respondent's  concession  to  be  appropriately
    made, and in the circumstances, I give only summary reasons for finding
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
    material error of law such that  it  is  necessary  to  set  aside  the
    decision.

4.    The appellant is a citizen of Kuwait of Bidoon ethnicity.  It  is  the
    appellant's case that he is from a family who are undocumented Bidoons;
    his father worked in farming and his  mother  was  a  housewife.  As  a
    result of the family  position,  he  was  not  able  to  access  formal
    education. The appellant's father had attempted to register the  family
    but as their history was not recorded in the 1965 census, he was unable
    to do so. It was claimed that whilst  in  Kuwait  he  took  part  in  a
    demonstration calling for more rights for Bidoon people and  was  later
    arrested by the police and detained having been accused of distributing
    leaflets which were anti-government.  He  denied  involvement  but  was
    beaten and ill-treated and compelled to sign a  document  before  being
    released. He remained at the home of a  family  friend  until  November
    2014 during which time his house was raided by the Kuwaiti authorities.
    He travelled through a number of countries before arriving in the UK on
    27 August 2018. He claimed asylum the following day.

5.    In a decision made on 26  February  2019,  his  protection  and  human
    rights claim was refused by the respondent. In  that  decision  letter,
    whilst it was accepted that he was a national of  Kuwait,  it  was  not
    accepted that he was an undocumented Bidoon nor was it accepted that he
    had given a credible account that he had been  arrested  and  detained.
    Having    applied    the    country    guidance    decision    of    NM
    (documented/undocumented Bidoon; risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356(IAC)
    which  stated  that  undocumented  Bidoons  are  at  a  real  risk   of
    persecution, on the basis of the rejection of his  factual  claim,  the
    respondent dismissed his protection claim.

6.    The appeal came before the FtT on 4 July 2019.  The  FtTJ  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and in the decision promulgated on 25  July
    2019 the FtTJ  made  reference  to  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant in her analysis and findings of fact set out at paragraphs 31
    - 49. At paragraph 34, the FtTJ set out that there were many issues  in
    the appeal which cast "grave doubts on the appellant's credibility" and
    then set out what those issues were.

7.    The grounds drafted by counsel who represented  the  appellant  before
    the FtT set out for three issues in which it was said that the FtTJ had
    erred in law. Ms Everett on behalf of the respondent  is  in  agreement
    with those grounds and that the credibility assessment made was flawed.



8.    The first issue relates to the  nature  of  the  appellant's  father's
    relationship with his friend, the family's financial circumstances  and
    the issue of his arrest following the demonstration.

9.    Dealing with the first point, the FtTJ at [36] made reference  to  the
    appellant's oral evidence in relation to the relationship  between  his
    father and  his  friend  in  Kuwait.  The  judge  took  as  an  adverse
    credibility point that the appellant  had  not  said  before  that  the
    friend was his father's employer. It was expressly stated at [40]  that
    his evidence had demonstrably changed.

10.    As  Ms  Stuart-King  submits,  it  was  incorrect  to  say  that  the
    appellant's evidence had  changed  in  the  way  set  out  above.  Both
    advocates agree that by reference to the appellant's witness  statement
    and also the substantive interview that took place that  the  appellant
    had made a number of references to the  appellant's  father,  whilst  a
    farmer, was working with his friend and that the farm belonged  to  the
    friend of his father. The supplementary  witness  statement  also  made
    reference to his father working for someone else and that  he  did  not
    own his own farm. It is therefore agreed by the advocates that contrary
    to the decision, the appellant had been consistent in that  respect  of
    his evidence and that it was incorrect to say that he had not.

11.   A similar error relates to the financial circumstances referred to  at
    paragraph 36 in the light of the material  set  out  in  the  appellant
    witness statement and in the interview and question 162.

12.   In the grounds at paragraph 16,  Counsel  has  set  out  her  note  to
    support the grounds on which it is said that there was a  mistake  made
    as to the nature of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    father's Kuwaiti friend. Whilst it was referred to in the  decision  as
    being a "father figure" the  note  makes  reference  to  the  appellant
    referring to him as being "like one of the family".

13.   At  [40]  the  FtTJ  reaches  a  conclusion  concerning  the  family's
    circumstances. Ms Everett on behalf of the respondent stated  that  she
    could not follow the reasoning set out at paragraph 40 or find evidence
    to support that conclusion.

14.   Similarly at [44] the FtTJ states that the appellant claimed  to  have
    been arrested five months  after  the  demonstration.  However  in  his
    witness statement at paragraph 11 he makes reference to being  arrested
    "after 2 to  3  months"  which  was  consistent  with  his  answers  in
    interview at question 128 (page 43 of the bundle) in which he stated in
    answer to the question "how long was it that you were in  contact  with
    the authorities after this?" He stated, "probably after three months, I
    was arrested approximately three months  after  I  fled."  Whilst  that
    error of fact by itself would not justify  the  setting  aside  of  the
    decision, it is a factual error which needs to be seen in the round and
    in the light of the other errors identified.

15.   The last error relates to the assessment of  the  expert  report.  The
    appellant relied upon an expert report set out in the bundle  at  pages
    94-112. The report set  out  background  information  relating  to  the
    government's position on  Bidoon  people,  their  history  and  current
    challenges faced. The instructions  received  from  the  solicitors  to
    prepare the report were set out at paragraph 29 and  at  paragraph  30,
    specific questions were then answered  by  the  expert  which  included
    issues relating to the appellant's factual account and whether  it  was
    supported by any material. For example, the expert  made  reference  to
    the demonstrations for  Bidoon  rights  and  the  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's arrest in the light of the country  materials  relating  to
    that. The FtTJ addressed the report at paragraph 48 in short terms  and
    on the basis that the report did not  take  the  appellant's  case  any
    further on the basis that the expert assumed that the appellant was  an
    undocumented  Bidoon.  However,  the  FtTJ  had  already  reached   the
    conclusion that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  not  credible  before
    reaching any assessment of the expert report. As in  the  case  of  any
    expert evidence it is required to  be  considered  in  the  round  when
    reaching findings of fact on credibility. The grounds at paragraphs  25
    - 29 set out issues that were referred to in the report which were  not
    considered in the assessment of credibility.

16.   For those reasons, I find a  material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside, and the  hearing
    remitted for de novo consideration of the appeal.

17.   I therefore set aside the decision of the judge  in  its  entirety.  I
    have taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statements  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Cis of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper
    Tribunal which recognises that it may not be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal shall proceed to remake the decision when it is satisfied that
    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or  other  opportunities  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the  nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective 2, it is appropriate to
    remit the case of the First-tier Tribunal.

18.   Having  exercised  my  discretion  and  by  considering  the  practice
    statement, the case falls under (b) given that the court  will  now  be
    required to assess the case afresh and make findings of fact on all the
    evidence. I am satisfied that the appropriate course is  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law. As such it is necessary to set aside  the
decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal;  no  findings  of  fact
are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and
to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date: 14/10/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

