
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/02172/2020 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 March 2021                    |On 11 March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     IA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS



For the appellant: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: No attendance



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated my decision but reserved my full reasons, which I now give.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.

1. To avoid confusion, for the purpose of  this  decision  I  have  referred
   below to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant's instructed counsel, Mr C Holmes was not  able  to  attend
   the remote hearing but sent an email  in  which  he  explained  that  the
   parties were in agreement as to the error of law  and  that  the  outcome
   should be to set aside the decision on asylum grounds but  to  allow  the
   appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds. Mr McVeety had also  seen  the
   email and agreed with the course of action proposed. In the premises,  it
   was not necessary to continue the remote hearing.

3. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity and Sunni  Muslim
   religion, with date of birth given  as  1.3.91.  He  arrived  in  the  UK
   clandestinely in 2007 and claimed asylum. That claim was refused  by  the
   respondent, as were a number of subsequent Further  Submissions.  Appeals
   were dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in 2007 and again in 2010.

4. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   28.9.20  (Judge  Raikes),  allowing  on  both  asylum  and   humanitarian
   protection grounds the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 3.2.20, to refuse his claim  for  international
   protection made in the latest  Further  Submissions  of  19.11.19,  which
   submissions relied on the grounds of general poor security  situation  in
   Iraq and the absence of identity documentation.

5. At the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant made it clear that he  did  not
   pursue the asylum claim twice previously rejected by the Tribunal that he
   was at risk because of his father's  claimed  membership  of  the  Ba'ath
   Party.  The  appellant's  case  was  advanced  solely   on   Humanitarian
   Protection grounds and associated ECHR breaches which  would  ensue  from
   his return to Iraq at Baghdad Airport without a CSID  or  other  identity
   document enabling him to transit to his home area of the Hawija District,
   which lies within the Kirkuk Province.  In essence, it was asserted  that
   the appellant faced a real risk of destitution on return to Iraq.

6. In summary, the grounds argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred
   in law in allowing the appeal under both the Refugee Convention  (asylum)
   and Humanitarian Protection grounds. It is pointed out that to  allow  an
   appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds in addition to  asylum  grounds
   is superfluous as no further protection would be necessary. The  decision
   is also internally inconsistent in that at [23] the judge found that  the
   appellant would not be at risk on return to his home area, as he  has  no
   personal association to ISIL or local or national government. I note that
   the grounds did not challenge any of the factual findings of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on all grounds was granted  by
   the First-tier Tribunal on 20.10.20, the judge  considering  it  arguable
   that the judge conflated  the  appellant's  Humanitarian  Protection  and
   asylum claims.

8. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and Mr Holmes' email. I agree
   that the decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds  is  inconsistent
   with both the  appellant's  case  and  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. In the premises the decision  is  in  clear  error  of  law.  I
   entirely agree with the view of the two representatives as to the correct
   course of action.

9. In the premises, the  appropriate  course  of  action  is  to  allow  the
   Secretary of State's appeal and set aside the decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal for material error of law, remaking the decision in  the  appeal
   by allowing it on Humanitarian Protection grounds only.

Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The decision in the  appeal  is  remade  by  allowing  the  appeal  on
      Humanitarian Protection grounds but dismissing it on asylum grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 March 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 March 2021

