
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02295/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields            |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2017                |On 21 December 2017            |
|Prepared on 2 November 2017       |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    F. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


        1. The Appellants is a citizen of Iraq who entered the UK lawfully,
           and then claimed asylum in March 2014. That claim  was  refused,
           and a fresh claim was then made on 12 January  2016,  which  was
           refused in turn on 19 February  2016.  The  appeal  against  the
           decision to refuse him protection status was  dismissed  on  all
           grounds by decision of First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manchester,
           promulgated on 16 February 2017.

        2. The Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Osbrone  of  6
           June 2017 on the basis the Judge had failed  to  mention  within
           his decision, or demonstrate that he had  applied,  the  country
           guidance decision of BA (returns to Baghdad) Iran CG [2017] UKUT
           18 a decision that had been promulgated after the  hearing,  but
           before his own decision was promulgated.

        3. Thus the matter comes before me.




      Error of law?

        4. When the matter was called  on  for  hearing  the  parties  were
           agreed that neither had sought to draw the Judge's attention  to
           the decision in BA once it was promulgated, and that neither had
           sought to advance further argument based upon its  content,  or,
           request the Judge to reconvene the hearing. The failure  by  the
           Appellant to do so, was needless  to  say,  unfortunate.  Indeed
           given the careful analysis of the evidence that  was  undertaken
           by the Judge, as recognised by both parties before me,  I  would
           venture to suggest that the error  into  which  the  Judge  fell
           would have been avoided had either of the  parties  alerted  the
           Judge to BA.

        5. The parties are however agreed that the decision  does  disclose
           an error of law in the failure to demonstrate that the  guidance
           to be found within BA was applied to the evidence, and that  the
           error was a material one. With the agreement of both  parties  I
           am invited to set aside only the decision to dismiss the  appeal
           on humanitarian protection grounds, and to remake  the  decision
           so as to allow  the  appeal  on  that  ground  alone.  Thus  the
           decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
           grounds is confirmed.




   DECISION

      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  16
      February 2017 did involve the making of an error of law that  requires
      the decision upon the humanitarian protection appeal to be  set  aside
      and remade.

      The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

      The decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds
      is confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 2 November 2017

