
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02705/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th September 2018                        |On 19th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Abdi [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Broudie
                    Jackson & Canter (Dale House)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 8  May  2018,  Judge  Devlin  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Somalia, against a decision made by the respondent on 9  February  2018
    refusing his protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim  was
    that he was from the "Sab"  or  "outcast"  Madhiban  clan  specifically
    Mohamed Gorgate who  feared  persecution  on  account  of  having  been
    targeted by Al Shabab as he was employed as a driver for  a  member  of
    the Somali General administration in the ports of Mogadishu.

2.   The decision of the judge was said to be wrong in law in  that  he  had
    (i) incorrectly interpreted the background evidence ( which states that
    the  nickname  "Madhiban"  is  used  to   refer   to   outcast   groups
    collectively) and mistakenly viewed it to be contradictory on the  part
    of the appellant to assert both that he was from a  minority  clan  and
    that  ethnically/genealogically  he was  Hawiye  (who  are  a  majority
    clan); (2) failed to consider material evidence  in  the  form  of  the
    appellant's explanations for alleged inconsistencies  in  his  evidence
    regarding the number of times he was approached by Al-Shabab before  he
    fled to Somalia in 2007, an alleged inconsistency regarding his  reason
    for returning to Somalia in 2013, and his failure  to  mention  in  his
    screening interview that his employment also included looking after his
    employer's kids and taking them to school; and (3)  made  contradictory
    findings as regards the appellant's credibility.

3.   I express my gratitude to the representatives for their clear and well-
    argued submissions.

4.   In the event I have concluded that the judge materially erred  in  law.
    There is much  to  commend  about  the  judge  structured  approach  to
    credibility and his very thorough analysis of the  evidence.   However,
    in considering the efficacy of his analysis I have to ask whether it is
    intelligible and whether the reader can understand clearly from it  why
    the appellant's evidence was found  not  credible  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof.

5.   As regards ground 1, as Mr Tan conceded,  the  background  evidence  on
    the status of the "Sab" or "outcaste" Madhiban clan is diverse and  the
    document on which the judge set particular store  -  the  "Genealogical
    Table of Somali Clans", has an entry under 'Hawiye' listing "Gorgate" -
    appears to show that the appellant's clan  did  historically  originate
    from the Hawiye and yet did exist as an outcast clan as  a  consequence
    of the historical ostracism of Mohamed Gorgate.   This  assessment  was
    consistent with the Tribunal country guidance case of MA  (Galgale  Sab
    Clan) Somalia CG [2006] UKAIT 0007.  Accordingly I consider that it was
    unsafe for the judge to conclude that the background evidence indicated
    persons were either Hawiye or outcasts and  could  not  originate  from
    both.

6.   So far as concerns ground 2, I do not consider that it is made  out  on
    its  own  since  the  judge  clearly  did,  when  identifying   certain
    inconsistencies,  show  that  he  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    attempted explanations.

7.   However, this does not assist the respondent, since in addition to  the
    judge's failure to assess the background evidence as regards  ethnicity
    properly, I see  particular  force  in  ground  (3).   I  have  already
    commended the judge for adopting a structured approach to  credibility.
    In line with the guidance given by the  UT  in  KB  &  AH  (credibility
    structured approach) Pakistan [2017]  UKUT  491  the  judge  sought  to
    analyse the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  from  different
    angles by reference to established credibility indicators  (sufficiency
    of   detail;   internal   consistency;   external   consistency;    and
    plausibility). The judge also, promisingly, appeared to understand that
    according to the guidance the appellant's account by reference to  each
    of these indicators, had to be considered cumulatively: At para 209  he
    stated:

         "209.    I now come to look at everything in the round.  When I do,
             I find that (a) the lack of detail in the Appellant's  account
             of his membership of the Mahdiban, and  the  lack  of  telling
             detail elsewhere; (b) the  significant  discrepancies  I  have
             identified; (c) the absence of any clear independent  evidence
             in support of the Appellant's claimed clan  membership,  self-
             identification with the Hawiye, his account of his reasons for
             leaving South Africa  and  of  the  events  that  led  to  his
             departure from Somalia in 2017; and, (d) the implausibilities,
             etc. that I have identified, taken  cumulatively,  exercise  a
             strong negative pull."

    However, he immediately followed this statement at paragraph  210  with
    the following statement:

         "210.    I find that the broad consistency of the evidence  of  the
             Appellant's clan membership;  the  broad  consistency  of  the
             Appellant's  account;  its   congruence   with   the   country
             background evidence; and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
             granted refugee status in South Africa,  taken  together,  are
             insufficient to effectively counteract  that  strong  negative
             pull."

    When one further tracks back  to  look  at  what  the  judge  concluded
    overall in respect  of  each  of  these  indicators,  the  difficulties
    intensify. It is  clear  that  he  found  the  appellant  had  provided
    sufficient detail in relation to certain aspects of his claim  but  not
    others, in particular not as regards the appellant's  clan  membership.
    The difficulty here is that viewed  in  the  round  the  appellant  had
    provided very considerable detail about his clan membership and  which,
    certainly once it is understood that it was not  inconsistent  for  the
    appellant to claim on the one hand that he  was  Mahdiban  but  on  the
    other that he originated from the Hawiye, was reasonably accurate.

8.   As regards inconsistencies, whilst the judge went on to identify  three
    "significant" discrepancies he was also prepared to say earlier in para
    201 (as well as in para 210 as cited above) that it remained  that  the
    "broad outlines of the Appellant's  account  have  remained  consistent
    throughout". The error on the part of the judge in this analysis is  to
    mistake the wood for the trees.  It was for the appellant to prove  his
    case but he only had to do so to the lower standard of proof.   If  the
    appellant's evidence was "broad[ly] consistency", then it is  difficult
    to follow why it was seen overall to be inconsistent.

9.   A similar difficulty afflicts the judge's treatment  of  the  indicator
    of plausibility (see para 207)  where  the  judge  appears  to  require
    complete  plausibility  rather  than  assessment  of  the   degree   of
    plausibility overall.

10.  Coupled with the judge's erroneous approach to the background  evidence
    on the appellant's ethnicity (Ground 1), I  consider  that  Ground  (3)
    succeeds in establishing that the judge materially erred in law.

11.  I repeat my positive opinion of the  judge's  structured  approach  but
    conclude that ultimately his application if it resulted in legal  error
    by failing to explain why viewed in the round, the  appellant  had  not
    established the credibility of his account to the lower standard.

12.  Accordingly the judge's decision is set aside  for  material  error  of
    law.

13.  It follows from my above findings that the judge's adverse  credibility
    findings cannot be preserved and that accordingly the proper course  is
    to remit the case to be heard de novo by the FtT.

14.  In case it assists the next judge who deals with this  appeal,  my  own
    concerns are not so much  about  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account as about whether, even if credible, it suffices to establish  a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm, given that (i) he appears  to
    have lived and worked in  Mogadishu  previously;   (ii)  Al  Shabab  no
    longer has the power and influence it did previously in that city;  and
    (iii) membership of an outcast clan was unlikely in 2018 to prevent him
    accessing available protection.  The focus of the next hearing may well
    need to be on whether (even assuming his account was credible) he would
    experience significant difficulties if he was returned to Mogadishu.

15.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error  of  law.



     The case is remitted to the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 15 October 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
