
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 September and 24 November 2016           |On 16 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     M I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel (1 September 2016)
     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi, Solicitors (24 November 2016)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer (1
September 2016)
     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer (24 November 2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds against the respondent's decision made  on  23
    September 2015 to reject his claim for  asylum  and  to  issue  removal
    directions.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 21 December  1983.   His
    claim can briefly be summarised as follows.  He first arrived in the UK
    on 17 April 2011 with a student visa valid until 28 October 2013  later
    extended to 23 May 2015.  He applied for asylum on 13  May  2015.   His
    claim was that he would be at risk of persecution in Pakistan as a  gay
    man.  He had become aware of his sexuality  during  his  childhood  and
    early teens. As a teenager he had a long-term relationship with another
    boy.  He had not told anyone about his sexual orientation.  He  started
    a fashion business in his early 20s  and  had  a  relationship  with  a
    member of staff for several years until coming to the UK.  He has  also
    had gay relationships in the UK.  In December 2014 his father  put  him
    under pressure to return to Pakistan to marry but he did not wish to do
    so.  He told his father that he was gay.  His father became  aggressive
    and abusive. His older brother threatened him and his  father  reported
    him to the police in March 2015. He feared persecution from his  family
    and others.

3.   The  appellant  provided  various  supporting  documents,  including  a
    "disownment" document, a newspaper announcement relating to  disownment
    and a police report in support of his claim.  However, his  application
    was rejected by the respondent who did not accept  that  the  appellant
    was a homosexual as claimed or that he had been subject to threats from
    family members in Pakistan.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing of the appeal the judge heard  evidence  not  only  from
    the appellant but also from three witnesses.  The judge summarised  the
    evidence at [21]-[26] of his decision.  He then heard  submissions  and
    considered the background materials summarised at [29].  The judge said
    that he found nothing inherently implausible in the appellant being gay
    and described his evidence as broadly credible and supported in respect
    of him having had homosexual  encounters  in  the  UK.   He  found  the
    evidence all pointed towards the appellant  being  gay  and  as  having
    engaged in homosexual relationships.

5.   However, the  judge  did  not  find  all  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    evidence to be credible.  There  was  a  document  verification  report
    (DVR),  which  satisfied  the  judge  that  the  police  report  was  a
    fabrication.  He also rejected the appellant's account of revealing his
    orientation to his family and of their making threats.  He found  there
    was no credible evidence that they were aware of the appellant's sexual
    orientation or, if they were, that they would  wish  to  publicise  the
    matter or make threats or report the appellant to the police.

6.   The judge went  on  to  consider  the  proper  approach  for  assessing
    whether the appellant would be at real risk on return as set out by the
    Supreme Court in HJ and HT v Secretary of State [2010] UKSC 31  and  in
    particular in the judgments of Lord Hope at paras 35 - 36 and  of  Lord
    Rodger at para 82.

7.   As already indicated the judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    gay and as to the situation in Pakistan he considered that  the  weight
    of evidence indicated that gay people who lived openly would  generally
    be at risk of persecution sufficient to engage the Convention and  that
    if the appellant did not conceal  aspects  of  his  sexual  orientation
    there would be enough evidence to suggest that he might be at risk from
    the police and non-state actors.  However, the judge said  that  as  to
    the  appellant's  intentions  on  return  his  evidence  was  a  little
    equivocal but he drew the strong  inference  that  he  wished  to  live
    discreetly in the UK as he had previously lived in Pakistan and that he
    would continue to live discreetly in Pakistan.  At [42], the judge said



         "In relation to the reason for living  discreetly  (para  35(d)  or
         para 82 [of HJ and HT]), as I have found above, it  is  clear  that
         the appellant wishes to keep his sexual life private, and to  share
         it only with other sexually active men.  I do not accept  that  the
         reason for the appellant's discretion is,  or  would  be,  fear  of
         persecution, but because he wishes to live discreetly for  his  own
         reasons: that was how he himself would wish to live, or because  of
         social pressures.  To put it another  way,  this  would  relate  to
         social pressures for cultural  or  religious  reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution."

    For these reasons the asylum appeal was dismissed as were  the  appeals
    on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge did not apply  the
    required standard of proof as  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11, was wrong to attach weight to the  DVR,
    failed properly to consider the article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,
    failed properly to assess the issue of whether the appellant would live
    discreetly  and  failed  properly  to  consider  article  3  and   para
    276ADE(1)(vi) of HC395 as amended.

9.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal limited to the challenge to  the  judge's
    findings on whether and why the  appellant  would  live  discreetly  in
    Pakistan as set out in paras 11-14 of the grounds.

10.  Ms Easty submitted that when considering why the appellant  would  live
    discreetly on return, the judge had failed to give proper consideration
    to the evidence he had given at interview where at Q132, 138, 140, 143,
    149, 150 and 152 he made it clear that the  reason  for  secrecy  arose
    from a fear of the consequences of being open.  Further, in his witness
    statement of 26 April 2016 the appellant again set  out  his  fears  of
    what would happen on return and in particular that if granted asylum he
    could live openly as a gay man for the rest of his life  and  for  this
    reason he could not relocate back to Pakistan as it would not  be  safe
    [47].  When the judge considered how the appellant would live,  he  had
    not given, so she submitted, adequate and  full  consideration  to  the
    issue of why he would do so.

11.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the issue was whether the  judge's  findings
    were properly open to him on the evidence.  The fact that  a  different
    judge may have reached a different  conclusion  did  not  without  more
    indicate that the judge had erred in law.  His approach to the evidence
    had been balanced.  He had been entitled to accept the  evidence  about
    the appellant's sexual orientation but to reject other  evidence  which
    had been adduced in support of the claim, such as  the  police  report.
    These findings were matters the judge was entitled to take into account
    in considering how the appellant would live  in  Pakistan  and  why  he
    would  do  so.   He  argued  that  in  substance  the  grounds  were  a
    disagreement with a finding properly open to the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

12.  The issue I must determine at this stage of the hearing is whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision should  be  set
    aside.  As set out in HJ and HT, once it  has  been  accepted  that  an
    appellant's sexual orientation is as  claimed  the  issue  then  to  be
    considered is how each applicant looked at  individually  will  conduct
    himself if returned and how others will react to what  he  does.   Lord
    Hope said at para 35(b):


         "...Those others will include everyone with whom he  will  come  in
         contact, in private as well as in  public.   The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk.  But he cannot and must not be expected to conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of it.   If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be.  The question of what is  reasonably  tolerable
         has no part in this inquiry."

     And at para 35(c):

         "... the next stage if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he would do so.  If this will simply be in response to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected.  But if the reason why he will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well-founded."

13.  I am satisfied that  when  considering  why  the  appellant  would  act
    discreetly on return, the judge failed to take into account what he had
    said at interview where he refers to not  being  able  to  tell  anyone
    about his feelings as "I had a feeling that if I will tell someone they
    will kill me or beat me and I knew it was not allowed in  Islam"  Q132.
    At Q138 after describing his relationship with a friend in Pakistan  he
    said:


         "He convinced me that we wouldn't tell anyone about this.  ...  and
         we promised that day that I would not tell anyone neither  he  will
         tell anyone because if he tells anyone then my family his family or
         anyone in society can kill me.  I was scared and he was  scared  so
         we agreed not to tell anyone."

14.  At Q143 the appellant referred to being told in the madrassa  that  gay
    people were bad people and have  been  buried  alive  and  at  Q150  in
    response to a question asking him  to  explain  why  he  had  not  told
    others, he said that he did not express his behaviour or  feelings  for
    other people because they could tell his family  or  even  society  and
    anyone could kill them.  When asked how he had  kept  his  relationship
    secret at Q152 he said that if anyone knew, they  could  be  killed  so
    they both promised to each other that  they  were  not  going  to  tell
    anyone.  In the appellant's witness statement when  talking  about  his
    relationship in Pakistan, he said they both decided not to tell  anyone
    as society would inform their families who  would  be  embarrassed  and
    ashamed of them and they would most likely be tortured or possibly even
    murdered by their own families (para 21).  He went on to say that  even
    though being gay was acceptable in the UK, his sexuality was  something
    he only discussed with extremely few people like his close friends  and
    other members of the gay clubs he attended.  He was  able  to  practise
    Islam side by side with his sexuality and face no fear or  problems  of
    persecution and that in the UK he did not need to worry about receiving
    threats from family or the police.  He said at para 47  that  he  could
    live openly as a gay man for the rest of his life and that he would  be
    killed if returned to Pakistan.

15.  This evidence is not necessarily determinative but I am satisfied  that
    it should have been taken into account by the judge when assessing  why
    the appellant would behave discreetly in Pakistan.  In  particular  the
    judge said at [37] that the appellant had not given  evidence  that  he
    was discreet because  he  feared  persecution  but  there  is  evidence
    arguably at least to that effect in both the interview and his  witness
    statement.  The fact that the appellant prefers to keep his sexual life
    private does not without more indicate that he will exercise discretion
    simply in response to social pressures or  for  cultural  or  religious
    reasons of his own choosing.

16.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred in  law  by  leaving  a
    number of relevant matters  out  of  account  when  assessing  why  the
    appellant would live discreetly  in  Pakistan.  It  was  Mr  Whitwell's
    submission that, were this to be my finding, the proper course would be
    for the appeal to be retained in the Upper Tribunal  whereas  Ms  Easty
    submitted that the proper course would be for the appeal to be  reheard
    de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.  I am not  satisfied  that  a  full
    rehearing is required in the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision can  be
    re-made in the Upper Tribunal on the basis of the evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

17.  The appeal was duly re-listed for a  further  hearing  on  24  November
    2016.  No application was made before the hearing to call further  oral
    evidence and in these circumstances the appeal proceeded on  the  basis
    of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.


Further Submissions

18.  Mr Hodson submitted that the sole issue remaining to be considered  was
    whether the appellant would act discreetly on return to  Pakistan.   He
    relied on paras 59-65 of the judgment of Lord Rodgers in HJ and HT.  He
    argued that reasons for the exercise of discretion may differ according
    to the culture and background of the country concerned.  In the UK  the
    appellant might wish to be relatively discreet about his sexuality  but
    on return to Pakistan his discretion would arise not simply because  of
    a wish generally not to be open about his sexuality but also because of
    the fear of consequences were he to be so.   There  would  need  to  be
    total concealment by the appellant in Pakistan whereas  in  the  UK  he
    might only wish to disclose his sexuality to gay  colleagues.   In  his
    evidence both at  interview  and  in  his  witness  statement,  he  had
    repeatedly expressed his fears of what would happen to him on return if
    his sexuality became known.  Whatever other motives the  appellant  may
    have for being discreet, there must be at least a reasonable degree  of
    likelihood that the fears he  expressed  about  what  would  happen  on
    return to Pakistan were a material factor in why  he  would  choose  to
    behave discreetly.

19.  Ms Ahmed submitted that the evidence  showed  that  the  appellant  had
    acted discreetly in Pakistan and that when he came to the UK he had not
    openly revealed his sexuality. Even though homosexuality was acceptable
    in the UK he had discussed it with very few people  (see  [25]  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judgement).  Similarly, the judge had recorded  the
    appellant's evidence that it had only been relatively  recently  before
    that hearing that he had spoken about his sexuality to  the  friend  he
    was currently  residing  with  (para  32  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement) whereas at [42] he had said that even though being  gay  was
    acceptable in the UK, his sexuality was  something  he  only  discussed
    with extremely few people like his very close friends and other members
    of the gay clubs he attended.  She submitted that  the  inference  that
    should properly be drawn from  the  evidence  was  that  the  appellant
    considered his sexuality to be a private matter and  that  was  why  he
    would behave discreetly on return to Pakistan and not because he feared
    persecution.

Assessment

20.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant   was
    homosexual as he claimed and that the weight of evidence indicated that
    gay people who lived openly in Pakistan would generally be at  risk  of
    persecution.  He found that if the appellant did not conceal aspects of
    his sexual orientation there was sufficient evidence to  indicate  that
    he might be at risk from the police and  non-state  actors  [41].   The
    sole issue  for  me  to  consider  is  why  the  appellant  would  live
    discreetly on return to Pakistan.

21.  In his opinion in HJ and HT, Lord Rodgers dealt with this  question  as
    follows:

         "60.  The  question  is  not  confined  to  cases  where  fear   of
             persecution is the only reason why  the  applicant  would  act
             discreetly.  In practice the picture  is  likely  to  be  more
             complicated.


         61.  A fear of persecution is by no means the only  reason  why  an
             applicant might behave discreetly if he were returned  to  his
             country of nationality.  For example, he  might  not  wish  to
             upset his parents or his straight friends  and  colleagues  by
             revealing that he is gay; in particular he might  worry  that,
             if the fact that he was gay  were  learned,  he  would  become
             isolated from his friends and relatives, be the butt of  jokes
             or  unkind  comments   from   colleagues   or   suffer   other
             discrimination.  Indeed,  in  a  society  where  gay  men  are
             persecuted it is quite likely that the prevailing culture will
             be such that some of an  applicant's  friends,  relatives  and
             colleagues would react negatively if they discovered  that  he
             was gay.  In these circumstances it is at least possible  that
             the only real reason  for  an  applicant  behaving  discreetly
             would be his perfectly  natural  wish  to  avoid  harming  his
             relationships with his family, friends  and  colleagues.   The
             Convention does not afford  protection  against  these  social
             pressures, however, and so an applicant cannot claim asylum in
             order to avoid them.  So if, having considered  the  facts  of
             any individual case, the Secretary  of  State  or  a  Tribunal
             concluded that the applicant would choose to behave discreetly
             on his return simply to  avoid  these  social  pressures,  his
             application for asylum would fall to be  rejected.   He  would
             not be a refugee within the terms  of  article  1A(2)  of  the
             Convention because, by choosing to behave discreetly in  order
             to  avoid  these  social  pressures,   the   applicant   would
             simultaneously choose to lead a life in which he would have no
             well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  for  reasons  of  his
             homosexuality.  A similar  point  arose,  in  the  context  of
             religion in  NABD  of  2002  v  Minister  of  Immigration  and
             Multicultural  and  Indigenous  Affairs  (25)  79  ALJR  1142,
             discussed at para 70 below.


         62.  Having examined the relevant evidence the Secretary  of  State
             or the Tribunal may  conclude,  however,  that  the  applicant
             would act discreetly partly to avoid  upsetting  his  parents,
             partly to avoid trouble with his friends  and  colleagues  and
             partly due to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  by  the
             state authorities.  In other  words  the  need  to  avoid  the
             threat of persecution would be  a  material  reason,  among  a
             number of complementary reasons, why the applicant  would  act
             discreetly.  Would the existence of these other reasons make a
             crucial difference?  In my view it would not.  A Jew would not
             lose the protection of the Convention because, in addition  to
             suffering state persecution,  he  might  also  be  subject  to
             casual, social anti-Semitism.  Similarly, a gay  man  who  was
             not only persecuted by the state, but also made  the  butt  of
             casual jokes at work, would not lose  the  protection  of  the
             Convention.  It follows  that  the  question  can  be  further
             refined: is an applicant to be regarded as a refugee  for  the
             purposes of the Convention in circumstances where the  reality
             is that, if he returned to  his  country  of  nationality,  in
             addition to other reasons for behaving  discreetly,  he  would
             have to behave discreetly in order to avoid persecution in the
             course of being gay?"


22.  When interviewed the appellant at numerous points in the interview,  as
    identified at [13-14] above, expressed fears about what would happen on
    return.  In a long answer to Q132 when asked at what point in his  life
    he came to realise that he would be gay he said "... I  couldn't  share
    that feeling with anyone at that time.  I was quite mature and came  to
    know that I couldn't tell anyone about that feeling I  had,  a  feeling
    that if I will tell someone they would kill me or beat me and I knew it
    was not allowed in Islam."  In answer to Q138 about what had  attracted
    him to one of his friends in Pakistan he said that  he  was  scared  at
    that time to express his feelings to him  because  he  might  tell  his
    family and they might beat him and if his own  family  found  out  they
    would beat him.  He also feared that if anyone else found out he  could
    be killed in the name of Islam.  At the end of that answer he  repeated
    that he was scared as his friend  was  and  that  agreed  not  to  tell
    anyone.  In his answer to Q143 he said that when he was in the madrassa
    they were told that gay people were bad  people  and  had  been  buried
    alive because Islamically it was considered  haram.   At  Q145  he  was
    asked what kind of life he believed he would  have  as  a  gay  man  in
    Pakistan and he replied: "If anyone came to know in Pakistan I was  gay
    even from society and the government they could kill me.  No-one  likes
    same sex people and there's no place for people like this in Islam."

23.  In his witness statement at  para  24  he  said:  "during  my  time  in
    Pakistan, I never told anyone about how I felt as I was scared and that
    my emotions stressed me out in Pakistan."  At para 27 he said  that  as
    an adult he had a better understanding of the penalties of being gay in
    Pakistan which was worse than he realised when he was younger.  At para
    36 he said that Pakistanis view homosexuality as sinful and  homosexual
    acts are illegal in Pakistan as they are viewed as an  offence  against
    Islamic laws.  He set out his family's reaction at paras 37 to 39  when
    he had told them about his sexuality.  He says that his father was very
    abusive towards him and  cut  the  telephone  line.   His  brother  had
    started to threaten him and told him he would get killed or  lashed  in
    Pakistan.

24.  It is also the case that the appellant  made  it  clear  that  when  he
    arrived in the UK he did not  openly  reveal  his  sexuality  and  only
    informed a few people (para 30 of his statement) and at para  42  that,
    even though being gay was acceptable  in  the  UK,  his  sexuality  was
    something that he only discussed with extremely  few  people  like  his
    close friends and members of the gay clubs he attended.   He  added  at
    paragraph 46 that the acceptance of his  sexuality  amongst  his  close
    friends and relationship with other people was a liberty and  being  in
    the UK made him happy, more comfortable and safe about his sexuality as
    he did not need to worry about receiving threats  from  family  or  the
    police authorities.

25.  Looking at the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied that this is a  case
    where the appellant's reasons for living  discreetly  in  Pakistan  are
    mixed.  He is clearly someone  who  does  not  wish  to  broadcast  his
    sexuality and, in his words, it is something  that  he  only  discusses
    with extremely few people like very close friends and other members  of
    the gay clubs he attends.  However, I also accept  that  the  fears  he
    expresses of returning to  Pakistan  arising  from  his  sexuality  are
    genuine fears which are objectively justified.  As the judge  found  on
    the evidence before him there was evidence that the appellant would  be
    at real risk of  persecution  on  return  if  he  was  open  about  his
    sexuality. I am satisfied that the evidence leads to a conclusion  that
    need for the appellant to act discreetly on return to  Pakistan  arises
    at least in part and perhaps even substantially from the fear he has of
    the consequences if his sexuality were to become known.

26.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant has shown  that  in  his
    circumstances the position is such that if he returned to Pakistan,  in
    addition to any other reasons for behaving discreetly, he would  do  so
    in order to avoid persecution because of his  sexual  orientation.   On
    this basis I am satisfied that his appeal should be allowed.

Decision

27.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside.   I
    re-make the decision by allowing the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in
    force.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 14 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

