
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2019                            |On 8 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                 HHJ STACEY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                  mr a h i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by Rodman
Pearce Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. This is an extempore decision.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James promulgated on 30 August  2018.   The  decision  of  Judge  James
    refused the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
    finding that notwithstanding that he was a non-Arab  Darfuri  he  would
    not be at risk on return to Sudan.

 3. The appellant challenged the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James and in a decision dated 1 October 2018 was granted permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  who
    identified a potential error of law concerning the  proper  application
    of the country guidance on non-Arab Darfuris contained in AA  (non-Arab
    Darfuris -  relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and  MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC).

 4. Ms Bassi gave a helpful indication for the Secretary of State  that  it
    was accepted that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James
    disclosed a material error on a point of law.  It was accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that the correct country guidance  that  had  to  be
    applied to the appellant's circumstances where he  was  undisputedly  a
    non-Arab Darfuri was that contained in AA and MM and that the  guidance
    within another case on Sudan, that of IM and AI (Risks - membership  of
    Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188 (IAC) did
    not address the situation for non-Arab Darfuris. The Secretary of State
    also accepted that the Country  Guidance  in  AA  and  MM  on  non-Arab
    Darfuris had been confirmed recently by the Upper Tribunal in the cases
    of AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC).



 5. Ms Bassi confirmed that the respondent accepted that the appeal  should
    be remade as allowed.

 6. The concessions made by the Secretary of State at the hearing  were  in
    line with the preliminary view that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  reached
    independently on the papers and therefore for the same reasons we  find
    a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, set
    it aside and remake the appeal as allowed.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 4 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
