
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02550/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2017                            |On 20 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     KRS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Morgan of McGarvey Immigration and Asylum
Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who comes from Singar  (Shingal)  in
    Mosul Province which is one of the  "contested  areas"  of  Iraq.   The
    appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.

 3. The appellant and his family left his village in August 2014 after ISIS
    attacked the village.  His father was captured and his wife,  children,
    step-mother and brother went to a  camp  in  Dehok  in  the  IKR.   The
    appellant went to Syria and from there to Turkey.  He then travelled by
    lorry to the UK which he entered illegally on 5 August 2015.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum.  On 26 October  2015,  the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  the  appellant's  claims   for   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and under the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Burnett.  The judge accepted that the  appellant  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in his home area  (namely  Shingal  in
    the Mosul Province) based upon his religious  beliefs  and  because  of
    imputed political opinion as he did not support ISIS.   However,  Judge
    Burnett found that the appellant could safely and reasonably internally
    relocate to Baghdad or, alternatively, to the IKR.   As  a  result,  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  He also  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds on the  basis
    that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  Art  15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on  a  number  of  grounds
    including that the judge failed  properly  to  consider  the  issue  of
    internal relocation in the light of the country guidance in AA (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and the expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Fatah.

 7. On 12 September 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B Grant) granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 6 October 2016, the Secretary of State served  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

 9. Before me, Ms Morgan, who represented the  appellant  relied  upon  the
    grounds of appeal in her oral  submissions.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge, in reaching his adverse finding on internal  relocation,  failed
    properly to consider the relevant factors set out in [15]  of  AA.   In
    particular, she relied upon the appellant's ethnicity, that he  had  no
    family or friends in Baghdad and was a Kurd of the Sunni faith and that
    Dr Fatah's evidence was that the only Kurdish community in Baghdad  was
    of the Shi'a faith.  Ms Morgan pointed out that the judge (at para  52)
    had wrongly understood the appellant to be asking the judge  to  depart
    from AA when, in fact, he  was  relying  on  it.   Further,  Ms  Morgan
    submitted that the judge failed to take into account  the  practicality
    of the appellant reaching the IKR from Baghdad to  which  he  would  be
    returned.  Again, she relied upon the expert evidence of Dr Fatah  that
    the appellant's laissez-passer would  be  taken  from  him  at  Baghdad
    Airport and he could not, therefore, fly to Erbil and  travel  by  road
    was not practical as it was through a "contested area".

10. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State accepted  that  the
    judge's conclusion in relation to  internal  relocation  could  not  be
    defended.  He indicated that, as the Presenting  Officer  before  Judge
    Burnett, he had focused on internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  but,  he
    accepted, in para 54  of  his  determination  Judge  Burnett  had  only
    briefly considered relocation to  the  IKR.   He  accepted  that  Judge
    Burnett had not reasoned how the appellant was to reach  the  IKR  from
    Baghdad.  In respect of internal relocation  in  Baghdad,  Mr  Richards
    accepted that the judge had been wrong to conclude that  the  appellant
    was seeking to depart from AA.  Rather, he accepted that the  appellant
    was asking the judge to conduct a  fact-sensitive  enquiry  as  to  the
    circumstances as set out in [15] of AA.  Mr Richards accepted that  the
    judge's decision in relation to internal relocation could not stand.

11. In my judgment, Mr Richards' concession was properly made.  The judge's
    brief reasoning in  para  54  of  his  determination,  leading  him  to
    conclude that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate  to
    the IKR, fails to take into account the practicalities of the appellant
    reaching the IKR from Baghdad, to which he will be returned.   Further,
    the judge failed properly to consider the factors set out in [15] of AA
    in relation to the appellant's relocation to Baghdad for the reasons Ms
    Morgan submitted.

12. Consequently, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  adverse  finding  in
    respect of internal relocation is flawed and cannot stand.

Decision and Disposal

13. The judge's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

14. The appeal will be re-listed in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    decision.  The judge's finding that the appellant has established  that
    he would be at risk of persecution in his home area  for  a  Convention
    reason shall stand.  The issue for the Upper Tribunal to decide will be
    whether the appellant can internally relocate within Iraq.

15. The judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds is not challenged and shall also stand.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

