
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02202/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 30 July 2019                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                  isak [z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Collins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

 1. Although the grant of permission by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson made on 7 June 2019 states that the point with which I shall
    now deal was a point that the judge was entitled to make,  she  granted
    permission to appeal and she did not expressly refuse permission on any
    of the grounds.  In those circumstances I consider that it is  open  to
    me to consider the matter.  In any event since the matter goes  to  the
    core of the procedural fairness of the hearing it is matter on which  I
    consider the Upper Tribunal should re-open of its own motion.

 2. It arises in this way and is recorded by the judge in paragraph  13  of
    his determination which reads:

         "I therefore asked if [the appellant] would be willing to have  his
         mobile telephone examined by the Tribunal. As this issue  had  only
         just arisen I gave the appellant  permission  to  confer  with  his
         Counsel to consider whether he was  prepared  to  show  his  phone.
         After a short adjournment the appellant then handed  his  phone  to
         myself.  I then checked the phone and after the substantial list of
         contacts I was able to find that there  were  approximately  twelve
         Albanian contacts with the Albanian  international  dialling  code.
         In respect of one of those persons the  appellant  then  said  that
         that person lived in England but still used his Albanian phone.  In
         respect of the others he said that these were numbers that  he  had
         with him prior to coming to the UK and kept  them  -  for  whatever
         reason - but had had no contact.  I then checked the phone  to  see
         the list of recent calls and discovered that any recent  calls  (if
         there had been any) had been deleted.  In  other  words  there  was
         nothing on the telephone logged to indicate who he had been  making
         contact with."

 3. I want to emphasise the judge's words '...if there had been any'.   The
    judge returns to the subject in the last sentence of  paragraph  28  of
    his determination by finding that the appellant had clearly deleted his
    recent telephone calls.  This was corroborative  evidence  of  his  not
    telling the truth.

 4. In doing so, the judge fell into error in  that  he  stepped  into  the
    arena and began conducting  an  investigation  of  his  own  about  the
    relevance of the telephone evidence.  That is not  the  function  of  a
    judge.  He should listen to the evidence and make such findings  as  he
    feels able on that evidence but he should not embark on a quest of  his
    own to find more evidence.

 5. I do not consider that the  consent  that  was  obviously  provided  by
    Counsel was sufficient to justify what was otherwise an improper course
    to adopt.  The problem with asking Counsel to consent to  this  process
    is that if there had been a refusal by Counsel, there was  obviously  a
    risk that the judge would make adverse inferences as the result of  the
    failure to provide consent.  That  put  Counsel  in  an  invidious  and
    unsatisfactory position.  It is understandable therefore why he felt it
    necessary to provide his consent.

 6. Secondly, the judge failed to draw the distinction that he had made  in
    the earlier part of his determination in paragraph 13.  The  fact  that
    there were no recent calls might have been because there had been  none
    or, alternatively,  that  they  had  been  deleted.  In  paragraph  28,
    however, he comes to the conclusion that there had been an  attempt  by
    the appellant to delete  his  recent  telephone  calls  without  giving
    reasons.  The judge expressly stated that this supported his view of an
    adverse credibility finding.

 7. As a result, I am satisfied that there was an error of law on the  part
    of the judge.  He should not have entered into the arena as he did  and
    carry out an investigation of his own.  There are real reasons why this
    is unfortunate.

 8. First, it may be that the evidence which  is  provided  by  the  mobile
    telephone might be refuted by additional evidence.   Neither  side  had
    notice as to how the judge  might  deal  with  this  further  evidence.
    There may have been an explanation or counter-explanation.  It does not
    seem to me it is appropriate to have this new evidence created,  as  it
    were, on the spot.  Second, the evidence might have  been  misconstrued
    and the wrong inferences drawn.

 9. There may be occasions when information obtained on  the  telephone  is
    offered by an appellant but that  is  very  different  from  the  judge
    asking, perhaps in  effect  requiring,  the  appellant  to  reveal  his
    telephone contact.  In those circumstances I consider that there was  a
    procedural impropriety.

10. I put this suggestion to Mr Tufan, the Senior  Presenting  Officer  who
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  and  he  accepted  that
    there appears to have been a procedural irregularity. I set  aside  the
    determination for this reason alone.  The findings will have to be made
    afresh.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  direct
that the decision is re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                 8 July 2019


