
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02888/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2017                |On 23rd January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    [U K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A B Faryl of Counsel, instructed by Buckingham
                    Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who claims to have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in June 2012 upon a student visa.   When  his  visa  was
    subsequently curtailed he claimed asylum on 15th July 2015.  That claim
    was refused by the respondent in a decision of 12th November 2015.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley on 1st March 2017.  In  a
    determination dated 30th March 2017 the appeal  was  dismissed  in  all
    respects.

3.   Challenge is made to the decision on a number of  grounds.   Leave  was
    granted to the Upper Tribunal.

4.   Thus it is that the matter comes before  me  to  determine  the  issues
    upon which leave was granted.

5.   It is the claim of the appellant that he  is  homosexual  and  on  that
    account he cannot safely return to Pakistan.

6.   The starting point for the events in Pakistan is that when  he  was  14
    he formed a sexual relationship with [AR].  There came a time  in  2011
    when he and [AR] were discovered by  his  parents  involved  in  sexual
    activities.  The police were contacted and the appellant was taken into
    custody and ill-treated before being released.   Fearing  for  his  own
    family members the appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student.

7.   It is the case of the appellant that [AR]'s  family  were  influential.
    The obvious question, which seemingly was never answered, was why  such
    a family would have chosen to involve the police in  the  matter  which
    would have got their son in trouble as well as  the  appellant,  rather
    the case proceeded  from  a  lack  of  evidence  and  the  inconsistent
    accounts as given by the appellant.

8.   In the screening interview it  is  said  that  the  appellant  gave  an
    incorrect name for his friend [AR], describing him as [AA].  It is said
    that the  Judge  placed  undue  weight  upon  that  matter,  given  the
    explanation that was offered by the appellant that the interpreter  had
    misunderstood what he had said.  That  explanation  was  noted  by  the
    Judge at paragraph 40 of the determination but it was  noted  that  the
    appellant when questioned  in  July  2015  he  had  excellent  English.
    Indeed, the screening interview  had  been  confirmed  as  a  true  and
    accurate account.

9.   That matter, however, does not stand on its own and the Judge  found  a
    number of matters which gave rise to concern, particularly his  failure
    to claim asylum upon arrival in the United Kingdom.  The Judge did  not
    find it credible that the appellant would  have  been  unaware  of  the
    process of such a claim, being with other students.

10.   In  his  screening  interview  he  indicated  that  he  had  had   one
    relationship in the United Kingdom with a [SM] although that person was
    not more clearly identified nor did he  attend  the  hearing.   In  the
    asylum interview he said that he had been in relationships but was  not
    in one currently.  Further in interview he said he had  met  [SM]  some
    six months previously to the interview.

11.  Thereafter the appellant also indicated that shortly  after  coming  to
    the United Kingdom he had had a relationship with [GS], who was a  Sikh
    that he met in Leeds.

12.  Further detail was provided at the hearing as recorded in paragraph  32
    of the determination that he had met [SM] in March or  April  2015  and
    met his  current  partner,  [MS],  in  February  2016.   That  witness,
    together with one [ST], attended the hearing and gave evidence.

13.  The Judge noted that the appellant had been inconsistent regarding  the
    relationships which he claimed that he had had in the  United  Kingdom,
    inconsistencies which the Judge considered to  be  significant  in  the
    context of the case.

14.  Complaint is  made,  and  indeed  is  one  of  the  grounds  for  which
    permission was granted, that the Judge in the  determination  makes  no
    findings as to the credibility of either of the two witnesses that were
    called.  In the normal  course  of  events  that  would  clearly  be  a
    significant omission but they had  essentially  adopted  their  witness
    statements, neither of which really says anything about having a sexual
    relationship with the appellant, which in the circumstances is somewhat
    curious.  The witness statement of [MS] is to be found at pages  11  to
    13 of the more recent bundle that was served.  He is British and a Sikh
    and  lives  in  Manchester.  He  states  that  he  is  currently  in  a
    relationship with the appellant, having met in February 2016.  Although
    there is an implication in the wording of the statement that that is  a
    sexual relationship it is not specifically stated as such.  The witness
    statement of [ST] was at pages 15 to 16 of the bundle.   He  has  known
    the appellant since April 2015 when he  met  him  in  Manchester.   His
    statement is silent on whether or not there is any sexual  relationship
    at all. As to [MS], the appellant does not live with him. He  lives  in
    Manchester on his own and [MS], it would seem, pays his  rent  and  his
    food.

15.  It is perhaps somewhat  odd  that  the  witnesses,  who  have  come  to
    support the appellant in his claim that he was a homosexual,  give very
    little detail as to their relationships with him, particularly in  that
    capacity.  Taken at its highest, their evidence does  not  particularly
    assist the appellant.

16.  Two further matters of evidence  were  raised  in  the  course  of  the
    hearing, the first being notes of an Immigration Officer  arising  from
    when the appellant was detained on 4th July 2015, working  in  a  shop,
    where he claimed that he was visiting his cousin.   The  notes  of  the
    interview indicate that the appellant said he was a single male with no
    romantic partner and no close ties otherwise  and  no  medical  issues.
    The appellant stated that he had a girlfriend, then  modified  that  to
    his friend, who is a girl, [R], but she does not  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant was worried that  the  immigration  authorities
    would contact his father as he had told him that  he  had  been  issued
    with another student visa.

17.  Complaint is made that this was evidence produced at a  late  stage  in
    the proceedings and was not a verbatim record of the conversation.   Be
    that as it may, no application for an adjournment was made as  to  that
    material and it is significant, as indeed Mr McVeety points  out,  that
    there has been no overt  challenge  to  the  correctness  of  what  was
    recorded.  If it is correct, the answers would tend  to  indicate  that
    the appellant was not homosexual nor in a relationship either with [ST]
    or [MS].

18.  Another curious document which has been presented in the course of  the
    hearing is described as "an order sheet".  This is a document which the
    respondent  accepts  as  a  genuine  document.   Potentially   it   had
    significance in favour of the  appellant's  case  as  it  was  said  to
    support the fact that a false kidnapping claim  was  made  against  the
    appellant's family by the family of [AR].  The FIR to which  the  order
    relates is not in the possession of either party.  A copy of the order,
    together with the verification of that order, is within the papers.  It
    would seem, however, an allegation of abduction of a young woman, whose
    proceedings are being withdrawn upon the request  of  the  young  woman
    concerned.  Whether  that  young  woman  is  the  woman  named  by  the
    appellant to the immigration authorities is not entirely clear  but  it
    is certainly not an allegation of homosexuality and is  not  supportive
    of the appellant's case in that regard.  There  is  a  marked  lack  of
    detail given, both by the appellant and anyone else acting for him,  as
    to the nature of the allegation that was the subject of the  FIR.   The
    Judge had considered all the evidence. It was noted that the  appellant
    had indicated at one stage that he lived openly as a homosexual in  the
    United Kingdom and at another that he did  not  because  he  wanted  to
    conceal his identity.  That was an inconsistency casting further doubts
    as to the reliability of the appellant's claim of events.

19.  In terms of the events in Pakistan and the claimed  torture  the  Judge
    was careful to consider the evidence of Dr Jabbar.

20.  Looking at the matter overall, the  Judge's  conclusion  was  that  the
    appellant had not established that he was a homosexual  as  he  claimed
    nor that there was any substance to the claim which he advanced.

21.  Thus as to the issue of the name  of  the   partner  being  incorrectly
    recorded in the screening interview, it seems to me that the Judge  has
    borne in mind the explanation that had been offered and was entitled in
    all the circumstances to reject it.  As to the CID notes  not  being  a
    verbatim record, it is  significant,  as  I  have  indicated,  that  no
    specific challenge to their content and the accuracy thereof  has  been
    made but merely as to the format of those notes.   The lack of findings
    as to the two witnesses would, as I have said, have been a  potentially
    serious matter had they given any material  evidence  that  would  have
    advanced the case of the appellant but I do not find that they did.

22.  Looking at  the  matter  overall,  I  find  that  the  Judge,  properly
    considering the case as a whole, and came to a sustainable conclusion.

23.  In the circumstances therefore the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall be upheld, namely that the claim for asylum is dismissed; that in
    relation to humanitarian protection is dismissed as is  the  appeal  in
    respect of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECH Convention.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed in respect of all aspects

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            [pic]                      Date 19 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD









