
 [pic]


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02033/2016





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2017                             |On 6th July 2017              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                  MR.N.H.S.

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Greer, Counsel, instructed by Arshed and Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVettey, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction.

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born in April 1979. He came to
      the United Kingdom in 2004 on a student Visa valid until September
      2005. Application for further leave to remain in 2005 was refused and
      he then overstayed. In September 2015 he made a claim to protection.


   2. The basis of the claim was that he is gay and faces persecution on
      return. He said he did not currently have a partner in the United
      Kingdom but had been in two long-term same-sex relationships here. He
      was in a relationship when he was 15 in Pakistan. In 2005 his family
      wanted him to marry someone in the United Kingdom and because he
      refused and shamed the family they threatened him. In support of his
      claim he had produced documents including extracts from various
      websites; text messages and a letter of support.


   3. His claim was refused on 18 February 2016. The respondent did not
      accept that he was gay. Reliance was placed upon section 8 of the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.His delay in
      claiming was highlighted. Furthermore, he only made his claim after
      being notified he was not being granted leave. When he applied in
      September 2005 for leave he claimed to be working. When the respondent
      contacted his named employer they advised they were unaware of him.
      Consequently he had engaged in deception.

The First tier Tribunal

   4. His appeal was heard before First tier Judge Lloyd. The parties were
      represented. The appellant told the judge he was from a high caste
      associated with Islam. His family finances studies in the United
      Kingdom and he completed an MBA in July 2005. He then began a gay
      relationship here. He claimed his brother phoned him in 2005 and told
      him he was to marry someone of the same cast. He met the person but
      the relationship did not develop. He said he told his brother he was
      gay. After this his family had no more contact with him until the
      summer of 2015 when they again began putting pressure on him to marry.
      At that time he was in his second gay relationship having moved to
      Manchester. In the interval he claimed had been living of savings and
      was supported by friends. He provided evidence of his involvement with
      gay groups in Manchester.


   5.  In support of his claim to be gay he called as a witness Mr J who
      said he was driving through the gay village in Manchester when he saw
      the appellant and another man holding hands. When he asked the
      appellant about this he told him he was gay. Mr J subsequently met the
      appellant and his partner.

   6. The judge did not find the appellant's claim to be credible. The judge
      did not find it believable that he would be permitted to come to the
      United Kingdom if his family had found him, at the age of 15, in a
      same-sex relationship. Furthermore, his evidence had been that his
      brother continued to financially support him. He also mentioned in his
      asylum interview that he had intended returning to Pakistan when his
      studies concluded.

   7. The appellant had claimed to be a same-sex relationship for 10 years
      in the United Kingdom. However the judge commented that he had only
      provided three photographs which did not persuade the judge they
      indicated a sexual relationship. Regarding the witness, Mr J, the
      judge found his account lacking in credibility. He concluded it was an
      attempt to bolster his friend's asylum claim. The judge went on to
      make comments about the different pieces of evidence produced. This
      included a letter from Mr N who it was said was not available because
      he was in Pakistan. He claimed to have been working as a taxi driver
      and said he had driven the appellant to the gay village on a regular
      basis since 2011. The judge commented on his absence and placed
      limited weight on his evidence because it could not be further tested.




The Upper Tribunal

   8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge failed to properly assess the evidence.


   9. The respondent opposes the appeal and provided a rule 24 response. It
      was contended that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with the
      judge's findings and adequate reasons had been given for reflecting
      the claim. By way of example reference is made to his claim of being
      beaten by his family yet they supported his studies in the United
      Kingdom.

  10. At hearing Mr Greer made submissions on the way the judge dealt with
      the evidence presented. In response, the presenting others are
      contended that the matter of credibility was one for the judge to
      decide. There was nothing to suggest the judge had applied too high
      standard of proof .The reference at paragraph 73 to the judge `not
      being persuaded' had to be read in the context of the decision as a
      whole. The presenting officer pointed out that the evidence produced
      of the appellant's activities in the United Kingdom postdated the
      negative decision of the respondent. It was submitted that if he had
      been in a long-term relationship as claimed there should have been
      more evidence to demonstrate this. The judge had considered all of the
      evidence and had made appropriate findings.

  11. It is my conclusion that no material error of law has been
      demonstrated. As the respondent contends I find the points made out
      amount merely to disagreement with the judge's findings. It was a
      matter for the judge to decide what weight to attach to the evidence
      presented. The judge considered the evidence and gave sustainable
      reasons for the conclusions reached.


Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First tier
Judge Lloyd. Consequently, that decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal
on all grounds shall stand.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

6th July 2017





