
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02720/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At: Manchester Piccadilly             |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 03 April 2018                     |On: 01 May 2018                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     PG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Evans, Waddell Taylor Bryan Sols
For the Respondent:       Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1971.  She  appeals  with
    permission against the 15th August  2017  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Herwald) to dismiss her protection appeal.


    Anonymity Order


 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Findings


 3. The crux of the onward appeal  is  that  a  procedural  unfairness  has
    arisen, in the Appellant's appeal being determined  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the absence of the Appellant or a representative.  When the
    matter came before Judge Herwald he could see that  the  Appellant  had
    previously been represented by GMIAU, but they had  withdrawn;  without
    any explanation for the Appellant's absence he could not  be  satisfied
    that she would attend at a later date and decided to proceed  with  the
    hearing. He did so and dismissed the appeal.


 4. What Judge Herwald could not have known was that at the dates that  the
    notices of hearing were sent to the Appellant, the 6th April  2018  and
    the 13th April 2017, she was in the grip of a psychosis, and  therefore
    unable to comprehend their contents.  On the 27th April  2017  she  was
    detained under section 2, and then 3, of the  Mental  Health  Act.  She
    remained in hospital until the 20th July 2017.   At  the  time  of  her
    admission she was noted  by  clinicians  to  be  'catatonic'.  She  was
    diagnosed with severe depression with psychotic features; she  has  now
    been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.   In a letter dated  21st
    August 2017 from Pennine  Care  NHS  Trust  Mr  Gary  Atherton  of  the
    Secondary  Care  Assessment  Team  states  that  in  the  view  of  the
    Appellant's team the Appellant would, at the operative time,  "been  in
    no fit state to respond to or even understand the nature of the letters
    sent to her".


 5. In the circumstances Mr Bates had no  objection  to  the  matter  being
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.   Nor  did  he
    have any objection to the listing being shortly delayed to  enable  the
    Appellant's representatives to obtain a detailed psychiatric report.


    Decisions


 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.


 7. The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  by  any  Judge
    other than Judge Herwald.


 8. The matter is not to be listed before the 4th June 2018.


 9. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                3rd April 2018


