
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02078/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2019                        |On 10 September 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                               tung son Nguyen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  He appealed to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  13
    December  2018  refusing  his  claim  for   asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been a member of  a  Vietnamese  national
    karate team.  He had gone to France to take part in a sporting event in
    November 2012.  He said that while  there  he  was  told  by  the  team
    manager that when he returned to Vietnam he would have  to  work  as  a
    bodyguard for an unnamed high-ranking figure  within  the  regime.   He
    decided to run away and met an agent to whom he gave his passport.  The
    judge noted a discrepancy in his evidence  in  that  in  his  screening
    interview he had said he gave the passport to the agent when  he  first
    arrived in France  as  opposed  to  later  on  after  being  given  the
    information by  the  team  manager.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in January 2013 and the judge noted a further discrepancy  in
    that he said that he was kept against his will in a house and forced to
    cultivate plants without pay, whereas his solicitors in a letter  of  8
    September 2014 said he was cleaning the house.

3.    He  claimed  asylum  on  22  September  2014,  claiming  to  fear  the
    authorities in Vietnam because he had absconded from  the  karate  team
    and refused to work as a bodyguard for  the  regime.   In  addition  he
    feared reprisals from traffickers from whom he said he had  escaped  in
    the United Kingdom, although that claim was, it appears,  abandoned  at
    the hearing as he no longer wished to be  considered  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking.

4.   The judge considered the evidence and accepted that the  appellant  had
    practised karate in the  past  and  might  even  have  represented  his
    country at some level and that in November 2012 he had gone  to  France
    along with other members of a karate team to attend a sporting event.

5.   The judge however did not accept that the appellant was asked to  be  a
    bodyguard nor that his disinclination to take up the  job  led  him  to
    flee to the United Kingdom.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant  was
    only 19 years old at the time, and although he might be good at  karate
    he had no experience of close protection work or weapons  training  and
    in the circumstances considered it not to be credible  that  agents  of
    the Vietnamese state would seek to recruit him in this way in a foreign
    country rather than waiting to approach him after his return.

6.   The judge considered that the reality of the situation  was  that  when
    in France the appellant had decided to take the opportunity to  abscond
    from the team and journey to the UK in pursuit of a  better  life.   He
    did not consider  the  photographs  of  the  appellant  wearing  karate
    outfits that showed he  was  a  prominent  member  of  a  high  profile
    national team.  He noted also that the appellant had never  claimed  to
    hold any prominent position within public life in Vietnam and  had  not
    involved himself in political activity in the United Kingdom.

7.   The judge went on to conclude that even if the appellant  had  attended
    the SEA Games in Malaysia in 2014 (the judge's doubts appear to  result
    from his noting at paragraph 7 that the objective evidence  showed  the
    SEA Games were only held in Malaysia in  2001  and  2017)  he  did  not
    accept that the appellant represented his country at such a high  level
    that his failure to return would embarrass  the  Vietnamese  Government
    and therefore bring him to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities
    simply for absconding from his karate team.  The judge did  not  accept
    that it had been established  that  the  Vietnamese  authorities  would
    thereby view him as a political enemy or impute to  him  any  political
    opinion deserving of persecution.  He went on to say that even  if  the
    appellant were asked and declined the offer to  work  as  a  bodyguard,
    nonetheless it had been established (I think in the end it  was  common
    ground that the word "not" had been omitted between "has" and "been" in
    line 2 of paragraph 54) that the Vietnamese authorities would  even  in
    those circumstances view him as a political enemy or impute to him  any
    political opinion deserving of persecution.

8.   The judge noted a discrepancy in the appellant's evidence  in  that  in
    cross-examination the appellant said he had spoken to  members  of  his
    karate team in December 2018 and they had told him that the  Vietnamese
    authorities had gone to his home looking for  him,  but  this  was  not
    stated in the witness statement, even  though  written  after  December
    2018.  The judge considered that this was a  recent  embellishment  and
    that it further undermined the appellant's credibility.

9.   The judge then went on to doubt  the  credibility  of  the  trafficking
    claim and concluded at paragraph 60 of his decision that  in  light  of
    the above inconsistencies he also  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to establish to the lower standard applicable in asylum  appeals
    that he was trafficked into the UK and it was therefore damaging to his
    credibility that he did not claim asylum sooner after arriving and  did
    not claim asylum in France at all.  The appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had  attributed  undue
    importance to  factors  extraneous  to  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account, noting the abandonment by the  appellant  of  the  trafficking
    issue and considering it to be arguable that the judge  had  attributed
    too much importance to the question of the level of the  representation
    of the appellant in relation to his country.

11.  In her submissions Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli relied on the grounds  and  what
    was said in the grant of permission.

12.  In the decision  letter  the  respondent  had  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had taken part in the competition as claimed and, she argued,
    there was no mention of the alternative of what  would  happen  to  the
    appellant if he had  taken  part  and  what  he  would  face  from  the
    authorities in Vietnam.

13.  The judge had erred, it was argued, in that it had not been  agents  of
    the Vietnamese state who had sought to recruit the appellant in  France
    but the team manager who had put this to him as good news.  It was also
    to be noted that the appellant had said he had previously worked  as  a
    security officer and that he was going to be trained rather than acting
    as a bodyguard immediately and that would be a  good  option  with  his
    karate background.  He had asked if he would be able to refuse the  job
    and was told that he could not and therefore he had decided to abscond.



14.  He was one of the fifteen chosen to represent Vietnam in France so  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 52 that he was not a  prominent  member
    of a high profile national team was not borne out by the evidence.   He
    was known and identified by the authorities.  He never  claimed  to  be
    politically involved.  There would be embarrassment to Vietnam, and his
    level of achievement was irrelevant but it was the  fact  that  he  had
    taken part and the authorities would be aware that he had absconded and
    this would cause embarrassment and he would be identified on return  to
    Vietnam.  His representation of Vietnam at  three  international  games
    would have been known to the authorities.  The judge had referred to no
    objective evidence concerning risk on return.  Nor had the Secretary of
    State in her conclusions.  In the absence of this the  Tribunal  should
    accept that any sportsman who did not  return  to  a  country  such  as
    Vietnam would be identified and persecuted on return on  the  basis  of
    imputed political opinion.

15.  Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli accepted that the word "not" was  probably  missing
    from paragraph 54, as noted above, but it had to be read with the other
    paragraphs in the absence of objective evidence to support the  judge's
    conclusions.  The judge was also confused in referring  to  trafficking
    since that claim had been abandoned.  It was accepted  that  the  other
    points on credibility had been considered, for example at paragraph  57
    in the contrast in the evidence as  to  when  he  gave  the  agent  the
    passport, he might have given the passport to the agent who brought the
    team to France and he had not been asked to clarify those issues and it
    was necessary when the questions were asked to be  aware  of  omissions
    and misunderstandings.  A witness could not be expected to  be  precise
    in answering every question.  He had not  been  asked  to  clarify  the
    inconsistencies and the decision was perverse and unlawful.

16.  In his submissions Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24  response  that  had
    been put in.  He argued that the claim was one of simply rearguing what
    had been argued before the judge.  The first point argued  was  not  in
    the grounds and should be rejected and the main  contention  seemed  to
    relate to a lack of objective evidence  put  in  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, but it was for the appellant to provide evidence of  risk  to  a
    person in the appellant's position if his claim were true  and  he  had
    absconded overseas and that no such evidence had been put in.   In  its
    absence the judge had been entitled to  find  as  he  did  and  it  was
    concluded there was no imputed political opinion.  Up to  the  time  of
    the hearing the trafficking point had been a live issue and  the  judge
    was entitled to consider that evidence, even if it was withdrawn at the
    final hour.  There was no unlawfulness in the decision.

17.  In her response Ms Bassiri-Dezfouli emphasised that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not taken issue with the question of risk  if  the  appellant
    were a sportsman as he claimed and in the absence of taking issue  with
    that the appellant did not have to prove he would be persecuted if sent
    back to Vietnam.  He had shown  he  was  a  sportsman.   There  was  no
    reference to what objective evidence had not  been  before  the  judge.
    The appellant would be known as  an  absconder  on  return  and  as  an
    embarrassment to his country.  It was a  matter  of  common  sense  and
    judicial notice that such a country would persecute him.
18.  I reserved my decision.

19.  The main  difficulty  in  the  appellant's  claim  is  the  absence  of
    background evidence to support his contention that even  if  his  claim
    were taken at its highest, he would be at risk on  return  to  Vietnam.
    It is not a matter in respect of which judicial notice can be  employed
    or some common sense approach adopted in order to conclude that Vietnam
    is a country which, without evidence to establish this, would routinely
    persecute a person who, having been on a visit abroad to represent  his
    country at a sporting competition, decided to abscond.  It is possible,
    of course, that the Vietnamese authorities would take such a view.  But
    the onus is on the appellant  to  make  out  his  claim  and  that  was
    signally not done in this case.  The onus was not on the  Secretary  of
    State, having decided not to accept his claim to  be  an  international
    athlete, to find background evidence that would show that he would  not
    be at risk on return.  That would be entirely to  reverse  the  correct
    burden of proof in a case such as this.  Even  then  if  the  case  was
    taken at its highest, which in effect it was done at  paragraph  54  by
    the judge, it was fully open to him to conclude as he did that  it  had
    not been established that the Vietnamese authorities would even  if  he
    had been a representative of his country in karate and even if  he  had
    been asked and declined the offer of work to work as a bodyguard,  view
    him as a political  enemy  or  impute  to  him  any  political  opinion
    deserving of persecution.  There were in any  event  the  discrepancies
    noted at paragraphs 55 and 57 of the judge's decision which  undermined
    his credibility.  The judge was careful,  though  he  did  address  the
    trafficking issue which had been abandoned at the hearing, to  make  it
    clear at paragraph 60 that he  also  concluded  the  trafficking  claim
    could not succeed, but it is clear from his judgment that he was not in
    any sense incorporating the adverse findings on the  trafficking  point
    into the adverse credibility findings overall.   But  even  if  he  had
    done, there would be no error of law in this case since  the  essential
    point, that of risk on return on the basis of the claim  taken  at  its
    highest had not been  made  out.   Accordingly,  the  judge's  decision
    dismissing this appeal is maintained.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 03 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

