


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02189/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2017                          |On 15 November 2017            |



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Alban, Fountain Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I refer to the Appellant in this case as the Secretary of  State  and  to
   the Respondent as the Claimant. The Claimant is a citizen of  Iraq.   His
   protection claim was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  15  February
   2017 and his appeal against  this  decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge B Lloyd in  a  decision  promulgated  on  31  March  2017.
   Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  that  decision  was
   granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler in a decision dated 7  August
   2017. He found that all grounds were arguable.


2. The Secretary of State relies on three grounds of appeal. Firstly, it  is
   contended that the Judge's finding at paragraph 26 of  the  determination
   is unsupported. The Judge found "There appears to be no  dispute  between
   the parties that the Appellant's father has indeed been  a  long  serving
   member of the Peshmerga". The Secretary of State argues that this was  in
   direct contrast to page 5 of the decision letter where it was stated  "It
   is considered that you have failed to substantiate  the  aspect  of  your
   claim that your father was a member of the  Peshmerga,  furthermore  this
   aspect of your claim has been vague, lacking in detail  and  inconsistent
   and therefore damages your credibility. The  Secretary  of  State  argues
   that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give clear reasons as  to  why  it
   was accepted that the Claimant's father was a long serving member of  the
   Peshmerga. It is also submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
   Claimant's account contained ambiguity and inconsistency at paragraph  31
   of the determination and the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  give  clear
   reasons as to why it had  been  accepted  that  the  Claimant  had  given
   credible evidence.


3. It is also submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  clear
   reasons why the Claimant could not seek protection from  the  authorities
   from a  non-state  actor  if  required  throughout  Iraq,  excluding  the
   contested areas.

4. It is further argued that in AA (Article 15 (c) (Rev 2) [2015]  UKUT  544
   (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that internal relocation  is  possible  and
   the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons why relocation to
   Baghdad would not be possible  again.  Paragraphs  135  to  137  of  that
   decision are cited and it is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
   gave  no  reasons  for  his  conclusion  why  the  Claimant   could   not
   satisfactorily relocate away from the IKR or even why  relocation  within
   the IKR excluding the contested areas is not possible.

5. At the hearing Mr Richards said that the sentence at paragraph 26 of  the
   decision that  there  was  "no  dispute  between  the  parties  that  the
   Claimant's father had indeed been a long serving member of the Peshmerga"
   was not a concession by Ms Bowden who had represented  the  Secretary  of
   State that there was no dispute between the parties and it was not  clear
   where, if it was asserted that there was a concession, it arose.  It  was
   challenged in the refusal letter that he was a long-serving member of the
   Peshmerga. It was recorded that Ms Bowden put her case in line  with  the
   refusal letter and it was recorded that there was a fundamental  lack  of
   credibility in his account that he feared ill-treatment. It was  recorded
   in paragraph 16 that Ms Bowden had submitted that the whole account was a
   fabrication. It was clear that there was no  concession  that  he  was  a
   member of  the  Peshmerga.  The  Judge  never  really  engaged  with  the
   challenge to the credibility of the Claimant's account. He  did  note  in
   paragraph 31 that he had provided credible evidence but no  reasons  were
   given for the positive findings in the face of the challenge made by  the
   Secretary of State and his own  finding  that  there  was  ambiguity  and
   inconsistency in the Claimant's account. He asked me  to  find  that  the
   inadequacy in the reasoning on the key parts of the evidence amounted  to
   a material error by the First-tier Tribunal. It was not possible for  the
   Secretary of State to know why matters had gone in the Claimant's favour.
   If I agreed then the arguments on internal relocation and sufficiency  of
   protection really were not  entirely  relevant.  His  fear  was  from  an
   individual and not the state and no reasoning was given as to  why,  even
   if the father had influence in the town in which they  lived,  throughout
   Iraq there would not be a sufficiency of protection including within  the
   IKR. Similarly in  terms  of  internal  relocation  the  Judge  found  in
   paragraph 33 that the Claimant would not be able to relocate in  the  IKR
   or another part of the country. There was a lack of reasoning in terms of
   the IKR and in relation to other parts of Iraq.  The  grounds  of  appeal
   made the case for Baghdad with reference to the appropriate case law. The
   Judge considered internal  relocation  at  paragraph  34.  There  was  an
   absence of reasoning and it conflicted with the findings in  the  country
   guidance case of AA. He asked me in all of the circumstances to find that
   there was a material error and that the decision ought to  be  set  aside
   and sent back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


6. Ms Alban relied on the Rule 24 reply and submitted that at  paragraph  16
   of the decision the questioning and submissions amounted to a concession.
   She submitted that it was not material as adequate reasons had been given
   for finding that the account was credible to the lower standard. He was a
   minor. Paragraph 15 gave details of his evidence and the Judge  concluded
   at paragraph 31 that he had presented credible evidence.  The  Judge  was
   entitled to make the finding and had given sufficient details as  to  how
   he reached the findings. At paragraph 30 he explained his evidence and at
   paragraph 31 the Judge accepted that he had given a detailed history  and
   that  was  the  key  issue  that  had  been  addressed.  With  regard  to
   sufficiency of protection, his father had connections within  the  states
   and reasons had been given for why he could not seek protection. He noted
   Ms Franchina's submissions and the Claimant's evidence and  was  entitled
   to find at paragraph 33 that he could not  seek  protection  due  to  his
   father's connections. With regard to internal relocation,  relocation  to
   Baghdad it had never been put forward. During the hearing  the  Secretary
   of State accepted that relocation would be to the IKR.  At  paragraph  33
   the Judge considered the Claimant's  youth  and  Sunni  background.  Even
   though it was not raised he considered it and gave reasoned findings.  He
   was entitled to find that he would be safe relocating.  She  referred  to
   her skeleton and R24 for full submissions.


7. I reserved my decision as to the error of law and outcome.


   Discussion


8. It was the Secretary of State's case,  as  set  out  at  page  5  of  the
   decision letter, that the Claimant had failed to substantiate the  aspect
   of his claim that his father was a member of the Peshmerga and that  this
   aspect of his account had been vague, lacking in detail and  inconsistent
   and therefore damaged his credibility. It was  also  concluded  that  his
   claim to have been the victim of domestic  abuse  at  the  hands  of  his
   father was also vague and lacking in detail.


9. The First-tier Tribunal recorded the evidence at paragraphs 11 to  18  of
   the decision. It is recorded  at  paragraph  16  that  the  Secretary  of
   State's submission was that the  whole  account  was  a  fabrication.  At
   paragraph 26 it was noted that the Secretary of State put her  case  very
   much in line with the refusal letter. In the  same  paragraph  the  Judge
   notes "There appears to be  no  dispute  between  the  parties  that  the
   Claimant's  father  has  indeed  been  a  long  serving  member  of   the
   Peshmerga."

10. I find, having considered  the  decision  as  a  whole,  that  there  is
   nothing to indicate that the Secretary of State conceded the point  taken
   in the refusal letter that the Claimant's account that his father  was  a
   long serving member of the Peshmerga was not a credible one.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal does not record that the  point  was  conceded  and  it  is
   clearly recorded that the Secretary of State relied on the refusal letter
   and argued the case on the basis that the whole of the Claimant's account
   was  a  fabrication.  In  the  circumstances  I  find  that   the   Judge
   misapprehended the Secretary of State's case. No reasons were  given  for
   the conclusion at paragraph 31 that:


   "Although there is some ambiguity and inconsistency in the account  which
   the Appellant has given I believe  he  has  presented  credible  evidence
   having regard to the lower standard of proof to which he must  adhere.  I
   believe that he has suffered violence as well as  pressure  to  associate
   himself with his father's activities in the Pesmerga."


11. In view of the fact that the  Secretary  of  State  contended  that  the
   Claimant's account was a fabrication  this  conclusion  was  inadequately
   reasoned.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  findings  in  respect   of
   sufficiency of protection and internal flight also cannot stand.


12. In the light of the fact finding required taking  account  of  Part  7.2
   (a) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of
   the First-tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal I remit the matter to the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
