
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02662/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                                |                              |
|Heard at: Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 26 February 2021                           |On : 11 March 2021            |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     RF
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Singh of Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 1 January 1988, of Kurdish
      ethnicity. He has been given permission to appeal against the decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dismissing his appeal against  the
      respondent's decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   3. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely
      on 12 January 2016. He was encountered by the UK authorities  and  was
      served with illegal entry papers. He claimed asylum the following day.
      His claim was refused  on  7  March  2019.  His  appeal  against  that
      decision was dismissed in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  20  September
      2019, but that decision was set aside and the  case  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal, where the appeal was dismissed once again, on  20
      July 2020.

   4. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was at risk  on  return
      to Iraq as a result of his relationship with C, whom  he  had  met  in
      late 2005 at a market where she was with her mother and cousin. He had
      signalled to her and managed to give her  his  telephone  number  and,
      whilst her family was very strict and escorted  her  everywhere,  they
      managed to meet secretly about 15 to 20 times from December  2005.  He
      made several marriage proposals to her family which were  all  refused
      because he was Sunni Muslim and she was Shia. Their  relationship  was
      discovered in 2006 when she became pregnant and C's brothers  ambushed
      and kidnapped him, took him  to  an  unknown  location  and  held  him
      captive and tortured him. They then dumped him and left him for  dead.
      He received emergency medical treatment and remained in hospital for a
      number of months. He was informed  by  his  mother  that  C  had  been
      murdered by her brothers. His father reported the torture to  Asayish,
      the Kurdish security  forces,  and  C's  brothers  were  arrested  and
      charged with torturing him. One of the brothers, A, was  sentenced  to
      12 years in prison, but was released  after  9  years.  The  appellant
      claimed that in 2015 A attacked him in Kirkuk and shot him in the  leg
      and he saw him again in Sulaymaniyah although A did not  see  him.  He
      fled Iraq as he was in fear of C's brothers and he believed that  they
      would kill him if he returned. He feared the Kurdish Democratic  Party
      as C's father was a KDP members.

   5. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted discrepancies
      in his evidence and did not accept any of his account,  including  his
      claimed relationship with C. The respondent considered that there  was
      a sufficiency of protection available to the appellant  in  any  event
      and that he could also relocate to another part of  the  KRI.  It  was
      considered that he would be able to obtain a CSID. As for  Article  8,
      the  respondent  considered  that  there  were  no  very   significant
      obstacles to integration for  the  appellant  in  Iraq  and  that  his
      removal from the  UK  would  not  breach  his  human  rights.  It  was
      considered that his claimed medical and mental  health  problems  were
      not such as to meet the threshold for an Article 3 or 8 claim.

   6. The appellant's appeal was  initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Thomas who accepted the appellant's account of his  relationship
      with C and accepted that he was assaulted  by  her  brothers  in  2006
      resulting in the injuries identified in the medical evidence. She also
      accepted that the appellant was shot in 2015 but she  did  not  accept
      that that incident was anything to do with C and her brothers and  did
      not accept that they retained any interest in him or that  he  was  at
      any risk on return to Iraq. She  found  that  the  appellant  had  the
      necessary documentation to return to Iraq and she dismissed the appeal
      on all grounds.

   7. Judge Thomas's decision was, however, set aside by the Upper  Tribunal
      by consent and the case was remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      the decision in the appeal to be re-made from afresh, with no findings
      preserved.

   8. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  20
      July 2020. The appellant gave oral evidence before the judge,  as  did
      his partner. The  judge  had  before  him  two  appeal  bundles  which
      included a medico-legal report from Dr Ritesh Sinha and photographs of
      the appellant's injuries. The judge accepted that there was  an  event
      in 2006  in  which  the  appellant  sustained  injuries  and  received
      treatment, and that the attacker was sent to prison, but  he  did  not
      accept the appellant's  account  of  the  problems  arising  from  his
      relationship with his girlfriend and did not accept  that  the  attack
      was honour-related or that there was any political element.  Likewise,
      whilst it was accepted that the appellant was shot in 2015, the  judge
      did not accept that it was in the circumstances claimed.  It  was  not
      accepted that there was any adverse interest in the appellant  and  it
      was considered by the judge that he could access his CSID  and  return
      to Iraq. He could relocate to another part of the IKR if he considered
      himself to be at risk in his home area. As for his claim to  be  in  a
      relationship with a  British  national  who  was  a  Sikh,  the  judge
      accepted that the relationship was genuine  but  considered  that  the
      relationship did not fall within  the  immigration  rules.  The  judge
      considered that the appellant could access medical treatment  in  Iraq
      and there were no very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  in
      that country, nor compelling  circumstances  outside  the  rules.  The
      judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   9. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on the grounds that the judge had  failed  properly  to  identify  and
      address the material issues, that he had failed to  consider  material
      evidence and had failed to make adequately reasoned findings of  fact,
      that it was not possible  to  understand  why  he  had  dismissed  the
      appeal, that he had made findings on immaterial matters  and  that  he
      had misdirected himself on the evidence.  It  was  asserted  that  the
      judge had failed to intervene when the Presenting Officer was carrying
      out an extensive and aggressive cross-examination and failed to  treat
      the appellant as a vulnerable witness in accordance with the  relevant
      guidance.

  10. Permission was granted on 3 September 2020. On  12  October  2020  the
      respondent produced a rule 24 response defending the judge's  decision
      and opposing the grounds of appeal. The matter then came before me for
      a hearing, by way of skype for business.

Hearing and submissions

  11. Mr Singh relied on the grounds which he submitted were in  two  parts:
      the first relating to the appellant's  vulnerability  and  the  second
      based upon the judge's failure to understand the appellant's case  and
      to take account of all the evidence. With regard to the first part, Mr
      Singh submitted that whilst at [6] the judge referred to AM (Zimbabwe)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17, there was
      nothing in his findings to show that he considered the appellant as  a
      vulnerable witness, yet Judge Thomas had specifically referred in  her
      decision to him being vulnerable and to considering  his  evidence  in
      that context. As for the second, Judge Parkes made errors on the facts
      of the appellant's case, at [13] to [17] and  misdirected  himself  on
      the evidence at [18] to [25], leading to errors of law in his decision
      on those facts and on the evidence.

  12. Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's rule 24  response  and  submitted
      that the judge's decision was sustainable in law. With regard to Judge
      Thomas's treatment of the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  her
      decision had been set aside in its entirety. It was unclear as to what
      submissions, if any, were made before Judge Parkes in  regard  to  the
      appellant being a vulnerable witness. There was nothing  in  the  Home
      Office Presenting Officer's minutes of the hearing to that effect  and
      nothing that reflected an aggressive cross-examination. There  was  no
      witness statement from the appellant's  Counsel  representing  at  the
      First-tier Tribunal hearing to support the  allegation  of  aggressive
      cross-examination and no indication that the judge did anything  other
      than treat the appellant as someone who had been diagnosed  as  having
      PTSD to the extent  stated  at  [10]  of  his  decision.  It  was  not
      incumbent upon the judge to include a paragraph specifically  relating
      to the appellant being a vulnerable witness. As for the second part of
      the appellant's grounds, the judge accepted some  of  the  appellant's
      evidence and gave proper reasons for rejecting his evidence of  events
      in 2015 and 2016 and for finding that he could safely  return  to  the
      IKR.  It  was  clear  that  there  was  a  major  discrepancy  in  the
      appellant's evidence as to what happened to him in 2015/16 and whether
      he was shot in Kirkuk or Suleymaniyah and the judge  was  entitled  to
      reject the appellant's claim on that basis and  for  all  the  reasons
      given.

  13. In response, Mr  Singh  reiterated  the  points  previously  made  and
      requested that the case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
      heard again.

Discussion and conclusions

  14. The first ground of challenge was the judge's  failure  to  treat  the
      appellant as a  vulnerable  witness  and  failure  to  intervene  with
      aggressive cross-examination. It is relevant to note that, in her rule
      24 response at [8] and [9], the respondent, in response to [4] of  the
      appellant's grounds, stated that  no  details  had  been  provided  of
      submissions  made  at   the   hearing   addressing   the   appellant's
      vulnerability or seeking any adjustments for the appellant on  such  a
      basis and that there was no indication of any objection being made  at
      the hearing on the  basis  of  aggressive  cross-examination.  It  was
      therefore made clear to the appellant that  the  allegations  made  in
      this ground  were  challenged  owing  to  a  lack  of  any  supporting
      evidence. Yet, despite the fact that the appellant  had  been  put  on
      notice, nothing further was produced in the four months following  the
      rule 24 response.  Mr  Melvin  accordingly  properly  relied,  in  his
      submissions before me, upon  the  lack  of  information  and  evidence
      supporting the allegations  made  in  the  grounds.  It  is  therefore
      unclear on what basis it is claimed that there was  unduly  aggressive
      cross-examination and to what extent  the  cross-examination  impacted
      upon the appellant's evidence and I note that there is nothing in  the
      judge's decision, the very detailed  record  of  the  hearing  or  any
      statement from or on behalf of the appellant to confirm or support the
      allegation.

  15. With regard to the treatment of the appellant as a vulnerable witness,
      it is indeed the case that there  is  no  specific  paragraph  in  the
      judge's decision explicitly confirming that the  appellant  was  being
      treated as a  vulnerable  witness.  However,  I  do  not  accept  that
      anything material arises from this, given that it is abundantly  clear
      that the judge had full and careful regard  to  the  contents  of  the
      medico-legal report of Dr Ritesh Sinha and the other medical  evidence
      in the appellant's appeal bundle, took full  account  of  the  medical
      opinions and, at [24], considered  the  impact  of  any  psychological
      problems on the appellant's ability to give  evidence  and  to  recall
      events and details.

  16. Further, and although not a point made by  the  judge,  I  note  that,
      whilst a letter of 17 January 2019 from Dr Saini of Soho  Road  Health
      Centre refers to the appellant being under the care of Psychiatry  and
      having counselling, and whilst the letter dated 8  January  2019  from
      Freedom from Torture refers to the appellant having  attended  therapy
      sessions, there was no report from  a  psychiatrist,  psychologist  or
      therapist before the judge. Dr Sinha gave a  medical  opinion  on  the
      appellant's mental health but his report did not indicate that he  was
      a psychiatrist or a mental health specialist. In addition, the  report
      gave conflicting opinions at [104] and [108] on whether  there  was  a
      diagnosis of PTSD, or just symptoms of PTSD. Accordingly,  there  were
      clearly limitations to the evidence before the judge and it  seems  to
      me that there is nothing in that evidence to suggest  that  the  judge
      did not treat the appellant or his evidence with the appropriate  care
      and consideration. I therefore find nothing  of  merit  in  the  first
      ground.

  17. Likewise, I find no merit in the second ground which is essentially  a
      disagreement with the judge's adverse  findings.  The  grounds  assert
      that the judge's decision was unclear and failed properly  to  explain
      the discrepancies identified in the evidence, but  I  agree  with  the
      submission made at [11] of the respondent's rule 24 response that  the
      grounds themselves are  unclear  and  fail  to  identify  the  judge's
      asserted errors of fact. Grounds [10] and [11], typed  in  bold,  make
      assertions that the judge misdirected  himself  on  the  evidence  and
      failed to consider the circumstances of  the  appellant's  ability  to
      access protection during the earlier incident but not the latter  one.
      However, it seems to me that  rather  than  identifying  the  evidence
      which was before the judge and not considered,  the  grounds  in  fact
      seek to expand upon the evidence and re-argue the appellant's case. In
      any event, the judge  plainly  did  have  regard  to  the  appellant's
      evidence  in  that  regard,  at  [18],  and  made  relevant  findings.
      Furthermore, such matters were  in  any  event  immaterial  given  the
      judge's rejection, for reasons  properly  given,  of  the  appellant's
      account of the continuing adverse interest in the  appellant  and  the
      attack on him in 2015.

  18. As  Mr  Melvin  submitted,  there  was  a  major  discrepancy  in  the
      appellant's evidence in relation to the events which he claimed led to
      him leaving Iraq and the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude from
      that discrepancy that the events claimed did not  in  fact  occur  and
      that there had been no further adverse interest in the appellant since
      the earlier incident in 2006. That was the point properly made by  the
      judge at [21] and [22] when considering  the  inconsistencies  in  the
      appellant's evidence at his interview  and  in  his  statements  about
      being pursued by A  and  shot  in  Kirkuk/  Suleymania.  As  Mr  Mevin
      submitted, the evidence at questions 167 to 178 of the interview could
      not be reconciled with the evidence in the appellant's statements  (at
      [9] of the statement of 8 April 2016 and [59] to [62] of the statement
      of 24 April 2019). There  was  no  lack  of  clarity  in  the  judge's
      findings. It is plain  that  he  considered  whether  the  appellant's
      mental health could have impacted upon his recollection of the  events
      and he gave proper reasons for concluding that it did not. The judge's
      rejection of the  appellant's  account  in  that  regard,  when  taken
      together with the other inconsistencies and discrepancies he  properly
      identified from [14] to [17] in particular  at  [15],  was  fully  and
      properly open to him and he was fully entitled to  conclude  that  the
      appellant had failed to give a credible account of being  at  risk  on
      return to Iraq.

  19. Mr Singh did not make submissions  on  the  grounds  relating  to  the
      judge's decision on Article 8 and that did not form part of the  grant
      of permission. In any event the appellant's relationship was a  matter
      properly considered by the judge at [36] to [40] of his  decision  and
      he was fully entitled to reach the conclusions that  he  did  in  that
      regard for the reasons cogently given.

  20. For all of these reasons I find that the grounds disclose no errors of
      law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

  21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

         Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  1 March 2021
