
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02324/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th July 2018                       | On 19th July 2018                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                               mr ali hussain
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain, Solicitor, instructed by Raiyad
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose appeal was dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor in a decision promulgated on 2nd  May
    2018.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged, it being said that  the  judge  had
    stated  he  believed  the  Appellant  had  attended  the  Tribunal  and
    disappeared without telling anyone that he was leaving.  The judge then
    proceeded to make a  decision  based  on  his  understanding  that  the
    Appellant was at the  hearing  centre  and  that  neither  he  nor  his
    solicitors had given any explanation for his leaving.  This was  simply
    untrue and was due to a mistake.  The Appellant was too ill  to  attend
    the hearing.  A fax had been sent explaining the position.  Indeed, the
    Appellant had attended at the solicitors' office  in  the  morning  and
    stated he was too ill to attend the Tribunal and he was sent to  a  GP.
    The  Grounds  surmise  that  some  other  Appellant  with  the  surname
    "Hussain" must have been mistakenly marked as present on the court list
    for the Appellant.  This would explain  why  even  after  an  extensive
    search the Appellant was not found  to  be  present  at  the  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was  requested  and  duly  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer.  Thus, the matter came before me  on  the  above
    date.

 3. Mr Hussain asked that the decision be set aside based on what was  said
    in the Grounds.  It was unfortunate that the judge had come to the view
    that the Appellant had been present at the Tribunal when plainly he had
    not been.

 4. For the Home Office it was said there was no objection to the  decision
    being set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

 5. Unfortunately, through no fault of the judge, there seems to have  been
    a mix-up in this case.  The judge noted at paragraph 40 of his decision
    that the Appellant was present at the hearing centre but  left  without
    explanation which was damaging to his credibility.  In fact, it appears
    that the Appellant never did attend at the Tribunal and was too ill  to
    attend and this was not disputed by the Home Office.

 6. It is therefore plain enough that the Appellant  has  not  had  a  fair
    hearing.  The judge assumed he was present at the hearing when  he  was
    not and therefore the credibility findings are unsafe.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  because
    there is an error in law,  namely  that  the  judge  assumed  that  the
    Appellant had declined to attend the hearing, although he had  attended
    the hearing centre and  founded  very  much  on  that  failure  by  the
    Appellant.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and under  Practice  Statement  7.2
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. No anonymity order is made.


Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date 18th July 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
