
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02403/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2016                       |On 21 October 2016            |
|                                         |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 AHMED RAZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     absent
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Adio promulgated on  22  August  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant was born  on  11  January  1983  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.

4.   On 27 February 2016 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Adio ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 13 September 2016  Judge  Frankish
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.  The application for permission to appeal  asserts  an  adjournment
    should have been granted on the basis of a written request  accompanied
    by a doctor's report submitted the day before.

    3.   The appellant's absence as remarked upon  at  [7]  with  no  other
    comment than the fact that he had been duly served. It is  not  obvious
    from the file that the adjournment application  with  medical  evidence
    was there to be seen by the F-tTJ. Indeed, with the hearing being on 10
    August 2016, the application bears the same date (not the  date  before
    as claimed) while the facsimile  transmission  verification  report  is
    timed and dated at 10:12 on 27.01.2006 (sic). Nevertheless, the medical
    report  confirms  occurrence  of  chest  and  upper   abdominal   pains
    accompanied  by  vomiting  for  which  a   medical   consultation   was
    necessitated between 1.27 and 1.51am on the day  of  the  hearing  with
    treatment prescribed as a result. Arguably, to have  proceeded  in  the
    appellant's absence was to  have  proceeded  on  a  material  erroneous
    assessment of the facts."

The Hearing

7.   The appellant was neither present nor represented. On the  day  of  the
appeal hearing the appellant faxed a document headed "statement of Mr  Ahmed
Raza" to the Upper Tribunal in which he asked that  this  appeal  should  be
considered on the papers only.

8.   Mr Bramble, for the respondent,  opposed  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
confirmed that he  understood  the  appellant's  position  to  be  that  the
appellant had been unwell and so unable to attend  the  hearing  before  the
First-tier on 10 August 2016, but expressed concern that the  appellant  may
be dishonest. He  told  me  that  the  respondent's  position  is  that  the
appellant did not  request  an  adjournment,  &  that  the  documents  which
accompany the application for permission to appeal  were  produced  for  the
first time when the application for permission to appeal was  submitted.  He
urged me to take account of the appellant's immigration history (set out  at
[2] of the decision promulgated on 22nd of August 2016. He told me that  the
appellant had had a fair hearing, and urged me to  dismiss  the  appeal  and
allow the decision of Judge Adio to stand.

Analysis

9.   The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to  adjourn
a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives under the  Rules  which
the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any  power  under
the Rules. The overriding objective is deal with cases  fairly  and  justly.
This is defined as including

    (a) dealing with the case  in  ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
    importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,  the  anticipated
    costs and the resources  of  the  parties  and  of  the  Tribunal;  (b)
    avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking   flexibility   in   the
    proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties
    are able to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
    expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

10.  At [7] of the decision, the Judge records that the  appellant  was  not
present at the First-tier hearing. It is clear from what the  Judge  records
there that the Judge did not have sight of the  appellant's  application  to
adjourn, nor the print from the appellant's doctor records stating that,  in
the early hours of the day of the  First-tier  hearing,  the  appellant  was
seen by a doctor and received treatment for a stomach upset.

11.  There is no indication that the appellant did not  contact  the  First-
tier hearing centre on 10 August  2016.  The  documents  produced  with  the
appellant's application for permission to appeal confirmed that on  the  day
of the First-tier hearing the appellant consulted a doctor and was  given  a
prescription for medicine. The printout of the doctor's notes indicate  that
the appellant was not seriously ill, but a stomach upset would be  difficult
to deal with in the tribunal setting.

12.  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was  held
that if a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that  of  fairness:
was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

13.  At [7] of the decision the Judge summarises the hearing.  It  is  clear
that the appellant did not participate in the hearing, and  that  the  Judge
was unaware of that request made  from  an  adjournment.  That  is  not  the
Judge's fault, but the net effect is that the  appellant  has  not  had  the
hearing that he sought, and, on the balance  of  probabilities,  the  reason
that he has not had that hearing is because he was ill.

14.  I therefore have to find that the decision is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law and set it aside. The nature of  the  error  which  caused  the
decision to be set  aside  indicates  that  none  of  the  findings  can  be
preserved and an entirely new fact-finding exercise is required.

REMITTAL TO FtT

15.  Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)  the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  I find that this case should be remitted  because  of  the  nature  and
extent of the judicial fact finding which will be necessary to make  a  just
decision in this case. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand.

17.  I remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Adio.

CONCLUSION

Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  material  errors
of law.

19.  I set aside the decision. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 19
October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

