
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02499/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th November 2016                         |On 11th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     T T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Martin, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 31st January 1991.  The
    Appellant initially left Sri Lanka in 2011 where he travelled to France
    and made an asylum claim which  was  refused.   After  three  years  in
    France an agent tried to get him to Australia but  he  was  stopped  in
    Malaysia and removed back to Sri Lanka on 4th February 2014.

 2. The Appellant then left Sri Lanka again on 28th February 2014  arriving
    in Malaysia on the same day.  He remained there  until  22nd  May  2014
    when he left by air arriving at Gatwick Airport on the  same  day.   He
    approached the Asylum Screening Unit at Croydon on  4th  June  2014  to
    make an asylum application, but his application  was  referred  to  the
    Third Country Unit as he had been fingerprinted and had made an  asylum
    application in a member state.

 3. The Appellant's application for asylum was based on a claim to  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Sri  Lanka  on  the  basis  of  his
    political opinion.  That application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 26th October 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Phillips sitting at Taylor House on 3rd March 2016.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  18th  May  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

 5. On 28th May 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was contended that the judge had made a finding  at
    paragraph 87 of his decision that the Appellant was likely to be  on  a
    stop list and would be detained at the airport on return as a result of
    his deportation from Malaysia for use of a false document in  2014  and
    by way of his previous detention in 2011.  It was  submitted  that  the
    judge had not correctly applied the findings in GJ  and  Others  (post-
    civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  and  despite  the
    reference to CG at three paragraphs within  the  decision  the  judge's
    findings did not identify a risk category within  which  the  Appellant
    falls.

 6. On 10th June 2016 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  refused
    permission to appeal considering that the judge had taken into  account
    all the evidence and made appropriate findings which were open  to  her
    including having had the benefit of the Appellant's  oral  evidence  on
    the day of the hearing.

 7. Grounds for the Upper Tribunal were renewed on 21st June 2016.  On  2nd
    September 2016 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Freeman noted that the hearing  judge  had  accepted  at
    paragraph 77 that the Respondent  had  shown  that  the  Appellant  had
    produced a false arrest warrant dating from 22nd April 2014 relating to
    a detention which had taken place when he was returned to Sri Lanka  by
    the Malaysian  authorities  that  February.   However,  the  Respondent
    accepted that he had been accused of supporting  the  Tamil  Tigers  in
    2009 and detained in 2011.  The reasons given by the judge at paragraph
    86 about  the  likely  consequences  of  the  Appellant's  return  from
    Malaysia did in  Judge  Freeman's  view  arguably  not  deal  with  the
    question of why this Appellant, who  at  that  stage  did  not  have  a
    warrant of arrest out against him, should have been detained on  return
    from that country in circumstances where GJ suggests he would not  have
    been on return from here.  Judge Freeman considered that the  Judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal had also given full reasons at paragraph 87 for
    accepting that it was reasonably likely that the  Appellant  was  on  a
    stop list  and  would  be  detained  at  the  airport  on  return.   He
    considered however  that  the  judge  arguably  had  not  provided  any
    evidential basis either at paragraphs 86 or 87 for the suggestion  that
    there is an "intelligence-led watch or stop list which exposes those on
    it to risks outside those set out  in  GJ".   He  consequently  granted
    permission to appeal.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose of  convenience  throughout
    the appeal process Mr T T is referred to herein as  the  Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State is the Respondent.  The Appellant appears by his
    instructed Counsel Mr Martin.  Mr Martin is familiar  with  his  matter
    having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Armstrong.  Mr  Martin
    advises that there has been no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of  the
    Appellant.

Submission/Discussion

 9. Mr Armstrong indicates that the judge has accepted at paragraph  77  of
    her decision that the arrest warrant is not genuine and  therefore  the
    Appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 7(d) of the current
    category of persons at real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on
    return to Sri Lanka as set out within the country  guidance  authority.
    On the basis that the Appellant does not fall into  that  category  the
    judge has failed to apply guidance given in GJ and has failed  to  give
    evidential reasons as to why the Appellant would appear on a stop list.
     In addition he refers me to paragraph 8 of  the  headnote  of  GJ  and
    indicates that that too has not been applied  by  the  judge  and  that
    therefore there are material errors of law in the decision.   He  asked
    me to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

10. Mr Martin contends that the  case  is  somewhat  unusual  in  that  the
    majority of the Appellant's evidence is accepted, for example the  fact
    that he was detained after the end of the conflict in 2011.  He submits
    that the judge was entitled to make conclusions regarding the detention
    in 2014.  He accepts that  the  verification  report  states  that  the
    warrant was not genuine but that  does  not  mean  that  there  was  no
    warrant.  He points out that the Appellant returned from Sri  Lanka  to
    Malaysia and that it is accepted by the judge at paragraph  86  in  her
    decision that such an event would lead to an investigation.  He submits
    the Appellant's account was that he had  breached  his  bail  and  that
    because of these circumstances the Appellant would be on a  stop  lists
    which would engage with the risk category of paragraph 7D based on  his
    individual circumstances.  He states that this is the approach that has
    been adopted by the judge and that there is no error of law.  He  asked
    me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Authorities

13. The relevant paragraphs of GJ and Others (post-civil war returnees) Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 are set out at 7:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose names appear on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.   The Sri Lankan authorities know that many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government."

Findings on Error of Law

14. It is unchallenged that there is produced in  this  matter  a  document
    verification report to the  effect  that  the  arrest  warrant  is  not
    genuine.  I acknowledge Mr Martin's contention that that does not  mean
    there has not been an arrest warrant but with  respect  that  does  not
    really get him very far.  On that basis and applying paragraph 7(d)  it
    is clear that it would be wrong to conclude on the  evidence  that  was
    available before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  Appellant  met  the
    risk category within paragraph 7(d) of the country guidance given in GJ
    as to the current category of person at real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  In such circumstances the finding
    that GJ applies and that the Appellant would be detained at the airport
    on return, as set out at paragraph 87 of the decision, must be wrong in
    fact and consequently constitutes a material error of law.  I  am  also
    satisfied that it is arguable that the failure to engage with paragraph
    8 of GJ also  raises  issues  of  material  errors  of  law.   In  such
    circumstances the correct approach is to find that there  are  material
    errors of law which taint the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    and to set aside the decision and to remit the matter to the First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

15. Both legal representatives urge upon me,  if  that  is  the  course  of
    action to be taken, to make  reference  to,  and  to  comment  on,  the
    position relating to the Appellant's  mental  health.   This  does  not
    appear to have been an issue that has been given much consideration, if
    any, before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  am  unaware  as  to  the
    extent to which it was, if at all raised.  However, it  is  clear  from
    both the comments made by Mr Armstrong and by Mr Martin that that is an
    issued that would need to be aired on a rehearing.  In the interest  of
    fairness I certainly have no difficulty in accepting that proposal  and
    bearing in mind the orders and directions made herein it  is  a  matter
    that the parties may wish to address prior to bringing this matter back
    before the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision and Directions

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law  and  the  decision  is  set  aside.   Directions  are  set  out
    hereinafter for the future conduct of this matter.

      1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
         House on the first available date 28 days  hence  with  an  ELH  of
         three hours.

      2) The rehearing of this matter is to be before any Immigration  Judge
         other than Immigration Judge C M Philips.

      3) No findings of fact are to stand.

      4) There be leave to either party to serve on the other party  and  to
         file at the  Tribunal  such  further  subjective  and/or  objective
         evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days prior  to
         the restored hearing.

      5) That a Tamil interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
