
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02255/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey dismissing  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing protection in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is  given  as  1
    January 1983.  His immigration history is a matter of  record  on  file
    and accordingly I do not repeat it in its entirety here.   For  present
    purposes however I note that he claims to have arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 June 2017 clandestinely; he claimed asylum  on  the  same
    date; a screening interview was also conducted on 13 June 2017.


3.   The basis of the Appellant's protection claim is helpfully set  out  in
    the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 7 et seq. - first
    of all in summary, and then with more detail.  The following is said by
    way of summary at paragraphs 8 and 9:

         "8.  He was claiming asylum because he had wanted to marry a  girl,
             named [S] and had asked for her hand for many  years  but  her
             father refused on the basis that the Appellant could not  take
             care of himself (since he was missing an arm and  two  fingers
             on the other hand) so he could not take care of his  daughter.
             The girl had said she wished to marry him and did not wish  to
             marry anyone else.


         9.   One night he and [S] were together and her father saw them and
             tried to grab him but he ran away.  Whilst running he heard  a
             gunshot and her father afterwards told him he had  killed  his
             daughter, and would kill him too."


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the  Appellant's  account,
    setting out reasons in particular at paragraphs 31-45 of the  Decision.
    This led the Judge to conclude in the following terms at paragraphs  46
    and 47:

         "46. For the above reasons I do not accept the Appellant's  account
             as credible.


         47.  I therefore do not accept that he has a well-founded  fear  of
             persecution and hence do not need to  consider  the  issue  of
             which, if any, Convention reason is applicable to his case."


5.   The Judge then cited the case of AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT  544  (paragraph
    48), and also made reference to the notion of  humanitarian  protection
    (paragraph 49).  The Judge then stated this:

         "50. The Appellant says he has a CSID card, although he  also  says
             he does not have it with him.  He would not  therefore  be  at
             risk of harm because of an  absence  of  Iraqi  identification
             documentation."


6.   The Judge then made further reference to AA (Iraq) in  respect  of  the
    general situation in the IKR, and then stated in respect of  Article  8
    of the ECHR:

         "The Appellant has no family in the UK  and  has  not  demonstrated
         that he has a private life here sufficient  to  engage  article  8"
         (paragraph 52).


7.   The Judge then dismissed the appeal on all grounds (paragraph 53).


8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  which
    was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on 1 May 2018
    but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  on  27  June
    2018 in the following terms:

         "1.  It is arguable  that  the  FTT  made  unclear  and  inadequate
             findings regarding the Appellant's access to  a  CSID  at  the
             point of return and thereafter.


         2.   The other grounds have less force but I  grant  permission  on
             all grounds."


9.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  6  September  2018
    resisting the Appellant's challenge.  The Rule 24 response  essentially
    focuses on the ground of  appeal  that  Judge  Plimmer  considered  had
    particular merit, asserting that the "need for a CSID was  superfluous"
    in circumstances where the Appellant's core claim had been found to  be
    without credibility and he  appeared  to  have  direct  family  members
    present in the IKR.


10.  The application for permission to appeal sets out 5 grounds of  appeal;
    the ground of appeal in respect of the CSID is Ground 4.  It  helpfully
    sets out some of the guidance to be derived from AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944 - in particular I note the following:

         "9.  Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. ...


         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does
             not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P."




11.  Further to this Mr Howard has directed my attention to the guidance  in
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)
    which provides a step-by-step guide to the processes and questions that
    need to be considered in the context of obtaining a CSID.


12.  The Respondent's  Rule  24  response  highlights  the  context  of  the
    consideration of this issue: the Appellant's claim for  protection  had
    been rejected as not  being  credible,  and  the  reasonable  inference
    therefrom was that the Appellant had  family  members  still  in  Iraq,
    including male family members.  It would therefore be the case that  by
    making use of their CSID documents the relevant page in the book  could
    readily be identified if it was necessary for the Appellant to obtain a
    further CSID.  It was also implicit in the Respondent's  submission  in
    the Rule 24 response that the Appellant would have family  members  who
    could vouch for him.


13.  In this regard it seems to me that the starting point,  in  any  event,
    is the Judge's observation at paragraph 50 that  the  Appellant  stated
    that he did indeed have a CSID card, albeit it was not  presently  with
    him.  In this context I note the following exchange in the  Appellant's
    substantive asylum interview conducted on 4 October 2017:

         "140.    do you have a civil status id doc
         A.   I have yeah everything


         141. where was it issued
         A.   in Sulimaniya


         142. when was it issued
         A.   a long time ago but they used to renew it every year always  i
                had this id


         143. where is it now
         A.   at home everything, only i use the passport and on the  way  i
                lost it


         144. could you obtain your csid if you returned
         A.   i cannot not return


         145. thats not what i asked repeat Q144
         A.   yes, i cannot if i go back they will kill me.  i  apologise  i
                don't know these


         146. to confirm you could obtain you csid on return is that correct
         A.   yes"


14.  I pause to note that the reference to losing "it" at  question  143  is
    clearly a reference to the loss of the Appellant's passport during  the
    course of his journey to the United Kingdom.  In this context it is  to
    be noted that the Appellant indicated at question 101 that whenever  he
    went to see S he took his  passport  with  him  just  in  case  he  was
    discovered and would be required to flee.  It may be thought that  that
    is such an extraordinary answer - or such  an  extraordinary  means  of
    precaution - that it is deserving of cynical scrutiny; be  that  as  it
    may, it is clear enough from the Appellant's answers that  it  was  his
    passport that he lost on his way to the United Kingdom, not his CSID.


15.  In his witness  statement  of  5  March  2018,  at  paragraph  29,  the
    Appellant made some comments about  the  difficulty  of  relocating  to
    Baghdad and stated that this would be difficult because he was  Kurdish
    and did not have any family there.  He also then added "I do not have a
    CSID", before going on to say that he had  no  friends  or  family  who
    would be able to financially support him in Baghdad.  It  seems  to  me
    that in context the reference to  not  having  a  CSID  was  clearly  a
    reference to not having one with  him  in  the  United  Kingdom  -  and
    therefore if he were to be returned directly to  Baghdad  he  would  be
    arriving in that city without the CSID that he had left at his home  in
    the IKR.  I do not begin to consider that what is said at paragraph  29
    was to 'row back' from the answers given in  the  interview.   To  that
    extent it seems to me that when the Judge states at paragraph  50  that
    "The Appellant says he has a CSID card, although he... does not have it
    with him", and concludes that he would not have any problems arising by
    reason of an absence of identification documents, that was an  entirely
    sustainable conclusion.  On that basis I reject the challenge  made  by
    the Appellant to the effect that the  Judge  had  not  offerd  adequate
    reasons as to how the Appellant could obtain a CSID on return to Iraq.


16.  As noted above, the  Judge  granting  permission  to  appeal  was  less
    impressed  with  the  alternative  grounds,  but  nonetheless   granted
    permission pursuant to those grounds.  Mr Howard has briefly  amplified
    those grounds before me today.


17.  Ground 1 asserts that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  fell  into  error  in
    applying the incorrect standard  of  proof.   In  this  context  it  is
    acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal Judge appropriately  directed
    himself to the standard of  proof  at  paragraph  5  of  the  Decision.
    However, a particular passage at  paragraph  39  is  alighted  upon  as
    indicating that the Judge misunderstood, or misapplied, the standard of
    proof.  The passage is in these terms:

     "I do not accept the Appellant's explanation that  [S]'s  father  could
         not identify him because the light was dim and  he  could  not  see
         well.  The only person who could tell him that her father could not
         recognise him (other than her father himself and I do not accept as
         probable that he would go to the trouble of telling him  so  during
         the claimed threatening telephone calls) was [S] who was dead."


18.  It is the use of the word "probable" in that passage that is  suggested
    to indicate misapplication of the standard of proof.  I do  not  accept
    that that one instance - and Mr Howard confirms that there are no other
    examples to which my attention can be drawn  -  is  indicative  of  the
    Judge misunderstanding the standard of proof applicable in a protection
    claim, or misapplying it generally to the facts  and  circumstances  of
    the Appellant's case.  It is to be noted that the Judge gives  detailed
    reasoning in the Decision and the particular matter alighted upon is in
    itself parenthetic - quite literally in that it appears in a  bracketed
    sub-clause to what is in any event only one peripheral  aspect  of  the
    overall evaluation of  the  Appellant's  narrative  account.   Even  in
    isolation  I  am  dubious  as  to  whether  it  is  illustrative  of  a
    misapplication of a standard of proof; in any event, I am not  remotely
    persuaded that it is material  to  the  overall  consideration  of  the
    claim.


19.  Ground 2 pleads that the Judge failed to apply 'country guidance'.   Mr
    Howard acknowledges that this was in  substance  an  annex  to,  or  an
    aspect of, Ground 4 - with which I have already dealt.


20.  Ground 3 pleads that the Judge erred in the approach to  Article  8  by
    dealing  with  the  Appellant's  private  life  in  the  single,  short
    paragraph 52 - indeed a paragraph of a single sentence (quoted  above).




21.  In my judgement context is significant  in  this  regard.   The  appeal
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  took  place  on  16  March  2018,  and
    therefore approximately only nine months after the Appellant's  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.  Whilst the Appellant did make passing reference
    to having "friends and a private life in the United Kingdom that I will
    not be able to continue should I be returned to any part of Iraq today"
    (paragraph 31 of his witness  statement),  he  provided  no  supporting
    evidence  of  his  private  life  or  any  supporting   statements   or
    information in respect of, or from, any of his friends.  Whilst  it  is
    to be acknowledged that paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    was raised in the Appellant's skeleton argument  (pages  15-16  of  the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal),  no  fact-specific
    details are pleaded in the Skeleton Argument: it has the appearance  of
    nothing more than a  rote  submission  without  any  reference  to  the
    individual facts of the case.


22.  In all such circumstances it seems  to  me  that  whilst  such  extreme
    brevity is not ordinarily to be  encouraged,  the  single  sentence  at
    paragraph 52 is - in the very particular circumstances of this  case  -
    an adequate disposal of the Article 8  issues.   The  reality  is  that
    there was no substance to the Appellant's Article 8 claim, and to  that
    extent I cannot see that a  more  full  recitation  or  exploration  of
    matters would have made any material difference to the outcome in  this
    regard. Accordingly I also reject this line of challenge.


23.  The remaining ground of appeal, Ground 5, is  an  allegation  that  the
    Judge  failed  to  give  adequate   reasoning.    The   only   specific
    illustration of this is that it is suggested that the Judge appeared to
    have expected the Appellant to provide a death certificate  in  respect
    of [S]'s killing.  In my judgement this ground has no merits, either on
    its own or in combination with any of the other grounds.   The  reality
    is, again, that the Judge gave very careful and detailed  consideration
    to the Appellant's case and explained the reasons why  the  Appellant's
    narrative account was rejected.


24.  In all the circumstances I find no substance to the  challenge  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
    of law and stands.


26.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 14 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
