
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02510/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 27 April 2021                     |
|Remotely by Skype                    |                                     |
|On 15 April 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    D M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Coyte of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1  July  1990.   The
    appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and comes from Makhmour.  Up to,  and
    including, the hearing of the First-tier Tribunal appeal in this  case,
    the appellant's home area was located by the parties  as  being  within
    the Erbil governorate of the IKR.  As will become clear, the  appellant
    now disputes that and contends that his  home  area  falls  within  the
    Ninewa governorate of Central Iraq  under  the  control  of  the  Iraqi
    authorities rather than the government of the IKR.

 3. The appellant left  Iraq  sometime  during  October  2015  and,  having
    travelled through various countries, lived in Finland for about one and
    a half years.  There, he unsuccessfully claimed asylum.  He  then  left
    Finland and travelled to the UK clandestinely where, on 17 March  2017,
    he claimed asylum.  The basis of the appellant's claim was  twofold  as
    set out in his screening interview on 17 March 2017.  First, he claimed
    that he was at risk from  the  Iraqi  authorities  as  a  result  of  a
    television interview he gave to a journalist in Iraq on 14 August  2014
    in which he criticised  the  Iraqi  authorities  by  stating  that  the
    defending military ran  away  when  ISIS  took  control  of  the  area.
    Secondly, he claimed that he had converted to Christianity  in  Finland
    in April 2016.

 4. Following an asylum interview on 5  February  2020,  the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  the  appellant's  claims   for   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and under the ECHR in a decision dated 2 March 2020.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   Before  Judge  Page,  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  TV
    interview which he claimed to have given and put him at risk  from  the
    Iraqi government.  He relied upon two arrest warrants dated 20  January
    2015 and 10 February 2015 which named him as a person wanted, and to be
    arrested, in relation to an  offence  under  Art  (197)  of  the  Iraqi
    Criminal Law.  Secondly, the appellant relied upon  his  conversion  to
    Christianity in Finland and his attending a Christian church in Newport
    from around April 2019.  In respect of that claim, he relied  upon  the
    evidence (given orally at the hearing) by two members of  that  church,
    including the minister.

 6. Judge Page dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The  judge
    made adverse credibility  findings.   First,  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim  that  he  had  been  interviewed  as  claimed  by  a
    journalist and had expressed anti-government views which would put  him
    at risk on return to Iraq.  The judge rejected the two arrest  warrants
    describing their contents as "risible" and  "gobbledygook".   Secondly,
    the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  converted   to
    Christianity in Finland or was practising as a  Christian  in  the  UK.
    Thirdly, the judge found that even if  the  appellant  were  a  genuine
    Christian, he was not satisfied that the appellant would be at risk  in
    Iraq as a Christian convert or that he would  pursue  his  Christianity
    there when he returned.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.  Permission was granted on all grounds by the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Grant) on 11 November 2020.

 8. The appeal was listed for remote hearing at the Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre on 15 April 2021 working remotely.  Mr  Coyte,  who  represented
    the appellant, and Ms  Pettersen,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype.

The Appellant's Challenge

 9. The appellant relied upon  three  grounds  of  appeal  which  Mr  Coyte
    developed in his oral argument.

10. Ground 1 contends that the judge failed to apply the CG decision of SMO
    and Others (Article 15(c); identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT
    00400 (IAC).  The judge failed to assess whether, applying the sliding-
    scale risk factors set out in SMO  and  Others,  following  Elgafaji  v
    Staatssecretaris van Justite [2009]  Imm  AR  477  (ECJ),  whether  the
    appellant would be at real risk of indiscriminate violence amounting to
    serious harm contrary to  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    (Council Directive 2004/83/EC) because it  had  been  a  wrong  premise
    throughout the appellant's asylum claim that his home area  was  within
    the Erbil governorate of the IKR when, in  fact,  it  fell  within  the
    disputed area of the Ninewa province in Central Iraq.

11. Mr Coyte submitted that there were a number of risk factors  which  the
    judge should have considered under Art 15(c) such as that the appellant
    is Kurdish and that his  home  area  is  under  the  control  of  Shi'a
    militia, he is potentially westernised and also, subject to a challenge
    under grounds 2 and 3, that the appellant has  a  political  background
    and has converted to Christianity.

12. Ground 2 contends that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    his adverse finding in relation to the appellant's claim based upon his
    interview and criticism of the Iraqi authorities.

13. First, the judge failed to give any reasons  why  the  arrest  warrants
    were "risible" or "imitated officialdom" or  were  "gobbledygook"  such
    that he discounted them as emanating from an official source  in  Iraq.
    The grounds contend that there was no submission or background evidence
    to support that reasoning which could only have  been  based  upon  the
    judge's own perception of what an official Iraqi  document  would  look
    like.

14. Secondly, the judge was wrong to doubt the authenticity of  the  arrest
    warrants on the basis that the appellant's claimed wrongdoing could not
    fall within Art (197) of the Iraqi Criminal Law.  As developed  in  his
    oral submissions, Mr  Coyte  submitted  that  this  was  not  a  matter
    directly raised by the respondent or explored  at  the  hearing.   That
    provision in the Iraqi Criminal Code could apply as it includes, as set
    out in the grounds, spoiling or obstructing means of communication with
    the intent to overthrow the constitutionally appointed regime or spread
    panic or anarchy during a time of civil unrest.

15. Thirdly, the judge was wrong to rely upon  perceived  discrepancies  in
    the appellant's evidence in his asylum interview that he had both  made
    a "five-minute speech" but had said in his oral evidence  that  he  had
    only been asked a few questions which could not  possibly  have  lasted
    for approximately five minutes.

16. Ground 3 contends that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  reach  his  adverse
    credibility finding in relation to the appellant's  claimed  conversion
    to Christianity.

17. First, it was not right for the judge to state that the  appellant  had
    not pursued his religious claim with "any vigour".   Mr  Coyte  pointed
    out that the appellant had pursued the claim before the judge including
    calling two witnesses to give oral evidence.  He had also raised it  in
    his screening interview.  Even though he  had  not  raised  it  in  his
    asylum interview, conducted three years after his screening  interview,
    he had not been asked directly about any claim based upon his religion.



18. Secondly, it was not clear why  the  judge  had,  despite  finding  the
    appellant's claim to have converted not to be genuine, stated  that  he
    would accept that "as a possibility" should the  appellant  resume  his
    attendance at his UK church which he had not done during  the  lockdown
    or between the time he arrived in 2017 and April 2019.

19. Thirdly, in his reply, Mr  Coyte  submitted  that  the  judge  had,  in
    effect, failed to take  into  account  the  Home  Office's  own  policy
    concerning the risk to Christian converts in  Iraq  when  reaching  his
    alternative finding that, even if the appellant was a genuine  convert,
    he would not be at risk on return.  Mr  Coyte  relied  upon  the  CPIN,
    "Iraq: Religious minorities" (October 2019) at para 2.4.6 which  stated
    that: "People who do convert from Islam to Christianity may be at  risk
    of being killed depending on  how  overt  the  person  is  about  their
    conversion and the attitudes of  their  community  and  family  members
    towards conversion".

20. Mr Coyte submitted that that document was in the public domain and  the
    judge should have been referred to it by  the  Presenting  Officer  and
    taken into account.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

21. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Ms  Pettersen  having  heard  Mr
    Coyte's submissions, accepted that Grounds 1 and 3 were made out.

22. As regards Ground 1, Ms Petterson accepted that  the  appellant's  home
    area of Makhmour was in the Central Iraqi province of Ninewa which is a
    disputed area.  That was the evidence  of  the  recognised  expert,  Dr
    Fatah in SMO and Others at [60] which was not doubted by the UT in that
    appeal.  The position was also confirmed,  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing,  by  reference  to  material  on  the  internet   which   both
    representatives accepted.  Ms Pettersen accepted that,  therefore,  the
    judge had failed to consider Art 15(c) on a 'case by case basis' taking
    into account all the appellant's circumstances in his home area in  the
    Ninewa governorate in Central Iraq.

23. In relation  to  Ground  3,  Ms  Pettersen,  having  taken  me  to  the
    background material that was before the First-tier Judge, in particular
    the US Department of State,  2019  Report  on  International  Religious
    Freedom: Iraq, (10 June  2020)  (at  pages  23-36  of  the  appellant's
    bundle), accepted that the judge should have been referred to the CPIN,
    in  particular  para  2.4.6  and  also  para  6.1.5  dealing  with  the
    difficulty of changing religion on identity cards.  She  accepted  that
    his finding that the appellant would not be at risk on return  even  if
    he was a Christian convert was a finding that could not  stand  due  to
    the judge's failure to engage with the Home Office's policy document on
    that very issue.  She  accepted  that  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    religious conversion in general required a fresh decision to be made.

24. However,  as  regards  Ground  2  Ms  Pettersen  did  not  concede  the
    appellant's arguments although she accepted that the  judge's  reliance
    upon discrepancies in the appellant's  evidence  as  to  how  long  his
    interview took (at para 48) was  not  based  upon  evidence  which  was
    particularly discrepant as the appellant had said  that  the  interview
    was "very short" and also that it was the questions and answers and not
    simply his speech which  had  taken  approximately  five  minutes.   Ms
    Pettersen accepted that there was no evidence before  the  judge  about
    the terms of the Iraqi Criminal Law although, the  appellant  had  been
    asked questions about the offence on  the  arrest  warrants  in  cross-
    examination.  Ms Petterson indicated that  she  left  determination  of
    Ground 2 to the Tribunal.

Discussion

25. In my judgment, Grounds 1 and 3 - as conceded by  Ms  Pettersen  -  are
    made out.

26. First, I accept,  albeit  through  no  fault  of  the  judge,  that  he
    proceeded to determine the appeal on the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    home area was in the IKR.  That is not the case.  It was a  mistake  of
    fact relevant to the issues in the appeal.  Although it is  clear  that
    the appellant's home area has, at times, been under the control of  the
    IKR government and part of the Erbil governorate, it is plain  that  it
    is not so at present and was not so at the time of the judge's hearing.
     The IKR government does not control that area which is now  under  the
    control of the central government (with the presence of Shi'a  militia)
    in the Ninewa governorate.  That would have been plain if the judge had
    been referred to Dr Fatah's evidence at [60] of  SMO  and  Others.   In
    those circumstances, the issue of whether the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk under Art 15(c) arose to  be  considered.   I  accept  Mr  Coyte's
    submission that the judge should, in those circumstances, have  applied
    the sliding-scale set out in SMO and Others adopting the ECJ's decision
    in Elgafaji.  That was, as Ms Pettersen conceded, a material  error  of
    law and a decision in relation to Art 15(c) needs to be made.

27. Secondly, I accept Ms Pettersen's concession that Ground 3 is made out.
     As regards the objective risk on return to a  Christian  convert,  the
    CPIN - which is a public  document  emanating  from  the  respondent  -
    provides some support for a real risk of  persecution,  depending  upon
    all the circumstances, to an individual who is a Christian  convert  in
    Iraq.  The judge failed to take that into account.  Indeed, it  is  not
    clear precisely what material the judge relied upon other than to  cite
    the  submission  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that  "the   Iraqi
    Constitution permits religious freedom" (at para 50) and then  at  para
    52  to  state  that:  "While  I  accept  there  may  be  instances   of
    discrimination and violence against Christians in  Iraq  by  those  who
    object to conversion, it is not the case that Christians in Iraq are an
    at-risk group per se".   That  finding,  not  linked  to  any  specific
    background evidence before the  judge,  failed  to  take  into  account
    background evidence in the Home Office's CPIN and that  amounted  to  a
    material error of law in relation to that finding.

28. As regards the judge's adverse credibility finding in relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed Christian conversion, Ms Pettersen did not seek  to
    sustain that finding.  I  accept  Mr  Coyte's  submissions  based  upon
    Ground 3, that  the  judge  erred  in  taking  into  account  that  the
    appellant had not pursued this limb of his claim "with any vigour".  He
    clearly had done so since his screening interview and at  the  hearing.
    Whilst it is true that in his asylum interview he made no mention of  a
    fear based upon his Christian conversion,  he  was  also  not  directly
    asked about it even though he did not, when asked, identify any claimed
    fear other than arising  from  his  interview  critical  of  the  Iraqi
    government.

29. The appellant's two witnesses gave  clear  and  unequivocal  supporting
    evidence as to his Christian conversion since April 2019.  Despite this
    evidence, and despite not criticising  the  appellant  for  failing  to
    attend church during the  lockdown,  the  judge  was  critical  of  his
    failure to attend church given that he  claimed  to  have  done  so  in
    Finland when he did not speak Finnish because,  he  said,  he  did  not
    speak English in order to attend church in the UK.  However, that  does
    not fully reflect the appellant's evidence which was not  that  he  did
    not initially attend church in  the  UK  because  he  could  not  speak
    English, but also because he did not know anyone in the UK  whereas  he
    knew Christian Iraqis in Finland.

30. Mr Coyte also relied upon the judge's reason set out in para 50 that he
    would, despite not believing the appellant to be  a  genuine  Christian
    convert, accept  that  as  a  possibility  if  he  was  to  resume  his
    attendance at his church in Newport.  I agree that that is  a  somewhat
    curious reason.  It does not sit particularly well with the  fact  that
    the appellant's case was that he had attended  church  in  the  UK  for
    seventeen months since April 2019 (although, and he was not  criticised
    for this, he did not take part during the lockdown) and explain why  an
    added period of time would have led the  judge  to  reach  a  different
    credibility finding.  It has also to be noted that the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had attended church,  and  converted,  as  he
    claimed in Finland.

31. As I have said, Ms Pettersen does  not  seek  to  sustain  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    Christian conversion and, in my judgment, his reasons are inadequate to
    support that finding.

32. As regards Ground 2, I am satisfied that the judge's  consideration  of
    the two "arrest warrants" relied upon by the appellant was, as a matter
    of law,  inadequate.   The  judge  had  both  arrest  warrants  in  the
    appellant's bundle in translation.  His  reasons  for  discounting  the
    documents as genuine are set out in para 46 as follows:

         "The central issue  in  this  appeal  is  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's claim to  be  at  risk  in  Iraq  as  someone  who  has
         communicated with the  media.   I  have  taken  the  two  documents
         purporting to be arrest warrants from the Court of Appeal  in  Iraq
         as my starting point.  Having viewed them in the round I find  that
         I can safely reject them as having emanated from the  judiciary  in
         Iraq.  Their  contents  are  risible.   Whoever  drafted  them  has
         imitated officialdom and phrases like: 'whoever this memo falls  in
         their hands, you are authorised  in  accordance  with  the  law  to
         arrest the accused whose name and address and description below and
         then hand them to our court as was required  by  (Makhmour)  Police
         Station'.  In the absence of evidence produced by the appellant  or
         verified by the Home Office  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  that
         Article (197) of the Iraqi Criminal Law Code has any application of
         the appellant's claim to have made comments to a journalist with  a
         video camera.  The Iraqi Criminal Code translated into  English  is
         available online.  I am surprised that the  Home  Office  have  not
         taken the trouble to read what Article 197 is applicable to.   This
         primitive document purports to  have  been  signed  by  'the  judge
         Yasser Ali Al Sawafi' and the document purports to  be  stamped  by
         the court seal of the judiciary supreme council - Makhmour Court of
         Investigations.  This is gobbledygook and I can safely discount any
         possibility that these documents have  emanated  from  an  official
         source in Iraq.  Having made these findings about  the  two  arrest
         warrants, I need not see the originals which the appellant has said
         are available.  The original documents could  add  nothing  to  the
         appellant's case in my view".

33. It is plain from this paragraph that  the  judge  doubted  whether  the
    appellant's conduct fell within Art (197) of the Iraqi  Criminal  Code.
    The judge does not explain why that was so  and,  equally,  that  issue
    does not appear to have been explored before the judge who  appears  to
    have looked at the Criminal Code in English online without reference to
    the  parties  who  could  make  submissions  upon  it.   Mr  Coyte  has
    summarised that provision in the grounds - and what is set out was  not
    contested by Ms Pettersen - and there is no  reason  to  conclude  that
    this obviously could not apply to the appellant's claimed conduct.   In
    any event, the appellant's representative was  entitled  to  deal  with
    that issue which was not directly raised  or  relied  upon  before  the
    judge.

34. Further, I accept Mr Coyte's submission that the judge gave no adequate
    reasons for dismissing the contents of the arrest warrants as "risible"
    or  "gobbledygook".   He  was,  of  course,  seeing  the  document   in
    translation  which  could  lead  to  language  which  might  seem  less
    official, from a UK or indeed other perspective, without being a  false
    translation.  But, more importantly, the judge referred to no  evidence
    - and as far as I am aware no evidence was put before the judge - as to
    how an arrest warrant of this sort would look.  It is not  self-evident
    that the arrest warrants were outwith the form that could  be  used  by
    the Iraqi authorities.  The language may  differ  from  what  might  be
    expected in the UK but, without  supporting  background  evidence,  the
    implausibility of their contents was not a matter which the judge could
    properly rely upon to doubt their authenticity (see HK  v  SSHD  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223).

35. Further, as Ms Pettersen frankly accepted, the  judge's  reliance  upon
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence as to how long his  interview
    took (set out in para 48 of his determination) does not  fully  reflect
    the appellant's evidence.  There the judge said this:

         "What the appellant claims to have said in the video recording  was
         discrepant.  It varied from a speech  lasting  five  minutes  to  a
         couple of sentences - and he  had  no  knowledge  if  it  was  ever
         broadcast.  His evidence about what he had said changed from a five-
         minute speech in his asylum interview to a few words that could not
         possibly have taken five minutes.  It was evident the appellant was
         inventing his evidence when he tried  to  embellish  the  encounter
         with the journalists last five minutes when he had next to  nothing
         to say to them.  I find that the appellant's account of having been
         interviewed by a journalist in Iraq is a  complete  fabrication  to
         obtain an immigration status here  -  as  he  apparently  attempted
         unsuccessfully in Finland".

36. As Ms Petersen accepted, the appellant's evidence was that the exchange
    had been very short and that he had not said that he had  made  a  five
    minute speech but that it had taken approximately five minutes  to  ask
    questions and provide answers.  In my judgment, the  judge's  reasoning
    in para  48  does  not  properly  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence.   The  reasoning  is  inadequate  to  sustain   his   adverse
    credibility finding in relation to the appellant's claim to  have  been
    interviewed and to be at risk as a result of making criticisms  of  the
    Iraqi government.

37. In my judgment, for these reasons, the judge also materially  erred  in
    reaching his  adverse  finding  in  relation  to  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's claim.

38. It follows that the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's  appeal
    involved the making of an error of law based upon Grounds 1, 2  and  3.
    His decision cannot stand and is set aside.

39. Both representatives accepted that, in those circumstances, the  proper
    disposal of the appeal was to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing.

Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

41. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Page.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               16 April 2021
