
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02009/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    F A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Frantzis, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By decision promulgated on 10 May 2018, I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons for so finding were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, FAA, was born in 1989 and is a  female  citizen
         of  Nigeria.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Spencer) against a decision of the  respondent  dated  14  February
         2017 to refuse her application for international  protection.   The
         First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  6  July  2017,
         dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant herself did not attend court.  I  had  a  letter
         from  the  appellant's  clinical  psychologist,  Dr   Susan   Odell
         indicating that the appellant was not mentally able  to  cope  with
         the court  proceedings.   Mr  Thorne  of  Counsel  represented  the
         appellant.  Mr Mills, a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
         appeared for the Secretary of State.

         3.   The appellant's immigration history is an  unhappy  one.   She
         entered the United Kingdom in September 2005 then, in 2006, applied
         for leave to remain as a child  of  a  person  settled  here.   The
         application was refused and the subsequent  appeal  dismissed.   In
         2014 she was served with notice for administrative  removal  as  an
         overstayer and, at that stage, she applied for  asylum.   Mr  Mills
         put it, those individuals who had appeared in previous  proceedings
         before the Tribunal as family members are now  claimed  by  her  to
         have  been  her  traffickers.   Judge  Spencer   found   that   the
         appellant's evidence was unreliable and  that  she  had  failed  to
         establish that she would face ill-treatment on return to Nigeria as
         she claimed.  The judge did, however, find [37] that the  appellant
         is "unfortunately suffering with mental  health  conditions."   She
         has been diagnosed with depression, post-traumatic stress  disorder
         (PTSD) and dissociative fugue.  The judge did  not  find,  however,
         that  "these  medical  problems  are  as  a  result  of  her  being
         trafficked or the victim of modern slavery."

         4.   There are two grounds of appeal but permission has  only  been
         granted in respect of the first  ground.   Judge  Brunnen  granting
         permission, wrote:

             "In Ground 1 it is submitted that when assessing the Article 3
             claim based on suicide  risk  the  judge  erred  by  making  a
             finding that was not supported by any  evidence,  namely  that
             the appellant would have family support on return to  Nigeria.
             This is arguable."

         5.   Judge Brunnen explicitly  refused  permission  in  respect  of
         Ground 2 and, although  Mr  Thorne  made  some  comments  regarding
         ground 2 at the hearing,  I  see  no  reason  to  go  behind  Judge
         Brunnen's decision.  I have, therefore, concerned myself only  with
         ground 1.

         6.   Having found that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  mental
         health difficulties, the judge considered suicide risk, applying  J
         [2005] EWCA Civ 629 in particular, the test  containing  six  parts
         set out in that judgment:

             "In our judgment, there is no doubt that in foreign cases  the
             relevant test is, as Lord Bingham said in Ullah, whether there
             are strong grounds for believing that the person, if returned,
             faces a real risk of torture, inhuman or  degrading  treatment
             or punishment. Mr Middleton submits that a different  test  is
             required in cases where the article 3 breach relied  on  is  a
             risk of suicide or other self-harm. But this submission is  at
             odds with the Strasbourg jurisprudence: see, for example, para
             [40] in Bensaid and the suicide cases to  which  we  refer  at
             para 30 below. Mr Middleton makes  two  complaints  about  the
             real risk test. First, he says that it leaves out  of  account
             the need for a causal link between the act of removal and  the
             ill-treatment relied on. Secondly, the test is too vague to be
             of any practical utility. But as we explain at para 27  below,
             a causal link is inherent in the real risk  test.  As  regards
             the second complaint, it is possible to see  what  it  entails
             from the way in which the test has been applied by  the  ECtHR
             in different circumstances. It should be stated at the  outset
             that the phrase "real risk" imposes a more stringent test than
             merely that the risk must be more  than  "not  fanciful".  The
             cases show that it is possible to amplify the test at least to
             the following extent.

             First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].

             Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:

                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).

             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."

             Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.

             Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

             Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.

             Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

         7.   The appellant asserts that the judge failed in his findings in
         respect of the sixth limb of  the  J  test.  She  argues  that  the
         judge's findings that the appellant did  have  family  which  would
         support her  on  return  to  Nigeria  were  arguably  flawed.   The
         evidence before the judge was that the appellant's father had  died
         and that her mother  had  abandoned  her.   Those  individuals  who
         brought the appellant to the United Kingdom had proved  not  to  be
         supporters of hers.  The judge had failed to take  account  of  the
         fact the appellant had been out of Nigeria since the age  of  15  a
         period of nearly twelve years.  The test in J provided  that  there
         must be family  support  or  other  support  arrangements  for  the
         appellant in Nigeria from the point of her arrival in the  country.
         The judge had failed to consider this  aspect  of  the  test.   The
         country expert, Debbie Ariyo, had attended the hearing but had  not
         been cross-examined.  Her evidence had been agreed by the  parties.
         Miss Ariyo's report indicated that "the  [appellant]  will  not  be
         able to access the therapeutic support recommended by Dr Odell  and
         Dr Biran" [66].  The grounds assert:

             "... it was simply not open  to  the  IJ  (sic)  to  make  the
             findings he does regarding this unchallenged  expert  evidence
             without first putting the matters of concern to her  in  order
             that  they  could  be  dealt  with.   This  is  a  fundamental
             principle of fairness which  is  all  the  more  compelling  a
             principle when expert evidence has not been challenged."

         8.   Further, the judge found that there was  "some  mental  health
         treatment  [available]  in  Nigeria".   The  judge  had  failed  to
         recognise that "some mental health treatment" may not be  the  same
         as "effective mechanism to reduce the risk  of  suicide"  (see  J).
         Further, the judge had failed  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
         psychotherapist, Josie Dale who had been working with the appellant
         for over a year.

         9.   Mr Mills, for the Secretary of State,  acknowledged  that  the
         judge appeared to have paid insufficient attention to the  decision
         of  Judge  Morrison  albeit  that  the   determination   had   been
         promulgated as long ago as September 2006.  Judge Morrison accepted
         that the appellant's father  had  died  and  that  her  mother  had
         abandoned her.  Mr Mills, however, submitted that the circumstances
         of the appellant had completely changed since  the  time  of  Judge
         Morrison's decision.  In effect,  the  appellant  herself  was  now
         arguing that the previous decision had been based on  untruths.   I
         agree with that submission.  Notwithstanding  the  principle  of  D
         [2002] UKIAT 000702, Judge Morrison's  decision  was  based  on  an
         entirely different case advanced by the same  appellant.   I  agree
         with Mr Mills that what Judge Spencer says  at  [35]  in  which  he
         deals with Judge Morrison's decision  provides  sufficient  reasons
         for Judge Spencer to depart from Judge Morrison's findings.

         10.  The expert report before Judge Spencer is more problematic.  I
         note that the expert's evidence was agreed and  that  although  she
         attended court, she was not  required  to  be  cross-examined.   In
         consequence, Judge Spencer has not reconciled his own finding  that
         there was "some mental health treatment in Nigeria"  available  for
         the appellant with Miss Ariyo's opinion that  the  appellant  would
         not "be able to exercise the therapeutic  support  recommended"  by
         her United Kingdom treating doctors.  If following the hearing, the
         judge had concerns regarding this aspect of the  evidence,  it  was
         open  to  him  to  reconvene  the  hearing  or  to   seek   written
         submissions.  Unfortunately, he chose not to take neither course of
         action.

         11.  In summary, I find (i) ground 2 may not be  argued;  (ii)  the
         judge's finding that the appellant has family members able to  give
         her support in Nigeria shall not be set aside.  The judge has given
         detailed reasons as to why  he  did  not  believe  the  appellant's
         account  and,  in  the  light  of  his  view  of  the   appellant's
         credibility, it was open to the judge not to accept the appellant's
         claim that she did not have family members in Nigeria.  I find also
         that the judge was not  bound  to  adopt  the  previous  Tribunal's
         findings on this aspect of the case which had been  advanced  on  a
         completely different factual matrix advanced by the appellant.  The
         only question which requires further determination is whether there
         is "effective mechanism to reduce the risk of suicide" available to
         this appellant in Nigeria.  The other findings of the  judge  shall
         stand.  The remaining  issue  shall  be  determined  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal at a resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 6 July 2017 is set aside.  All of the  findings  of  fact  shall
         stand save those in relation to  the  availability  in  Nigeria  of
         adequate care and medical treatment for the appellant.  That  issue
         will be determined and the decision remade in the Upper Tribunal on
         a date to be  fixed.   The  resumed  hearing  will  take  place  at
         Bradford on the first available date before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Lane.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford  on  13  June  2019,  the  appellant
    relied upon number of  new  expert  reports  and  letters.  The  bundle
    included evidence in the form of an addendum report from Ms Ariyo;  two
    letters from Dr Susan Odell of the Community Mental Health Team,  Leeds
    dated 24 October 2018 and 12 September 2018 respectively; a report from
    the appellant's GP, Dr Brian dated 11 September 2018. Mr  Diwnycz,  who
    appeared for the Secretary  of  State  took  no  issue  with  this  new
    evidence or, indeed, the existing evidence put forward regarding mental
    health facilities in Nigeria.

 3. Ms Frantzis, who appeared for the appellant  at  the  resumed  hearing,
    submitted that the evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant  may  have
    family living somewhere in Nigeria but that, without  immediate  access
    to family and medical support upon arrival in  Nigeria,  the  appellant
    would be at serious risk. She submitted that an absent  family  support
    network, with which the appellant could not readily make  contact,  was
    as good as no support network whatever. It would be during this  period
    immediately following return to Nigeria that the appellant would be  at
    serious risk of a significant collapse in her mental health leading  to
    the possibility of suicide.

 4. The updating medical evidence is helpful. The  final  paragraph  of  Dr
    Odell's most recent letter (albeit almost a year now old now, given the
    unaccountable delay in listing this appeal for a resumed hearing) reads
    as follows:

         "As  I  have  stated  previously,  I  anticipate   that   if   [the
         appellant's] asylum claim were to be unsuccessful  ...  this  would
         present an immediate serious risk to [her] and  it  would  cause  a
         sustained increase in her risk of suicide. I cannot envisage a  way
         in which it would be feasible  to  provide  the  intense  level  of
         support that would be required to keep [the appellant] safe  before
         during and after  any  removal  process  and  I  believe  that  the
         probable outcome of removal would be  that  [the  appellant]  would
         take her own life." [Dr Odell's own emphasis]

 5. Dr  Odell  has  acquired  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances through her sustained  treatment  of  her.  However,  the
    doctor provides no support for her opinion that  the  risk  of  suicide
    could not be brought  under  control  before  and  during  the  removal
    process. There is no evidence before me  to  suggest  that  the  United
    Kingdom immigration authorities would not take the appropriate steps to
    very significantly diminish and most likely extinguish the risk of  the
    appellant hurting herself from the point at which she is informed of  a
    decision to carry out removal and during the  removal  process  itself.
    Indeed, Ms Frantzis did not seek to place reliance upon this aspect  of
    the doctor's opinion.

 6. There is much more force in the doctor's view that this very high level
    of suicide risk would exist from  the  point  at  which  the  appellant
    disembarks upon arrival in Nigeria and findings herself, to all intents
    and purposes, effectively alone,  without  obvious  family  support  or
    immediate access to mental health support.  Ms  Ariyo's  latest  report
    shows that mental health support in Nigeria is at best very patchy  and
    certainly costly. Moreover, Mr Diwnycz did not submit  that  access  to
    mental health support could be  arranged  in  advance  and  whilst  the
    appellant still in  the  United  Kingdom  and  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to require the appellant to prove a negative in this  regard.
    I find that it is reasonably likely that the appellant's  anxiety  will
    become severe upon acquiring full knowledge that she will  be  removed;
    that such anxiety may  be  prevented  from  leading  to  the  appellant
    harming herself before and during the  removal  process  but  that  the
    threat to her, by way  of  suicide,  is  likely  to  become  acute  and
    uncontrolled immediately following her arrival in Nigeria. I find  that
    this is a relatively unusual case in which the  medical  evidence  very
    clearly points towards the likely outcome for  an  appellant  suffering
    what is likely to be acute mental disturbance following removal. In the
    particular circumstances that I find exist in this appeal, I allow  the
    appeal of the appellant on Article 3 ECHR grounds.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 14 February 2017 is allowed on human rights  grounds  (Article  3
    ECHR)


Signed                              Date 1 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





































