
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02162/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 March 2020                     |     On 15 April 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'PV'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
By virtue of the appellant appealing an asylum decision, unless and until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr V Lingajothy, Legal Representative, instructed by
L & L Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 0. These are a written record of the oral reasons given for my decision at
    the hearing.

Introduction

 0. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Davies (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 18 July 2019, by
    which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
    refusal on 21 February 2019 of his protection and human rights claims.
    That decision had in turn refused the appellant's application for leave
    to remain based on a claimed fear of persecution because of perceived
    links, as a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnic origin, to the LTTE,
    and 'sur place' activities in the UK.  The appellant's background was
    that he had entered the UK from India on a temporary student visa in
    May 2010, his family having been granted refugee status by the Indian
    authorities many years earlier (although the respondent did not regard
    the grant of such status as necessarily meaning that the appellant had
    refugee status within the meaning of the Refugee Convention). The
    appellant claimed that on arrival to the UK, he lost his claimed
    refugee status in India and so was unable to return there (albeit that
    claim was rejected by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in 2012, but not
    disputed during an First-tier Tribunal hearing before Judge Anstis in
    2016). The respondent disputed the appellant's perceived or actual
    links to the LTTE or sur place activities in the UK, which she regarded
    as contrived.

The FtT's decision

 0. As well as rejecting the appellant's protection claims, the FtT
    assessed the appellant's article 8 ECHR rights on the basis of a return
    to Sri Lanka ([76]) and also considered his ability to return to live
    with his parents and family in India.

 0. The FtT took as his starting point the decision of Judge Anstis in
    2016, recording that the appellant conceded that he did not meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, including very significant
    obstacles to integration to the country to which he would be returned
    ([78]).  The FtT did not regard interference with the appellant's
    private life as any greater than in 2016 and so rejected the appeal in
    respect of a breach of the right to enjoy a private life ([82]).

 0. While the relationship between the appellant and his UK relatives was
    close, the FtT did not regard it as constituting family life for the
    purposes of article 8 ECHR and there was no reason to depart from Judge
    Anstis' s findings.

 0. The FtT rejected the appellant's appeal in its entirety.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 0. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal, which were initially rejected
    by Designated Judge Manuell in a decision dated 6 January 2020.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith granted permission on a single ground,
    namely whether the FtT had erred in considering, for the purposes of an
    article 8 ECHR assessment, whether Judge Plimmer's conclusion in 2012
    that the appellant would have retained leave to enter and remain in
    India would still be valid, particularly as India is not a signatory to
    the Refugee Convention; and had also erred on the basis that the
    respondent was proposing to remove the appellant to Sri Lanka, not
    India, in her most recent decision of February 2019.

The hearing before me

 0. At the hearing before me, two preliminary matters arose.  The first
    matter was a submission by Mr Lingajothy that in the event that I found
    there to be an error of law in relation to article 8, Mr Lingajothy
    sought to renew an application for permission for me to consider errors
    of law in the remaining grounds.  I provided him with an opportunity
    during an adjournment to seek any authority on the point.  He was
    unable to identify any authority for the proposition that he could
    renew his application, permission having already been refused twice.
    In response, Ms Everett referred to the Joint Presidential Guidance
    2019 No 1: Permission to appeal to UTIAC, paragraphs [48] and [49] in
    relation to the extent of limited permission of grounds to proceed and
    I also referred the parties to Safi & Ors (permission to appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC).

 0. Second, Mr Lingajothy sought to rely on evidence which he suggested
    which was produced in January 2020, albeit on review of the
    documentation it in fact is dated December 2019, of which no notice had
    been given.  When I asked him for an explanation for the lateness in
    the production and lack of notice, he was unable to provide any
    explanation.  The document was evidence in the form of a news article,
    said to demonstrate the inability of Sri Lankan refugees to maintain
    immigration status in India.

 0. I mention these two preliminary points because although their
    resolution was ultimately unnecessary for a fair disposal of the
    appeal, where a representative wishes to rely on particular
    propositions which go to the scope of an appeal, it is very unhelpful
    if they make general propositions without being prepared to assist this
    Tribunal by reference to authorities which are relevant to that
    proposition. In this case, Mr Lingajothy' s lack of prior preparation
    for the hearing resulted in an unnecessary lengthening of the hearing
    while I attempted to establish the relevant authorities.  That being
    said, I was ultimately able to establish the correct legal authorities
    and apply them to the facts in this case.  The lack of notice of an
    intention to adduce new evidence might otherwise have derailed the
    hearing, had it been relevant to the respondent's decision (which it
    was not).

 0. The grant of permission was limited to the appellant's rights under
    article 8 ECHR and the extent to which the FtT had failed to consider
    whether the appellant's ability to return to India would have changed
    since Judge Plimmer' s decision in 2012; or alternatively, whether the
    FtT had failed to consider that the respondent proposed to return the
    appellant to Sri Lanka, as stated in the refusal letter, rather than
    India.  In granting permission, Judge Smith regarded it as arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider the fact that the
    appellant would be returning to Sri Lanka, rather than India.

The appellant's submissions

 0. Mr Lingajothy submitted that for the purposes of an article 8 family
    life claim, Judge Anstis had accepted the relations between the
    appellant and his uncle's family in the UK, at [16] to [24] of the 2016
    determination, which the FtT should have taken as his starting point.
    Second, the FtT had not had the benefit of SSHD v BK (Afghanistan)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1358, which was authority for the proposition that in
    considering the guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, an
    FtT should not regard previous findings as a 'straitjacket' and should
    be willing to consider fresh evidence.  Mr Lingajothy submitted that
    the FtT had failed to consider the ability of the appellant to
    integrate into Sri Lanka, where he had left since he was 4 years old,
    and there had been an inadequate assessment of the proportionality of
    the refusal of leave to remain.

The respondent's submissions

 0. Ms Everett said that the brevity of the FtT's reasoning about article 8
    reflected the fact that the applicant had not pursued the article 8
    issue with any vigour, either before Judge Anstis or more particularly
    before the most recent FtT.  There was no suggestion in the grounds
    before me of any failure to consider family life in the UK and reality,
    the only focus remained on the appellant's return either to India or,
    alternatively, to Sri Lanka.  The FtT had considered, in that context,
    issues such as the availability of family support for the appellant.

Discussion and conclusions

 0. I do not accept Mr Lingajothy's submission that the FtT treated either
    of the previous determinations of Judges Anstis and Plimmer as
    "straitjackets." First, the FtT reflected the changed positions between
    the Judge Plimmer's 2012 decision, at [24], that the appellant had been
    residing in India and would be able to return there; and the position
    in 2016, considered by Judge Anstis, in which it was not argued that
    the appellant could return to India.  Second, Mr Lingajothy did not
    develop his argument beyond a generalised assertion.

 0. Third, Mr Lingajothy's submission ignores the point which goes to the
    heart of this appeal, namely the very limited evidence before, and
    submissions made to, the FtT on the article 8 issue.  A criticism might
    be made that a First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to consider the
    fresh evidence before him or her or has failed to engage with an issue
    which has been the subject of detailed submissions before them.  That
    is not the case in this appeal, which indeed Mr Lingajothy confirmed,
    as he was the appellant's representative before the FtT.  In these
    circumstances, the FtT cannot be criticised for failing to depart from
    the findings of a previous First-tier Tribunal, when there is no other
    evidence to depart from those findings, and no submissions on the
    issue.  The FtT reflected that at [77]:

         "Article 8

         77.  The appellant did not deal with the article 8 issue in his
         witness statement.  Nor was the matter dealt with in the skeleton
         argument or in submissions."

 0. In other words, the FtT was in the position of carrying out an
    assessment of an element of the appellant's appeal without the
    assistance of either additional evidence that was not before the
    previous First-tier Tribunals, or any further submissions.
    Nevertheless, for completeness, the FtT did go on to consider the
    appellant's family and private life at paragraphs [78] to [82],
    including by reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
    Rules and Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

 0. I accept the force of Ms Everett's submission that in terms of the
    appellant's family life in the UK, the FtT had clearly considered this
    at paragraph [81]; and in relation to ongoing financial assistance from
    UK relatives, this was also referred to and considered by the FtT at
    [79].  In essence, the FtT's conclusion at [81]that there was nothing
    new in this appeal that makes it appropriate to depart from the
    decision of Judge Anstis was not to treat Judge Anstis' decision as a
    straitjacket, but was simply a reflection, as already stated in
    paragraph [77], that there was no additional evidence before the FtT by
    way of a witness statement nor was the matter dealt with in any
    skeleton argument or in legal submissions.

 0. I considered next the ground that the FtT had confused, in his
    decision, where the appellant would be removed to, noting that the
    respondent was only proposing to remove the appellant to Sri Lanka.
    The additional evidence which Mr Lingajothy attempted to adduce was
    only relevant to the appellant's return to India, not Sri Lanka, as it
    suggested the Indian authorities' refusal to recognise Sri Lanka
    refugees as having Refugee Convention status.  However, the
    respondent's refusal had clearly been on the basis of the appellant's
    return to Sri Lanka.  The FtT's consideration of article 8, at [76],
    [78] and [88] to [107], was on the basis of a return to Sri Lanka.
    Indeed, the FtT noted at [76] that the respondent had made the
    assessment on the basis of a return to Sri Lanka and had referred at
    [78] to the respondent's refusal letter.

 0. In the absence of new evidence and submissions, the FtT was unarguably
    entitled to conclude that there was no reason to depart from the
    previous findings of Judge Anstis and Judge Plimmer, albeit in
    circumstances where one had considered a return to India, and the
    other, in the context of a return to Sri Lanka.  The burden of proof
    was on the appellant and that was a burden that the FtT was entitled to
    conclude that the appellant had failed to discharge.  There was no
    confusion by the FtT about where the respondent was proposing to return
    the appellant and he considered the appeal on that basis, without any
    error of law.

 0. It was unnecessary for me to resolve Mr Lingajothy's submission that if
    I were to conclude that the FtT had erred in relation to article 8, he
    could renew permission to proceed with the appeal in relation to the
    appellant's protection claims.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed J Keith                                             Date:   18  March
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
