







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02313/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 9 May 2019                       |On: 17 May 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                  Mr A K I
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Jones, counsel, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity


    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of  Iraq,  born  on  10  January  1995.  He
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on  22  March  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 3 February 2018, to refuse
    his application for asylum dated 22 August 2015.

 2. Judge Parkes found at [21], that taking the evidence overall and having
    regard in particular  to  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Ghobadi  of  the
    appellant's ability to leave the IKR on his own passport,  he  had  not
    shown that he was genuinely involved in anti-KDP reporting in  the  IKR
    and that he is not  of  adverse  interest  to  the  prevailing  regime.
    Threats by Isis no longer constituted a danger. He can  return  to  the
    IKR.

 3. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jones, who represented  him  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, submitted that the Tribunal misconstrued the facts
    of the  claim  and  did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the  dates  and
    chronology.

 4. The appellant had asserted that prior to his departure from the IKR, he
    worked as  a  journalist  and  raised  issues  concerning  the  state's
    relationship to Iran and the treatment of Peshmerga. He  believed  that
    it was these articles, published through a website  which  he  and  two
    colleagues ran, which led to the threats which eventually caused him to
    leave the IKR. These articles were published in late June 2015.

 5. Following the circulation of these articles within the  public  domain,
    the appellant received threats towards the end of July 2015. These were
    recorded on his phone and  were  transcribed  and  translated  for  the
    purpose of his asylum appeal.

 6. Within a few days of receiving these  threats,  the  appellant  made  a
    decision to leave the IKR. He fled using a conventional border crossing
    as well as his own passport. Whilst threats had been made  against  him
    at  that  time,  there  had  been  no  official  condemnation  of   his
    activities.

 7. It was only after the appellant fled the IKR that a warrant was  issued
    for his arrest on 15 August 2015. That warrant was not disputed by  the
    Home  Office  and  no  questions  were  raised  or   submissions   made
    challenging its veracity.

 8. The warrant for his arrest had been brought back to the UK by a  friend
    who was visiting the  IKR.  This  was  documented  in  the  appellant's
    evidence, including the relevant flight details. His lawyer in the  IKR
    had, by that stage, already fled the country on account of  threats  to
    his own life, having represented the appellant.

 9. Mr Jones submitted that the fact that the appellant was  able  to  flee
    the IKR on his own passport was thus not indicative of the fact that he
    was not at  risk  of  persecution  given  that,  at  the  date  of  his
    departure, an arrest warrant  was  yet  to  be  issued.  There  was  no
    evidence that information had at that stage been  communicated  to  the
    personnel who controlled the border crossing.

10. Mr Jones accordingly submitted that the decision of the  Tribunal  pre-
    supposed that the appellant was recorded as a wanted person at the date
    of his departure although that had not formally taken place until  some
    two weeks after  his  departure.  That,  he  submitted,  explained  his
    ability to leave the jurisdiction without suspicion.

11. Mr Jones also referred to the evidence of Mr Mahmood Ali which  is  set
    out at [12] of the Tribunal's decision. It was accepted that  he  is  a
    journalist who was granted refugee status on account  of  his  risk  of
    persecution posed by his journalism within the IKR.

12. He submitted that the Judge failed to record or consider  his  evidence
    that as a fellow journalist critical of  the  IKR  government,  he  was
    aware of and respected the appellant's articles, which he considered to
    be credible. His evidence relating to the credibility of  the  articles
    and their content accordingly increased the  likelihood  that  the  IKR
    government would react in the same way they did towards  the  appellant
    as the public were more likely to trust the contents of the article and
    by analogy, hold a critical view of the government.

13. It was Mr Ali's  evidence  that  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    articles and content increased the likelihood that the government would
    react in the same way and that he would  similarly  be  at  risk  as  a
    consequence of this, on his return.

14. Dr Kaveh Ghobadi had provided a report in which  he  authenticated  the
    arrest warrant issued against the appellant. Based on his knowledge and
    experience, he concluded that the document is genuine.

15. In his report dated 9 July 2018, Dr Ghobadi stated at paragraph 73 that
    it is not possible to say for sure  whether  the  appellant  is  really
    wanted by the Kurdish government for  the  articles  he  has  allegedly
    published. However, it could be said that had he attracted the  adverse
    attention of the Kurdish  authorities,  he  would  not  not  have  been
    allowed to leave the country legally.

16. Mr Jones submitted that Judge Parkes went further, stating that if  the
    appellant had attracted adverse  attention,  he  would  not  have  been
    allowed to leave.

17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow stated that in the light of  the
    submissions made, he did not seek to oppose the appeal.

18. Both parties submitted that in the circumstances, if  the  decision  is
    set aside, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a fresh decision to be made.

    Assessment

19. The crux of the appellant's case was that he had been able to leave the
    IKR on his own passport, as at that stage an  arrest  warrant  had  not
    been issued. That warrant was only issued  two  weeks  later.  Although
    threats were made against him  prior  to  his  leaving,  there  was  no
    evidence that adverse information had by then already been communicated
    to those controlling the border crossing. At that stage  the  appellant
    was thus not officially sought by the government.

20. I accept that there has accordingly been a misunderstanding as  to  the
    chronology of  the  appellant's  claim.  As  Mr  Jones  submitted,  the
    implicit assertion that the telephone threats alone were sufficient for
    the border guards to have been notified of a requirement to prevent his
    exit, was not substantiated on the evidence.

21. Further, as noted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  Hutchinson,  in
    granting the appellant permission to appeal, the Judge failed to  place
    sufficient weight on the evidence  of  Mr  Mahmood  Ali,  as  a  fellow
    journalist who had been granted refugee status on account of  his  risk
    of persecution posed by his journalism  within  the  IKR.  It  was  his
    evidence that the credibility of the appellant's articles  and  content
    increased the likelihood that the IKR government  would  react  in  the
    same way and that the appellant would accordingly also be at risk as  a
    consequence on his return.

22. I accordingly set aside the decision. It will have to be re-made. It is
    accepted that this is an appropriate case to remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. I set aside the decision and remit the case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham) for a fresh decision  to  be  made  by
    another Judge.

    Anonymity direction continued.













            Signed                             Dated: 15 May 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





