
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02377/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2019                   |On 14th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Knight (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in this case in
relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Geraint Jones QC in the First-
tier Tribunal, promulgated on 23 April 2019 after a hearing at Hatton Cross
on 10 April 2019.

The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq and had made a protection claim based on
his having been targeted by ISIS for selling alcohol and being an atheist.
He comes from an area of Kirkuk and said that he has no CSID and no means
to get one.

The judge dismissed the appeal finding all aspects of the claim to be
without credibility.

The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted are very extensive,
comprising 23 pages in all. The grounds principally rely on the judge's
conduct of the hearing, which has in fact been the subject of a complaint.
I have not been advised of the result of that complaint, nor have I been
provided with a copy of the complaint but as I understand it the judge
concerned has now retired.

I have been provided with a witness statement by counsel who represented
the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. That statement indicates that
the judge made no effort to introduce himself or the representatives at the
hearing nor did provide any introduction to the appellant or explanation of
the procedure. His manner was aggressive and sarcastic during the course of
the hearing and gave every impression of being biased against this
appellant in particular and asylum seekers in general.

The Decision and Reasons itself, in the findings, is couched in rather
intemperate language. The judge at paragraph 23, in his first finding,
states that the appellant is willing to lie, and has lied, to procure the
outcome that he desires, that is continued residence in this country. He
goes on to say that he is entirely sure the appellant lied during cross
examination. He suggests that the appellant changed his account during the
course of the hearing, which on the basis of the evidence before the judge
he clearly had not. The matter of his atheism, the judge said was raised at
the hearing and for the first time only by counsel and not by the
appellant. The asylum interview and the appellant's statement quite clearly
refer to this and thus it is not true to say that it was raised by counsel.

The Decision and Reasons goes on to refer to the appellant lying about
virtually every part of his claim and indeed the Decision and Reasons also
refers to asylum seekers generally disposing of their identity documents to
assist their case.

I am entirely satisfied on the basis of the grounds, the witness statement
of counsel, Ms Blair and the contents of the Decision and Reasons itself
that an impartial observer sitting in court at this hearing would have come
to the conclusion that this appellant did not have a fair hearing. The
Decision and Reasons itself gives the impression that this particular judge
considers all asylum seekers to be liars. It may be that the appellant's
claim may be found to be not credible but the terms in which the adverse
credibility findings are couched in this Decision and Reasons does not give
the impression of an impartial assessment of the evidence.

Mr Tufan did not seek to defend the Decision and Reasons. I therefore find,
on the basis of fairness, that the Decision and Reasons is tainted by
material errors of law and must be set aside in its entirety.

Given the fact that the entire case will need to be reheard and findings of
fact made it is appropriate that it be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
for a full rehearing on all issues.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    Decision and Reasons is set aside and the matter remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 5 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

