
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02094/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 18, 2018                          |On January 22, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  MR D S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannagara, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He entered the United  Kingdom
    on August 9, 2008 as a student. His visa was extended until August  29,
    2011. He lodged two applications to remain outside of  the  Rule  which
    were refused. He was then given leave to remain for  post  study  leave
    until February 13, 2014. Four applications to  remain  on  EEA  grounds
    were lodged between January 6, 2014  and  November  7,  2015  and  each
    application was refused. On August 9, 2016 he was served  with  removal
    papers and the following day he claimed asylum.

 3. The respondent refused  his  application  on  February  3,  2017  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision  on  February  27,  2017  and  the
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Andonian
    (hereinafter called the Judge)  on  August  24,  2017.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on September 13, 2017 the Judge dismissed his appeal on all
    grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on September 27, 2017 arguing  the
    Judge had erred. Permission to appeal was given by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pooler on November 14, 2017. The respondent filed a  Rule
    24 response dated December 7, 2017.

 6. The case came before  me  on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. Having heard submissions  I  reserved  my
    decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Kannagara relied on the grounds of appeal as drafted  and  submitted
    the Judge had made a material error in law. He  argued  the  Judge  had
    made up his mind before considering the appellant's statement and  oral
    evidence. He submitted the decision should be set aside and remitted to
    the First-tier because:

      a) The Judge made an adverse finding on credibility due to  the  delay
         in claiming asylum. The appellant gave  a  credible  and  plausible
         explanation for not claiming earlier namely  he  had  been  granted
         leave as a student and a post study worker and he had been  seeking
         leave to remain as an EEA family member. The adverse finding played
         a major role in the ultimate rejection of his claim.

      b) The  Judge  failed  to  consider  his  explanation  about  why  the
         appellant and S had a lack of contact. He stated that it was S  who
         contacted him and that it was S who told him to stay away.  He  had
         been approached in Colombo by LTTE supporters because he was  known
         to have links to the LTTE through his  previous  actions.  However,
         the Judge overlooked the appellant's claim that he was not involved
         in the LTTE and therefore knew little about S or anyone else.

      c)  The  Judge  failed  to  consider  his  explanation  why  S  wanted
         information from him about R.

      d) The Judge unfairly made a finding that it  lacked  credibility  his
         mother lost all three arrest warrants.

      e) The Judge considered the medical  report  after  he  made  findings
         about the appellant's injuries. This was an error in law.

 8. Ms Pal adopted the  Rule  24  response  dated  December  7,  2017.  She
    submitted that none of the grounds raised identified an error  in  law.
    In particular, she submitted:

      a) The Judge correctly directed himself in respect of the weight to be
         attached to the delay in claiming asylum. The Judge did not  reject
         his claim because of the delay and it  was  only  in  [26]  of  the
         decision  that  he  concluded  the  delay  adversely  affected  his
         credibility.

      b) The Judge considered the appellant's link to  the  LTTE  from  [10]
         onwards  in  the  decision.  The  Judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
         appellant's claim and set the claim out in detail in the  decision.
         He then made findings that rejected his claimed link to S  at  [20]
         and [21] and at [19], [22], 25] and  27  he  addressed  the  issues
         relating to R. These findings on S and R were open to him.

      c) The Judge considered the appellant's  explanation  about  the  lost
         arrest warrants and he rejected his  account  which  was  something
         open to him.

      d) The Judge considered the appellant's account. He found the  account
         lacked credibility. The medical report  accepted  there  were  many
         reasons  causes  for  the  injuries.  As  the  Judge  rejected  his
         credibility it mattered little  where  he  summarised  the  medical
         evidence.

 9. Having heard the submissions I reserved my decision.

    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR IN LAW

10. The appellant's protection claim was rejected and  it  is  the  Judge's
    approach to the evidence that forms the basis of the grounds of appeal.



11. The Judge made an adverse finding on credibility under section 8 of the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Offenders etc) Act 2004 at [26] in
    his decision. Mr Kannagara submitted that this  finding  was  wrong  in
    law. The Judge was clearly aware of the appellant's immigration history
    and was entitled to make the finding he did at  [26].  The  appellant's
    last grant of leave ended on February 13, 2014  and  whilst  he  lodged
    four separate attempts to extend his stay as an EEA family member  they
    were all rejected. Section 8 makes it clear that a person  is  expected
    to make his asylum claim at the earliest possible opportunity. This was
    not done in this case. Even if the appellant felt he could stay without
    claiming asylum the fact remains that after the refusal of his last EEA
    application on November 7, 2015 he waited  until  he  was  served  with
    removal papers before making his claim. The Judge was entitled to  make
    the finding he did and it is clear it was only one of the factors  that
    led the Judge to reject his claim.

12. The issues relating to the LTTE and S and R are  connected.  From  [10]
    onwards the Judge considered the evidence and explanations  given.  The
    Judge recorded how and when the appellant met S. His evidence was  that
    when he lived in his village he passed information to S. He claimed  he
    was detained but after his release he said that S again  contacted  him
    but this time he wanted information about R, a person called who worked
    in the criminal investigation department. The Judge set out his account
    of what happened to R and then proceeded to  consider  the  appellant's
    whole claim. The Judge found the appellant gave  inconsistent  evidence
    about S and was unable to tell the Judge much  about  him.  These  were
    factors the Judge held against him.

13. Mr Kannagara argues that the Judge should have attached weight to  what
    he said in his statement but taking  the  decision  as  a  whole  I  am
    satisfied the Judge did engage with the evidence. What he  did  not  do
    was make the findings sought by Mr Kannagara.  If  the  Judge  had  not
    considered the evidence and made no findings then that would be capable
    of amounting to an error in law but I am satisfied the  Judge  assessed
    the evidence as it related to both S and R and reached conclusions open
    to him. The Judge found the appellant's claim  lacked  credibility  and
    dealt with both S and R in some detail.

14. Mr Kannagara argued that the Judge erred in his approach to the medical
    evidence. The medical evidence dwas inconclusive as the doctor accepted
    the appelalnt's old injuries could have been caused in  any  number  of
    ways. Ideally, the findings on the medical evidence and how it affected
    the evidence would have been earlier in the decision but it  cannot  be
    argued the Judge has not considered the content of the  report  against
    his injuries and the account given. The Judge dealt with the report  in
    some detail between [31] and [32] of the decision.

15. The final issue raised related to the Judge's treatment of  the  arrest
    warrants. He dealt with this at [24]  and  [28]  of  his  decision.  Mr
    Kannagara argued the appellant's explanation that his mother lost  them
    through moving house should have been accepted.  The  finding  at  [24]
    followed other negative findings. The Judge does not have to accept the
    explanation tendered by the appellant.  In  this  appeal  he  chose  to
    reject his claims and he gave reasons. Those findings are not  perverse
    and were findings open to the Judge. None of the grounds  identify  and
    error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  Judge's
    decision.


Signed                              Date     January 18, 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable because the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed                              Date     January 18, 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

