
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02400/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 July 2016                          |On 21 July 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kanagaratnam who, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  10  May  2016,
    purported to allow the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. I make an anonymity  direction  in  this  case.   Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant   is   granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him or any member of their  family.   This  direction  applies
    both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
    this decision on the basis of the risk of serious harm  arising  to  TS
    from the contents of his asylum claim.

 3. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the respondent and to TS as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The respondent's challenge was as follows:

         "It is submitted that within the 'notice of decision' the appeal is
         allowed under human rights grounds however  at  no  point  has  the
         judge given clear reasons within the body of the  determination  as
         to why the appellant would be successful due to a breach  of  human
         rights.  The reasons within the determination itself suggests quite
         the opposite.  In paragraph 16 the FTJ states that 'I find that the
         removal of this appellant from the United Kingdom would  not  cause
         the United Kingdom to be  in  breach  of  its  obligations  to  the
         European Convention of Human Rights'.

         It is clear that the judge has made  a  clerical  error  with  this
         determination.  The SSHD takes  notice  of  the  case  of  Katsonga
         ("Slip Rule: FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 00228  (IAC),  where
         it is stated that the 'Slip Rule'  cannot  be  used  to  reverse  a
         decision.  However it is submitted that the  discrepancies  between
         the judge's reasoning and the final decision do present a  material
         error of law, therefore the decision should be set aside".

 5. Permission was granted on that sole ground by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in a decision dated 8 June 2016 issued on 9 June 2016.

 6. I was provided with a Rule 24 response dated 13 July  2016.   Mr  Duffy
    did not object to its late admission and I extended time in  order  for
    it to be admitted. At paragraph 3 it states:

         "The respondent's sole  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  decision
         allowing the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  is  at
         variance with the reasoning in the  determination.   The  appellant
         cannot resist this ground, and agrees that the decision  should  be
         set aside".

 7. There is therefore  agreement  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses an error on a point  of  law  in  stating  that  the
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds. It is my decision that this
    part of the decision alone requires re-making and I do so, refusing the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

 8. Ms Jones sought to argue that the re-making could and  should  be  much
    wider, addressing various purported errors in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  I was also  referred  to  a  letter  from  the  current
    representatives to the previous representatives complaining about their
    conduct of the case.

 9. It was not my view that the decision should be re-made  other  than  on
    the narrow basis set out above. I have set out the limited ground  upon
    which permission was sought and granted and which was conceded  by  the
    appellant. There was no cross-appeal on any ground from the  appellant.
    He therefore did not have permission to argue any error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal before me. He was not in a position
    to have any part of the First-tier Tribunal  re-made  other  than  that
    discussed above.

10. The Tribunal has addressed the appellant's submission in EG and NG  (UT
    rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24 scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT  00143  (IAC).
    The third paragraph of the head note to that case states

         "A party that seeks to persuade the Upper  Tribunal  to  replace  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal with a decision that would make
         a material difference to one of the  parties  needs  permission  to
         appeal.   The  Upper  Tribunal  cannot  entertain  an   application
         purporting to be made under Rule 24 for permission to appeal  until
         the First-tier Tribunal has been asked in writing for permission to
         appeal  and  has  either  refused  it  or  declined  to  admit  the
         application".

11. As I understood it the appellant  sought  to  argue  that  it  remained
    within my discretion to extend the scope of the  re-making  to  address
    what he considered to be the shortcomings in the  credibility  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal and, further, to admit a  witness  statement
    from his sister and an independent social work report neither of  which
    were provided before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. That argument appeared to me to seek to override due  process  and  the
    statutory constraints on the Tribunal. What  the  appellant  is  really
    asking is to for his  case  to  be  looked  at  again  now  because  he
    considers  that  he  had  poor  representation  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and has a better case now to present.  Those  arguments  could
    have been made in an application for permission to appeal but were not.
    The proper course open  to  him  is  to  make  a  fresh  claim  to  the
    respondent.

13. Ms Jones made a tentative application for me to  sit  as  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge and decide on an application for permission to appeal. I
    declined to do so as that also appeared to me to be a course of  action
    which sought to undermine due process.

Notice of Decision

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an  error  on  a
    point of law on the narrow basis set out above.


15. The appeal is re-made as refused on all grounds.

Signed: [pic]                           Dated: 20 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
