
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02240/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2018                              |On 05 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Awara [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Broudie
Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Austin sent on 2 May  2017  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision made by  the  respondent  on  20  October  2015  refusing  his
    protection claim.

2.   I am grateful to both representatives for their  succinct  submissions.
    It is convenient, in light of the common ground, if I proceed  straight
    to my reasons for concluding that the judge materially erred in law.

3.   There is an initial difficulty with the judge's decision  in  that  his
    adverse credibility findings are far from clear.  On the one hand  they
    state that his account is not credible without qualification.   On  the
    other hand, they accept that the factual matrix in this  case  is  that
    the claimant is a Kurd, someone who has a history of having  served  in
    the police force and someone whose  family  members  live  in  relative
    safety.  On its own I am not persuaded this lack of clarity constitutes
    an error of law but it does serve as a backdrop for  considering  other
    difficulties.

4.   Even assuming that the judge was entitled to decide  the  case  on  the
    basis of the above factual matrix, the judge was required  to  consider
    three different matters: (1) risk on return  to  the  appellant's  home
    area of Kirkuk, (2)  risk  on  return  to  Baghdad;  and  (3)  risk  on
    relocation to Sulaymania.  As regards the judge's  treatment  of  these
    three  issues,  it  is  a  struggle  to  follow  his  assessment  since
    consideration of them is jumbled together. But leaving aside this  lack
    of organised reasoning, the judge's treatment of each  of  these  three
    issues is problematic.

5.   As regards (1), the judge stated that he "considered  the  guidance  in
    the case of AA (Article 15c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)", but then
    went straight on to ignore it, assuming, wrongly, that this case  found
    there was no generalised  risk  in  that  region  despite  it  being  a
    contested area.  The judge gave no indication that in departing from AA
    he was seeking to rely on cogent new  COI  or  its  equivalent  and  Mr
    Harrison did not suggest that there was such before the judge.  If  the
    judge had in mind that perhaps the claimant would be immunised  against
    general risk by virtue  of  his  personal  characteristic  of  being  a
    "serving policeman", then that required more explanation,  particularly
    given that it would have  been  potentially  contrary  to  Home  Office
    country policy information.

6.   Turning to (2), the claimant clearly would have  difficulty  in  living
    in Baghdad by virtue of the fact that he is accepted to be a Kurd.  The
    judge's treatment at paragraph 37 of  the  Baghdad  scenario  makes  no
    reference to relevant country guidance.

7.   As regards (3), the judge's treatment of  it  does  not  addresses  the
    issue of whether or not the claimant would in the first place  be  able
    to obtain a CSID, which, as held by the Court of Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, is "an essential document for life in Iraq".

8.   The judge's failure  to  address  the  CSID  issue  also  afflicts  his
    treatment of issues (1) and (2).

9.   In light of the above analysis, I conclude that  the  judge  materially
    erred in law and I set aside the judge's decision.

10.  Both parties agreed with me that in the event  that  I  set  aside  the
    judge's decision  the  case  should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT  to  be
    considered afresh.

11.  The respondent accepts that the  appellant  is  Kurdish  and  a  former
    policeman.  These findings can be treated as a start-point for the next
    hearing but nothing else can be preserved from the judge's decision.

12.  Since there is a new country guidance case on Iraq due to be  concluded
    soon, it would be unwise of me to add anything except to say  that  the
    three issues identified above as ((1), (2) and  (3)  above)  should  be
    addressed.  However, if the next Tribunal were to  find  the  appellant
    wholly lacking in credibility in anything other than his ethnicity  and
    experience as a former policeman, then I would not exclude that it  may
    decide that his ability to access a CSID could  be  inferred  from  his
    lack of credibility in other material respects, applying  the  approach
    set out by the Court of Appeal in GM (Eritrea) (approved by the Supreme
    Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49).

13.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge Austin is set aside for material error of
    law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Austin).


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 30 March 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




