
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02981/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2019                     |On 12 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                              Q A S (Pakistan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Paul Turner, Counsel instructed by Burney Legal
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  We continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This order  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal refusing him international protection under  the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and alleges that he is  at  risk
    on return because he is a gay man.  The respondent disputes his  sexual
    orientation, arguing that the appellant is not a credible witness.

 3. The names of the witnesses and the appellant have  been  anonymised  in
    this decision.

Background

 4. The appellant was born in April 1988 and is now 31 years old.  He  came
    to the United Kingdom as a student with a Tier 4 visa in January  2011.
    That visa expired in January 2015.  Before his  student  visa  expired,
    the applicant made a human rights application for leave to remain which
    was unsuccessful and on which he was appeal rights exhausted on 16 June
    2015.  He did not embark but remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom.

 5. On 6 December 2017, the appellant was encountered working illegally and
    was arrested.  On 11 December 2017 he claimed  asylum.   There  was  an
    asylum interview and a referral to the National Referral Mechanism.  On
    15 February 2018, the respondent refused the asylum claim,  giving  the
    appellant a further in-country right of appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6.  First-tier  Judge  Samimi  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.    The
    appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and we set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge on irrationality grounds: the Judge had made  a
    Mibanga error in applying her finding that the appellant's evidence was
    not credible to reduce the  weight  given  to  the  evidence  of  three
    corroborative witnesses whom she found to be witnesses of truth.

 7. The appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  permission  was
    granted.

Error of law decision

 8. At a hearing on 16 April 2019, we set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and ordered that the decision in this appeal be remade in
    the Upper Tribunal.  We therefore have no regard to  the  reasoning  or
    conclusions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  although  we  can  take  into
    account the evidence recorded in that decision.

 9. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    for remaking of the decision in this appeal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. The evidence before the Upper Tribunal consisted  of  the  Home  Office
    bundle, the respondent's Country Information and Policy  Note  entitled
    Pakistan: Sexual orientation and gender identity  or  expression  [July
    2019], colour copies of photographs of the appellant and friends,  said
    to have been taken at various nightclubs  in  London,  and  a  298-page
    bundle of documents filed by the appellant, which included his  witness
    statement and those of his three witnesses, Mr A, Mr M and Mr  K.   All
    three witnesses and the appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing.

11. There are also letters of support from Ms SN, Mr  N  (said  to  be  the
    appellant's former partner in Pakistan) and Mr H; a medico-legal report
    from Dr Juliet Cohen, Head of Doctors at Freedom from Torture (formerly
    known as the Medical Foundation), a psychological report from Dr  Saima
    Latif,  a  Chartered  and  Registered  Practitioner  Psychologist   and
    Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society,  and  a  country
    report from Ms Uzma Moeen of  the  Asian  Legal  Advice  Service.   The
    bundle includes other evidence to which we will refer where relevant.

12. The respondent has provided the Upper Tribunal with a copy of the up-to-
    date Country Policy and  Information  Note  (CPIN)  entitled  Pakistan:
    Sexual orientation and gender identity or expression [July 2019] and we
    will have regard to that iteration of the CPIN, rather  than  the  July
    2014 version which appears in the appellant's bundle.

Appellant's evidence

13.   The appellant adopted his witness statement dated  6  November  2018,
    prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   In  that   witness
    statement, the appellant said he had grown up with his parents and four
    siblings, initially in an area in Jhelum in the Punjab, Pakistan.

14. The appellant had begun to be aware of his sexual preference for  boys,
    not girls, in 2002 when he was about 14.  The appellant felt 'very down
    and nervous' as he  knew  that  what  he  felt  was  against  Pakistani
    culture, religion and society.  He knew it would be unacceptable to his
    family, so he did not tell them how he felt.  He feared  that  if  they
    found out, they would inform on him and he would be killed.

15. The appellant confided only in his best friend, Mr N, to  whom  he  was
    attracted, and in May 2002, during the summer holidays,  they  began  a
    relationship. The relationship continued until January 2010  and  Mr  N
    has written a letter in support of the appellant in these  proceedings.
    Mr N's first supporting  letter  erroneously  said  their  relationship
    began in 2003, but he later corrected that to confirm  the  appellant's
    account that it began in 2002.

16. The relationship was not without difficulties.  The appellant shared  a
    bedroom with his other four siblings: the  family  home  had  only  two
    bedrooms.  Mr N also lived in a small home and did not have a  separate
    bedroom.  The boys used to go to a hilly area which  was  quiet,  where
    nobody normally went, and there they would engage in  sexual  activity.
    In September 2003 they were caught there by neighbours of  the  family,
    who beat both boys and then told their  families  what  they  had  been
    doing.

17. The appellant's family reacted as he had expected: they also  beat  him
    and locked him in a room for a couple of hours.   His  mother  let  him
    out.  The appellant was restricted from seeing Mr N for about six weeks
    after that. The family considered that the appellant's aberrant  sexual
    impulses were an illness and that what he  needed  was  a  wife,  after
    which he would recover and not be attracted to men any more.

18. Three years later, in 2006, when the appellant was 17 years old, he was
    sent to study for a mechanical engineering diploma at a boarding school
    in the Wah Cantonment (Wah Cantt) in Punjab.  The appellant was able to
    return home often to his home in Jhelum and visit his family  at  least
    once a month there.  He continued  his  relationship  with  Mr  N:  the
    families were more relaxed by this time about their friendship and they
    were allowed to hang out and  eat  together,  and  go  to  watch  films
    together.  They 'acted normal in front of our families' but the  sexual
    relationship continued.

19. In August 2007, the appellant was watching an adult film with Mr N in a
    CD centre which had a private room at the back.  They had watched  many
    films together in that room and had learned by experience  that  nobody
    would come to disturb them in that room while  the  film  was  playing.
    They felt it was a safe place for their sexual activity,  but  on  this
    particular occasion, they were discovered during that activity by 'some
    people' who took them to their families and also told  the  local  Imam
    what they had been doing. This time, the appellant's family  were  very
    unhappy with him.  They beat him up hard.

20. The appellant's sexuality was a religious and social  problem  for  the
    whole family.  The local Imam was his father's friend  and  the  family
    had many discussions with him about what was to be done.  The Imam took
    no public steps, but eventually  in  January  2008,  a  compromise  was
    reached, with the Imam saying that the whole family would have to leave
    their home in the Jhelum area of the Punjab and move  away  to  another
    city.  The appellant's father could  have  formally  disowned  him  but
    chose to move his family away instead. The family  moved  to  Sargodha,
    and all its members had to find new schools and jobs.

21. The appellant continued to board at his  educational  establishment  in
    Wah Cantt.  He had a secret physical relationship with Mr  D  while  he
    was there, but it was just for 'enjoyment' (casual sexual activity) and
    only for a few months.  No one found out. At the end of his studies  in
    2009, the appellant returned home  to  join  his  family  in  Sargodha.
    While living there, he had an 'enjoyment' relationship with  a  cousin,
    Mr C.  His cousin knew about the appellant being caught previously  and
    they were  very  careful  to  find  private  places  for  their  sexual
    activity.  They were not caught and nobody else in  the  Sargodha  area
    knew of the appellant's sexual orientation at that time.

22. The appellant's  family  continued  to  consider  that  his  homosexual
    orientation was a phase and that if he were to get married to  a  girl,
    he would stop wanting to have sex with men.  They found him a potential
    wife in Pakistan (without consulting the appellant) from a family  with
    a strong political wing.

23. The appellant was not pleased and he says he 'emotionally  blackmailed'
    his mother into sending him  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  study.   His
    brothers both had good educations and a  good  job,  and  he  told  his
    mother that he wanted the same.  The appellant's family were  not  very
    happy about letting him travel abroad to study,  but  he  thought  that
    they might have hoped that if they agreed, he would listen to them  and
    marry their choice of bride when he returned.  The appellant's view was
    that he was leaving Pakistan to avoid the marriage,  but  that  at  the
    time he did not fear that he would be killed or suffer serious harm  if
    he stayed.

24. The appellant got a visa, and came to the United Kingdom in May 2011 to
    study.  Once in the United Kingdom, the appellant learned that  it  was
    legal to be openly gay here.  He began to attend gay clubs and live  an
    openly gay life.  Unfortunately, he met some people while doing so  who
    were from  Sargodha.   They  told  his  family  in  Pakistan  that  the
    appellant was leading an openly gay lifestyle here.

25. In August 2011, the appellant met a man, Mr  U,  with  whom  he  had  a
    relationship in the United Kingdom, lasting until December  2013,  when
    Mr U went back to Pakistan.  They keep in contact, and Mr U  now  lives
    in Istanbul, Turkey.

26. On 20 December 2012, the appellant's family asked him  whether  he  was
    leading a gay lifestyle in London,  during  a  telephone  conversation.
    The appellant admitted it.  His family got really angry and  broke  all
    ties with him, saying never to call home again and  that  if  they  saw
    him, they would kill him.  The appellant has not spoken to any  of  his
    family members since then.

27. In January 2013, a friend  told  the  appellant  that  the  appellant's
    father had lodged an FIR against the appellant on 12 January  2013  and
    published in a newspaper a notice that he was disowning the  appellant.
    He considers that the family had to do this in order to allow  them  to
    continue to live a normal life in the local community and 'not face any
    struggle'.

28. On 2 October 2013, the appellant returned to Pakistan for a  month,  to
    see whether he could live there.  He did not go home to  Sargodha,  but
    stayed in Rawalpindi and Lahore with friends.

29. On 18 October 2013, the appellant said that he was  visiting  Islamabad
    with a friend when someone called out 'catch him  he  is  gay'  and  on
    turning around, he saw that they had been spotted  by  people  whom  he
    recognised from his home neighbourhood in Sargodha.  The appellant  and
    his friend went back quickly to their car and drove off:  the  Sargodha
    people tried to follow, but the appellant and his friend got away.  The
    appellant went to the police and lodged  a  complaint:  without  family
    support, he felt scared.  He did not mention that the  Sargodha  people
    were pursuing him because of his sexuality, because homosexual activity
    is a crime in Pakistan and to do so would have seen  him  arrested  and
    beaten up by the police.

30. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom on  2  November  2013  and
    continues to live openly here.  He goes  to  gay  clubs  and  bars  for
    'enjoyment', in particular to West Five (Disco  Rani),  Royal  Vauxhall
    Tavern, Club Kali, Heaven, GAY Bar and Ku Bar.   He feels safer in  the
    United Kingdom than he would in Pakistan, where he now feels there is a
    real danger to his life were he to return.   The  appellant  relied  on
    unparticularised compassionate and compelling circumstances  and  asked
    for his appeal to be allowed.

31. That statement was not updated for the Upper Tribunal  hearing.   After
    the appellant  had  adopted  it,  Mr  Turner  asked  him  supplementary
    questions, seeking  to  clarify  matters  raised  in  the  respondent's
    skeleton argument.  The  appellant  gave  evidence  through  a  Punjabi
    interpreter. Mr Turner asked the appellant whether  he  had  fabricated
    his account of being gay, and his history.  He said that he had not: he
    was gay and this was his gay life.

32. Mr Turner asked why the appellant had not claimed asylum on arrival  in
    2011: he said he was scared, as he had heard on the news and the  radio
    that the Home Office were deporting everyone,  and  he  was  afraid  of
    being deported.  Mr Turner asked the  appellant  to  clarify  when  his
    relationship with Mr N began.  He said it was definitely 2002 and  that
    it was Mr N who had made the mistake by saying 2003, as  he  had  since
    confirmed.

33. Mr Turner reminded the applicant that  in  his  2015  application,  two
    years after the final rift with his parents, the appellant had said  he
    was receiving �600 a month from his family to support his studies.  The
    appellant said his solicitor had completed that application and he  had
    made a mistake in not reading it through.  He  was  not  receiving  any
    money from his family in 2015: when the Home Office  arrested  him,  he
    was working, and if he had been receiving financial  support  from  his
    family, he would not have been working. He had not mentioned being  gay
    then because his focus was on completing  his  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

34. The appellant was asked about the discrepancy in his account  in  these
    proceedings as to where the  sexual  activity  between  him  and  Mr  N
    occurred, whether it was at home (as Dr Latif's report stated) or in  a
    hilly area.  The appellant said he had told Dr Latif it happened in the
    hilly area and the mistake was hers.  In his home area in  Jhelum,  the
    houses were small, and he lived with his parents and his four  brothers
    and sisters.

35. The appellant's original home town  was  small,  with  only  about  200
    houses.  He did not know how a photograph of  him  kissing  a  man  had
    reached his  family  in  Sargodha.   He  did  not  know  who  took  the
    photograph.

36. In cross-examination, Mr Melvin challenged the appellant's account that
    he went to a co-educational school in Pakistan.  The appellant  pointed
    out that he had produced a certificate from the school saying  that  it
    was co-educational, and had given it to his solicitor.  Mr Melvin  then
    asked about the first time that the appellant and Mr N were  caught  in
    the hilly area: had his parents explained the potential  penalties  for
    his actions?  The appellant said they had.  His  mother  had  explained
    that sexual activity between men was not  allowed  in  their  religion.
    After that, his parents and brothers and sisters had kept a  close  eye
    on the appellant, and he had not been allowed to see Mr N for about six
    weeks.  He was very scared.  Both of them behaved  as  'nice  guys'  in
    front of their families and won their confidence back.

37. After a time, the appellant told his mother he needed to  collect  some
    notes from Mr N, who was his classmate, and she allowed him to  do  so.
    The appellant's family were  not  watching  him  24  hours  a  day  and
    sometimes, if the appellant had secret feelings and noticed that he was
    not being watched, he would meet Mr N in secret places.  Mr N's  family
    felt the same about homosexuality as the appellant's family: they  were
    also watching him.  Whenever the appellant had feelings towards  Mr  N,
    they would go to a secret place.

38. The appellant and Mr N they were not caught again until the  neighbours
    saw them in 2007.  This time, the Imam was involved, and the  appellant
    was badly beaten.  He really needed to see a doctor or go to  hospital,
    but his family did not take him because of the shame; his injuries were
    treated at home with some cream. Mr Melvin asked about the  appellant's
    relationships with Mr Nasir and the two  'enjoyment'  relationships  he
    had in Wah Cantt and Sargodha.  The appellant said that he had not told
    Mr Nasir about those relationships.

39. The appellant said that his parents chose Sargodha for their next  home
    area after the family was forced out of their home town in  the  Jhelum
    area.  He thought it was about 4 hours' drive away.  The Imam in  their
    Jhelum home town had told them that they could no  longer  live  there,
    even though the appellant was not living at home but was at a  boarding
    school in Wah Cantt.  His family had to change jobs and  schools:   the
    appellant's behaviour had a significant impact on them.

40. Mr Melvin expressed surprise that with these difficulties,  the  family
    had supported the appellant's wish to come to the  United  Kingdom  and
    study here.  The appellant said that between the end of his studies  in
    Wah Cantt in 2009 and coming to the United  Kingdom  in  2011,  he  was
    living at home in Sargodha with his parents but not  working.   Members
    of his family beat him and  said  bad  things  to  him  all  the  time,
    particularly when there were financial difficulties.  The  family  were
    angry with him and thought they had spent enough on his  education.  He
    said it was principally his mother  who  had  supported  his  wish  for
    further study abroad, after he spoke to her in an emotional way, saying
    that all of his siblings except him were well-educated and doing  well,
    with the appellant lagging behind.

41. The final breach between the appellant and  his  family  was  connected
    with the kissing photograph reaching them in Sargodha.   The  appellant
    did not know whether that picture was physical or  electronic,  or  how
    they came to see it.  His family  just  told  him  that  now  they  had
    evidence of his homosexual  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    evidence had reached the community in Sargodha and  many  people  there
    knew about his sexuality now.  He still had no idea who sent or  showed
    the picture to his family.

42. Asked about his return to Pakistan in 2013, the appellant said he  knew
    he could not return to Sargodha as his family had filed an FIR  against
    him there. Sargodha was a big city with a population of  about  600,000
    people.  The appellant had wanted to find out whether he could live  in
    another city, away from his family and his previous problems.   He  had
    friends in Rawalpindi, Islamabad and Lahore, and he visited  them,  but
    in Rawalpindi he had a bad experience because he  was  attacked  there.
    None of his friends from that trip had written letters of  support:  it
    had not occurred to the appellant to ask  for  letters.   He  had  been
    unable to obtain a copy of the  police  report  he  filed  after  being
    chased in Islamabad by friends from his home  area  of  Sargodha.   The
    Sargodha people had recognised him, even though he had  not  seen  them
    for five years.

43. Since arriving in the United Kingdom in 2011, the  appellant  had  been
    going to different clubs but had not  joined  any  LGBTI  organisations
    here.  He had many gay friends, but none to whom he was close.  He  had
    not asked any of them to  give  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    because he did not want to expose his immigration status  in  front  of
    anyone.  He had never discussed his immigration status, or that of  his
    friends, with them.

44. In re-examination, the appellant confirmed the list of gay clubs in his
    witness statement, saying that he went clubbing every week or so;  they
    would dance and drink at the clubs.  He had attended  Pride,  which  he
    said took place 6 July 2019.

Mr A's evidence

45. Mr A, also a Pakistani citizen, adopted his  witness  statement  of  29
    March 2018, prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.    Mr  A  did
    not give evidence in the First-tier Tribunal: this is  the  first  time
    his evidence has been tested.

46. In his statement Mr A said that he had been part of  a  3-person  house
    share in Ilford, having  moved  in  to  the  house  in  May  2011,  the
    appellant taking a room in the house in June or  July  2011.   Each  of
    them had a room to themselves.   Mr A left the house in December  2012,
    and the appellant was still living there then.  Over time,  they  moved
    from being housemates to friendship, sitting in the back garden  having
    tea and chatting after work, and later, sometimes going out for  meals.
    Mr A found the appellant to be gentle, nice, cooperative, friendly  and
    caring.

47. The appellant had a friend, Mr U, who came often to the house to  visit
    the appellant, beginning in the autumn of 2011.  Mr U would  come  over
    two or three times a week, sometimes staying over  in  the  appellant's
    room.  Mr A asked  the  appellant  to  explain  this  friendship.   The
    appellant was reluctant at first, but eventually told Mr A he was  gay,
    explaining about the situation with Mr N in  Pakistan,  the  steps  his
    family had taken to separate them, but that he could not keep away from
    Mr N because of how he felt.  While staying in the house, the appellant
    sometimes went out to gay bars.

48. After Mr A left the shared  house  in  December  2012,  the  friendship
    continued.  They would speak about once a week and  meet  a  couple  of
    times a month, in Wimbledon, and go out to eat.  The appellant had told
    him about the attempted attack  in  Islamabad  in  October  2013.   The
    relationship with Mr  U  ended  in  2013,  because  Mr  U  returned  to
    Pakistan.  Mr A considered that the appellant was at risk  in  Pakistan
    from both his family members and people  in  general,  because  of  his
    sexuality.

49. In answer to supplementary questions from Mr Turner, Mr A  refuted  the
    respondent's assertion that the appellant is not gay.   Mr  A  said  he
    lived in the same house as the appellant for  over  a  year,  that  the
    appellant looked gay and had a male  friend  he  went  out  with  'many
    times', and had gay activities.  The appellant told Mr A  some  things,
    but some things he noticed himself because they were sharing a house.

50. In cross-examination, Mr Melvin asked more about Mr U.  Mr A emphasised
    that he is not gay.  Mr A said that Mr U was  the  appellant's  friend,
    not his own friend. He thought Mr U was doing building work: he did not
    know Mr U's immigration status, nor did he know where Mr U  lived.   He
    did not know if Mr U was homeless or had anywhere else to stay.

51. Mr A was not related to the appellant, they were just friends.    Mr  A
    did not know any of the appellant's other friends.  When they met, they
    did so alone.  Mr A did not have any direct knowledge of the events  in
    Pakistan about which the appellant had spoken to him.

52. There was no re-examination.

Mr M's evidence

53. Mr M adopted his witness statement of 29 March 2018.  He is a Pakistani
    citizen and is in the  United  Kingdom  on  a  spouse  visa.   He  gave
    evidence in the First-tier Tribunal but there is nothing  of  substance
    in his evidence then which was not in the witness  statement.   Mr  M's
    witness statement says that he met the appellant when  they  were  both
    working at the Soho, London branch of Burger King:  Mr M  worked  there
    from the beginning of 2012 until March  2013,  and  when  he  left  the
    appellant was still working there.  Mr M then  managed  a  kiosk  which
    belonged to a friend of his, but stopped working there in January  2018
    because his wife  was  heavily  pregnant  with  their  child  (born  in
    February 2018) and he wanted to look after her.

54. At Burger King, Mr M mostly worked the same shifts as the appellant and
    he helped to train him on the job.  They became friendly.  Mr  M  found
    the appellant to be a nice, friendly person, easy to talk with and very
    helpful.  He was not particularly ambitious: he just  wanted  a  simple
    life, and was down to earth. They both lived fairly close  together  in
    Ilford, so at the end of  their  shifts  they  travelled  in  the  same
    direction.  Sometimes, perhaps two or three times a month,  they  would
    meet outside work.  The appellant would come to Mr M's home for  dinner
    with Mr M and the people he shared his  home  with.   Once,  they  went
    shopping together in Oxford Street.  After Mr M left Burger King,  they
    stayed in touch by telephone, once or twice a week, and would  meet  up
    two or three times a month as before, when the  appellant  was  in  the
    area.

55. Mr M suspected that the appellant was gay, almost as soon as they began
    working together.  A man would come frequently to Burger King and  pick
    the appellant up after work, and they would go out together, perhaps to
    Oxford Street.  This happened three or four times a week: sometimes the
    man waited outside, and sometimes inside the restaurant.   If  his  co-
    workers invited the appellant to go out with them after work, he  would
    say he was not free as he was going out with that man.

56. After a month working in Burger King, the appellant admitted to his co-
    workers that he was gay and that he was in a relationship with the  man
    who waited for him so often after work.  He never really told Mr M what
    happened about that relationship.  The appellant told  Mr  M  that  his
    family knew  of  his  sexuality  and  had  disowned  him  because  they
    considered it a very shameful thing.

57. After the appellant left Burger King in 2013, the friendship continued.
     Mr M became aware that the appellant had been back to Pakistan to  try
    to find another city in which he  could  live  but  that  it  had  been
    impossible as it was too dangerous.  Mr  M  also  considered  that  the
    appellant risked physical punishment from his family, or even death, if
    returned to Pakistan.  It is against the law to be gay in Pakistan  and
    people generally would see him as a bad person, and either bully him or
    'treat him like a mental person'.

58. Mr M was asked some supplementary questions.  He said that he was  from
    Pakistan.  He was asked to comment on the  respondent's  position  that
    the appellant was not gay; Mr M replied that the  respondent's  opinion
    was a matter for her,  but  that  he  would  say  what  he  knew.   The
    appellant was definitely gay.  Among the group  of  friends  at  Burger
    King, they had observed him and it was easy to tell that  he  was  gay.
    Mr M was sure about that.   The  group  at  first  used  to  tease  the
    appellant about it.  After a while, when  they  were  all  closer,  the
    appellant told them the truth.

59. Mr M had worked with the appellant from  2012  to  date.   He  was  the
    appellant's line manager, the person who told him what to do, and  they
    had become friends gradually.   Mr M was a Muslim and would not  invent
    such a story.  The group had been 'pretty much sure' that the appellant
    was gay, as soon as they met him.

60. In cross-examination, Mr Melvin asked more about the other man.   Mr  M
    could not remember his name, nor had he seen  the  appellant  with  any
    other partner.  Mostly when they met, the  appellant  came  to  Mr  M's
    home,  as  he  was  'getting  busy'  and  meeting  elsewhere  was   not
    convenient.  They never discussed relationships; the appellant was  not
    easy or ready to talk about it and  the  friendship  was  not  on  that
    level.  Mr M did not want to know.  Mr M felt shame even talking to the
    appellant about his being with a man.  They both felt shy and  did  not
    discuss it.

61. When the appellant went back to Pakistan  in  2013,  Mr  M  and  others
    suggested that he go and speak nicely to his family and see whether  he
    could live separately from them, so that things could  improve  between
    him and his  family.   The  appellant  went  to  a  different  city  in
    Pakistan: he explained to Mr M that because of 'the gay  thing'  people
    could bully and hit a person, or 'throw bad words' at him.  People  did
    not feel shy doing that. The appellant came back really upset;  he  had
    tried to contact his family to sort something out,  but  they  did  not
    respond.

62. In re-examination, Mr M  said  that  he  remained  in  touch  with  the
    appellant, who had visited his home just a couple  of  months  earlier.
    This was the second time he had come to Court to give evidence for  the
    appellant.

Mr K's evidence

63.   Mr K adopted his undated witness statement prepared  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  Like Mr M, he is  a  Pakistani  citizen  and  a
    married man, here on a spouse visa.  Mr K gave evidence at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing, but the brief summary of that  evidence  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision adds nothing  to  the  oral  evidence  the
    Upper Tribunal has heard today.

64. Mr K worked at the Soho Burger King from 2009, leaving in  March  2013.
    Mr K now works full time for a company called KM Security as a  closed-
    circuit television camera operator. He started to work for them in June
    2016.  Mr K and the appellant worked together at Burger King for only 5
    or 6 months, but they became, and remain,  very  good  friends.   Mr  K
    found the appellant to be friendly, helpful and very easy to talk with.
    Their direction of travel at the end of the shift was the same.  Once a
    week or so, they would go shopping in Oxford Street.

65. A man used to come often after work to see the appellant, and sometimes
    wait for him in the dining area.  Mr K did not think anything of it: he
    thought they were just friends until  the  appellant  told  him,  after
    about two or three weeks, that he was gay, and the man was his partner.
     The appellant and that man would go clubbing sometimes together  after
    work.

66. Mr K was shocked at first when he learned that the appellant  was  gay.
    In Pakistan this was considered to be wrong.  However, that  particular
    Burger King was near Soho, with a notorious gay scene, and many gay men
    came there at night, so he was used to  it  and  their  friendship  was
    unaffected.

67. After Mr K left Burger King,  they  stayed  friends,  speaking  on  the
    telephone about once a month.  Sometimes Mr K would return to visit the
    Soho Burger King: he was working at Pret a Manger and they  would  meet
    in Barking for a catch up and a bite to eat.   When  Mr  K  bought  his
    family home in Rainham, the appellant did some painting and  decorating
    work for him.

68. The appellant told Mr K that his family in Pakistan had been very upset
    when they found out about his sexuality and that they were no longer on
    speaking terms with him.  Mr  K  thought  that  if  the  appellant  was
    returned to Pakistan, his family would kill him: he was sure  that  had
    Mr K been in a similar situation, his own father would have killed him.
    Mr K said that if people in general found out that a  person  was  gay,
    they were at risk of being abused and raped;  if  religious  extremists
    found out, you would surely be killed.

69. In answer to supplementary questions from Mr Turner, Mr K said that  he
    did not think that the appellant would  have  invented  an  account  of
    being gay.  When they used to work together, and  the  co-workers  went
    out with the girls, the appellant never went.  He would say that he was
    not interested in the girls, and go out with his  male  friend.   Mr  K
    thought, though he  was  not  certain,  that  the  two  of  them  lived
    together.  Mr K himself was straight, but he said you 'could just tell'
    when someone was gay.  At that time Mr K had been very  slim  and  both
    men and women would give him their telephone number.   The managers did
    not object, and taking the numbers politely was part of the service  at
    that particular branch of Burger King.

70. Mr K had come to the Upper Tribunal to support his friend but  he  felt
    shy even talking about people being gay.  He himself was  now  married.
    He was 100% sure that the appellant was gay.  Mr K had never  seen  the
    appellant with a girl in the 8 years he had been in the United Kingdom:
    the appellant was always with the boys.

71. In cross-examination, Mr K  said  that  he  had  no  contact  with  the
    appellant's family and was not related to him.  He had learned that the
    appellant had claimed asylum on the basis of being gay  last  year,  in
    2018, when his case was coming to the First-tier Tribunal.   Mr  K  had
    not enquired about the appellant's immigration status before  that,  or
    where he worked.  That was not his role:  he should know  these  things
    about himself, not others.  It was not  a  good  thing  to  be  gay  in
    Pakistan and have a boyfriend instead of a girlfriend.  Nor  was  it  a
    good thing to smoke cigarettes.  Mr K was 30 years old; his father  had
    died the previous year and never knew that Mr K was a smoker.

72. Mr K was asked why in his statement he had not given the  name  of  the
    appellant's friend (which he had remembered, somewhat inaccurately,  in
    chief).   Mr K said that he had only met that man a  couple  of  times,
    and it was a long time ago.  The appellant told Mr K that the  man  was
    his gay friend. They used to  go  off  every  day  together  after  the
    appellant finished work.  All of the co-workers were living  in  shared
    accommodation and he had concluded that they probably  lived  together.
    It was not something the appellant had ever said to Mr K.  He  did  not
    know whether the appellant had ever lived with a man.

73. Mr K's life had changed now, and they lived a long way  apart,  because
    Mr K was in Essex and the appellant was  in  Harrow  these  days.   The
    appellant called Mr K sometimes, and occasionally told  him  about  his
    relationships. They kept up mostly on the telephone, but the  appellant
    came sometimes to help with building work at Mr K's new  home,  and  he
    also met him sometimes.  2018 had been a difficult year:  Mr  K's  wife
    had cancer of the womb and they had not  been  able  to  have  a  child
    together. Mr K was very stressed now.

Mr N and Mr U's letters

74. The bundle contains two manuscript letters from Mr N,  the  appellant's
    claimed long-term partner in Pakistan.  The  first,  dated  30  January
    2018 confirmed that the appellant was Mr N's best friend  and  that  at
    some stage in 2003 they began a relationship together.  The  last  line
    of the letter is illegible. The second letter, dated 1  November  2018,
    says that the relationship began  in  2002,  not  2003,  and  ended  in
    January 2010.

75. An email from Mr U, dated 3 February 2018, confirms that he  was  in  a
    relationship with the appellant 'in near  past'  from  August  2011  to
    December 2013 and that they 'used to spend time together'.  Mr  U  says
    that 'For some reasons I had to leave the United  Kingdom  in  December
    2013.  Currently I am living in Istanbul (Turkey)'.

Ms SN's evidence

76. A letter from Ms SN, who shares the same family name as the appellant's
    former claimed partner in Pakistan, says that she is a British  citizen
    (a copy of her passport is attached) and that she found the appellant a
    nice, kind person, a social and helpful  individual.   He  had  no  bad
    habits and had not been involved in any crime.  She knew him  to  be  a
    gay man living openly in the United Kingdom, who had been away from his
    family for  a  long  time.   His  family  had  disowned  him  and  that
    distressed the appellant.

77. Ms SN was shocked by his history in Pakistan but supported him  morally
    and emotionally.  He was able to tell her about his relationships.  She
    confirmed that as  a  gay  man  in  Pakistan,  a  Muslim  country,  the
    appellant would be unable to live his life openly and freely because of
    his sexuality, 'and will live his life  in  fear  and  distress'.   She
    asked the Tribunal to allow his appeal and grant refugee status.

78. Ms SN gave evidence at the First-tier Tribunal, confirming that she met
    the appellant in December 2014 and that he had been very helpful to her
    family, looking after her father when he was ill.  She had not met  any
    of his gay friends or partners.  The First-tier Judge considered her to
    be a witness of truth.   Ms SN did  not  give  evidence  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Mr HA

79. A letter from Mr HA, also a British citizen, said  that  the  appellant
    was polite, calm and down to earth, and that he was  living  an  openly
    gay life in the United Kingdom, attending  gay  clubs  and  bars.   The
    appellant had told Mr HA of this family problems,  which  Mr  HA  found
    'terrible and shocking'.  He understood how difficult it must have been
    to survive in  that  terrible  situation  in  Pakistan.   It  would  be
    impossible for the appellant to live a safe and  open  life  as  a  gay
    person in Pakistan.

Other documents

80. The appellant's bundle contains a photocopy of  a  purported  newspaper
    advertisement by the appellant's father, saying that  'for  reasons  of
    disobedience and bad habits' he disowned the appellant from  his  fixed
    and movable property  and  would  no  longer  be  responsible  for  his
    'promises,  actions  or  transactions'.   His  father  said  that   the
    appellant had  'disappeared  since  15  January  2013'.   There  is  no
    original copy of the newspaper in which this advertisement is  said  to
    have appeared.

81. The bundle also contains a number of photographs of  the  appellant  in
    sparkly tops, with other men, apparently at  clubs,  and  printouts  of
    Facebook messages between the appellant  and  a  Junior  Officer  in  a
    cement company, living in Lahore, who shares the same first name as the
    appellant's former partner in Jhelum. Quite a lot of the posts  are  in
    what appears to be Punjabi.  The only legible reference to risk is this
    post on 30 November 2011:

         "I'm good.  Y u say right here the  situation  is  very  dangerous.
         Many crises are seen but nothing wrong for people.  And  I  studied
         in a university and it going in good way.  My exams are on 13th  of
         December.  May Allah help me and all  the  other  student.   Please
         pray for me. ... How going your job?..."

82. There are also some messages with (clothed, formal)  photographs  of  a
    man, who shares the first name of the appellant's  claimed  partner  in
    the United Kingdom.  There are indications of some voice messages,  but
    otherwise the photographs are all more or less  the  same,  except  for
    some puzzling photographs of a wash basin, and a joke photograph  of  a
    beer lorry painted to resemble a beer can with the text 'my doctor said
    only one beer a day...so I ordered only one'.  On  14  June  2017,  the
    appellant posted his new telephone number.  There are photographs of  a
    staircase and a Lamborghini car, of the inside  of  a  flat,  some  Eid
    Mubarak messages and more voice messages.  The only  remotely  intimate
    post is on Tuesday 26 September  when  one  party  says  'How  are  you
    dear!!' and the other replies, 'How are you?', following which there is
    an exchange of telephone numbers for a third  party.   Apparently  they
    were 'Fine'.

83. On the last page of the social media excerpts, there is a copy  of  the
    Facebook home page for West 5 Bar with posts about special events on  6
    July and 9 March (presumably 2018).

Psychological report:  Dr Saima Latif

84. Dr Saima Latif, BSc Hons, MSc, D.Hyp.,  DipFPsy  (dist.)  PhD  CPsychol
    CSci  AFBPsS  MEWI  BSCH  (Assoc)  is  an  independent  Chartered   and
    Registered  Practitioner  Psychologist,  a  Chartered   Scientist,   an
    Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society.   She  describes
    herself as an  Accredited  Expert  Witness.  Her  report  is  dated  21
    February 2018.

85. Dr Latif's reported the appellant's history as she understood it.   The
    appellant told her that his father was an accountant and his  mother  a
    home maker.  He had a happy childhood until  2003,  when  his  troubles
    began.  He had achieved High School  Matriculation  and  an  FSC  in  a
    Mechanical Diploma, and worked in a school as a teacher for  6  months.
    Dr Latif described the first sexual incident between the appellant  and
    Mr N as having taken place while they were in his bedroom  at  home  in
    the Jhelum area, rather than in a hilly area as all the other  accounts
    state.

86. Having reported the  appellant's  account  and  set  out  the  relevant
    criteria in detail, Dr Latif's report made no  attempt  to  relate  the
    appellant's state of health to those criteria.  The assessment at  11.0
    and following says that she 'tried  to  gain  as  much  self-report  as
    possible  with  regards  to  any  post-traumatic  state  and   symptoms
    following the events  experienced  by  [the  appellant]'.   Dr  Latif's
    professional  opinion,  based  on  the  self-reporting   evidence   the
    appellant provided, was that the appellant  had  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder (DSM-5 309.81), with co-morbid Major Depressive Disorder (DSM-
    5 296.32).  She considered  that  in  consequence  his  narratives  and
    accounts at interview  might  present  discrepancies  as  a  result  of
    retrieval difficulties,  rather  than  fabrication.   His  account  was
    considered to be consistent with the research evidence and  on  removal
    to Pakistan, Dr  Latif's  opinion  was  that  he  would  be  likely  to
    experience 'further elevated psychological  symptoms,  which  may  lead
    onto more severe psychiatric disorders'.

87. Dr Latif considered that  detention  would  aggravate  the  appellant's
    condition and that he needed to be treated  as  an  Adult  at  Risk  in
    Immigration Detention.  Cognitive behavioural therapy  (CBT)  would  be
    needed in the long term to assist his recovery.

Asian Legal Advice Service: Uzma Moeen's report

88. A letter dated 8 August 2018 from Uzma Moeen LLB LLM of the Asian Legal
    Advice  Service  purports  to  provide  country  evidence   about   the
    circumstances of gay men in  Pakistan.   The  statement  confirms  that
    homosexuality is haram (prohibited) in  Islam  and  an  'enormous  sin'
    attracting the certain wrath of Allah. At [21] Ms  Moeen  explains  the
    distinction between tazir and hadd punishments, with tazir  punishments
    discretionary and subject to judicial supervision, but hadd punishments
    for 'transgression of God's limit' being strict and fixed, as  set  out
    in the Qur'an or various hadiths.    Homosexuality is not  specifically
    identified as requiring  hadd  punishment  but  it  is  zina,  that  is
    unlawful sex outside  marriage,  and  aggravated  by  its  male-on-male
    nature.  No source for that statement appears in the report.

89. Ms Moeen set out section 377 of the Pakistan Penal Code and referred to
    the CPIN on Pakistan: Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity  of  April
    2016.  After setting out section 377 (carnal  intercourse  against  the
    order of nature with any man, woman or animal), and  referring  to  the
    Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance  [1979],  her  report
    accepted that  there  as  significant  judicial  discretion  between  a
    minimum sentence of two years and a maximum of  life  imprisonment.  In
    addition, section 12 of the Enforcement of Shariah Act [1991] provided,
    rather vaguely, that 'effective legal and administrative measures shall
    be taken by the State to eradicate obscenity, vulgarity and other moral
    vices'.   Prosecutions  were  rare,  despite  expressions  of  judicial
    revulsion towards homosexual practices.

90. Ms Moeen stated that in the current  wave  of  religious  extremism  in
    Pakistan, gay men were seen as violating the dominant norms  of  Muslim
    faith and society.  She explained the absence of case law as follows:

         "41. ... It is no coincidence that there is no case law in Pakistan
         discussing  the  issue  of  homosexuality  specifically.   This  is
         because there is no open recognition of its existence in  Pakistan,
         and not even any specific mention of  its  punishment.   Generally,
         sex is a taboo subject, as noted, and deviant  forms  of  sexuality
         are covered in embarrassed silence.  This is  considered  to  be  a
         matter too grave and too unacceptable to be discussed openly."

91. On 26 July 2011, the United States Embassy in Islamabad  sponsored  the
    country's first LGBTI Pride celebrations across  the  country.   Almost
    all the Islamist groups  held  rallies  opposing  this  United  States-
    sponsored series of events, with Jamaat-e-Islami describing it as  'the
    worst social and cultural terrorism against Pakistan'.   Reference  was
    made to passages in the CPIN about the response  of  Pakistani  society
    and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation to LGBTI rights.

92. Ms Moeen acknowledged  that  Muslim  gay  men  do  live  and  exist  in
    Pakistan, hiding their activity from view and fearing  being  targeted,
    victimised  and/or  persecuted  if  discovered.   She  considered   the
    appellant's account to be plausible and  that  there  as  a  very  real
    possibility of an honour killing of the appellant, although 'there  are
    no reported cases of the killing of a gay man or  a  gay  couple  which
    have been specifically  identified  as  an  honour  killing  as  such'.
    Again, this assertion was not sourced.   If returned to  Pakistan,  the
    appellant could only seek reconciliation with his family  by  accepting
    an arranged marriage and denying his sexuality (no source  given).   Ms
    Moeen confirmed that others would be embarrassed by  knowing  a  person
    was gay; that families would try to marry off their son to 'sort things
    out' and that being openly gay was unacceptable.  Ms Moeen speaks  here
    from her own experience. She refers to 'normalisation' services run  by
    Christians in Pakistan.

93. The Punjab Information of Temporary Residents Ordinance 2015 (the  TRO)
    allows the police to collect data about tenants  in  rented  houses  or
    hostels, hotels and guest houses, giving the police a database  of  all
    such persons.  The information was to be used by the  police  only  for
    prevention, detection, investigation and  prosecution  of  offences  of
    terrorism and other offences under the Pakistan Penal Code 1860 but  Ms
    Moeen stated (no source given) that those targeting the appellant could
    obtain his whereabouts by bribing a police officer.  However, in  2016,
    Ms Moeen said that 38 property landlords and tenants had cases  against
    them for violating the TRO by not passing the required  particulars  to
    the police; in 2017 there were further cases of the same  offence  (the
    statistics given are confusing and difficult to parse).

94. FIRs, wherever lodged, are passed to the police station in  a  person's
    home area, and if he registered elsewhere (for example under  the  TRO)
    to that area too.  The Punjabi  police  were  attempting  to  create  a
    central database searchable in all police stations; at least some  FIRs
    could be searched that way now.  A person as not likely  to  appear  on
    the Exit Control List until serious formal charges were framed  against
    him.  Until then, travel was not difficult.   Ms Moeen did not consider
    that the appellant would have had difficulty leaving Pakistan  when  he
    did, even if a FIR had been registered against him or an arrest warrant
    issued.  Only 'high profile offenders' were the subject of  entries  on
    the Entry Control List.

95. Ms Moeen was unable to authenticate the copy entry in  a  newspaper  in
    which the appellant's father was said to have disowned him.  She  found
    the appellant's account plausible as advanced, for the reasons given in
    her report.

Freedom from Torture - Dr Juliet Cohen's medico-legal report

96. Dr Juliet Cohen MA MB BS Dip RACOG MRCGP FFFLM is a consultant  at  the
    Manor Hospital, Headington Oxford, Head  of  Doctors  for  the  Medical
    Foundation's Medico-Legal Report Service  and  a  consultant  with  the
    International Centre for Health and Human Rights.  She is a  Fellow  of
    the Faculty of Forensic and Legal Medicine  of  the  Royal  College  of
    Physicians.

97. Dr Cohen's report is dated 19 July 2018.  She set out a  history  which
    was broadly that already given by the appellant  above.   There  was  a
    little more detail: his father was said to be a retired factory cashier
    and his mother a housewife.  When the appellant's family said that they
    would be disowning him, the appellant told Dr Cohen that they said that
    'if he came home they would hand him over to  the  extremists  and  let
    them do whatever they liked with him, or they would report him  to  the
    police and have charges laid against him', and that the family  of  the
    girl he was engaged to were also threatening to kill him if they caught
    him.  His fianc�e's  family  were  related  to  a  politician  and  the
    appellant was sure he would be able to find out what flight he  was  on
    when he returned and catch him that  way:   in  Pakistan,  'a  powerful
    person can do whatever they want  to  do'.   In  this  version  of  the
    account, the friend the appellant met in Islamabad in October 2013  was
    his lover, Mr N.

98. The appellant had low mood and a number of lesions on his body, not all
    attributed to the abuse he suffered at his family's hands and those  of
    local persons. 13 of the  lesions,  taken  together,  were  significant
    clinical evidence of  the  assaults  described,  as  per  the  Istanbul
    Protocol at [188].   Dr  Cohen  found  no  indication  of  fabrication,
    exaggeration or embellishment of the account.  The appellant  had  some
    symptoms consistent with post-traumatic stress disorder but he did  not
    meet the full criteria diagnostic of that disorder.   He did  meet  the
    diagnostic criteria for moderate depression and anxiety.  She  did  not
    consider his psychological condition to  be  fabricated  (see  Istanbul
    Protocol at [287]).   The  appellant  needed  specialist  psychological
    therapy and a review of his anti-depressant medication to  improve  his
    sleep and mood.

99. That completes the evidence which the appellant placed before the Upper
    Tribunal.

Respondent's CPIN: Pakistan:  Sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  or
expression [July 2019]

100. The respondent's CPIN confirms that s.377 of the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
    prohibits 'carnal intercourse against the order of nature' and at 2.4.3
    says this:

         'b)  State treatment of LGB persons

         2.4.3   Section 377 of the  Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)  does  not
         explicitly  refer  to  same-sex  sexual   activity,   but   'carnal
         intercourse against the order of nature', which is punishable by  a
         fine and/or imprisonment for a period of two  years  to  life.  The
         Offence  of  Zina  (Enforcement  Of  Hudood)  Ordinance   of   1979
         criminalises any form  of  penetration  outside  of  marriage,  but
         voluntary sexual acts between persons of the same  gender  are  not
         covered  by  the  provisions  although  they  suggest   that   non-
         heterosexual  sexual  acts  that  involve  penetration   could   be
         prosecuted and sharia law provisions  may  punish  same-sex  sexual
         acts by death. There is no law prohibiting  discrimination  on  the
         basis of sexual orientation ...

         2.4.4   In practice, the authorities very rarely  prosecute  cases,
         but Sections 377 and 294 ('Obscene Acts and Songs') of the PPC  has
         sometimes been used by police as a pretext to arrest,  threaten  to
         arrest, harass, intimidate and extort LGBTI  persons,  particularly
         men who have sex with men (MSM) and transgender women. ...'

101. At 2.4.6 the respondent assesses that there is in general no real  risk
    of persecution by state actors.  The risk to any  individual  is  fact-
    specific.  If the risk is from state  actors  (which  is  not  asserted
    here)  at  2.5.1  the  CPIN  says  that  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection.

102. The appellant in these proceedings fears non-state  actors.   At  2.5.5
    the respondent assesses that 'In general, the state  appears  able  but
    unwilling to offer effective protection and the person will not be able
    to avail themselves of the protection of the authorities', noting  that
    each case is  fact-specific.   At  2.6,  the  CPIN  gives  guidance  on
    internal relocation.  As one would expect, at 2.6.1  the  report  finds
    that there is no internal relocation if the person fears state  actors.



103. At 2.6.2 and following, the CPIN says this:

         '2.6.2      Where the person has a well-founded fear of persecution
         from non-state actors, decision makers must determine  whether  the
         person could relocate internally to a place where  they  would  not
         face a real risk of persecution or serious harm and where they  can
         reasonably be expected to stay. Given that homophobic attitudes are
         prevalent throughout  the  country  and  state  protection  is  not
         generally available there is unlikely to be any place, in Pakistan,
         to which an LGBTI person could reasonably relocate  without  making
         fundamental  changes  to  their  behaviour.  Each  case   must   be
         considered on its individual merits. ...

         2.6.5   It would not, in general, be unreasonable for  a  gay  man,
         who has chosen to  live  discreetly  due  to  social  or  religious
         pressures,  to  relocate  internally  within   Pakistan.   However,
         internal relocation will not be an option  if  it  depends  on  the
         person concealing their sexual orientation and/or  gender  identity
         in the proposed new location for  fear  of  persecution.  [Emphasis
         added]

104. At 5.3.1, the CPIN references a report by  the  Canadian  IRB  and  the
    BBC, that 'homophobia has wide social and religious sanction' and  that
    discrimination and prejudice run  deep  in  Pakistani  society  against
    sexual minorities.  At 5.2.5, the 2019 IRB report is cited as follows:

         '5.2.5   The IRB January 2019 report  cited  sources  referring  to
         MSM:

         'AFP reports that, according to  the  president  of  NAZ,  an  LGBT
         organization in Pakistan, [translation] "90% of Pakistani  men  are
         MSM [...] simply because women are not easily accessible".  Without
         providing  further  details,  the  CGRS  [Office  of  the   Belgian
         Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons] researcher
         cited in the [2017] EASO meeting report on Pakistan, indicated that
         "[s]ources stated that it is common for straight men to indulge  in
         Male to Male sex (MSM)  and  there  is  general  acceptance  within
         [Pakistani] society for this particular act".'

105. At 5.3.4, the IRB noted that the gay community  was  'underground'  and
    that:

         'According  to  sources,  sexual   minorities   in   Pakistan   are
         "deterr[ed] from acknowledging"  or  "reluctant  to  reveal"  their
         sexual orientation or gender identity. According to a report by the
         European Asylum Support Office

         (EASO) of the EU on an October 2017 meeting on Pakistan,  citing  a
         Country of Origin (COI) researcher from the Office of  the  Belgian
         Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons (CGRS), the
         LGBT community in Pakistan operates "behind closed doors" ...'

106. At 5.4 under the heading Family Treatment the CPIN says this:

         '5.4.1   According to research conducted by the IRB and reported in
         2019 'As with  many  other  issues,  the  extent  of  familial  and
         societal  discrimination  and  violence  faced  by  lesbian,   gay,
         bisexual, transgender and  intersex  (LGBTI)  people  tends  to  be
         inversely proportional to their socio-economic status.'69

         5.4.2   DFAT noted that people attracted to the same sex were often
         rejected by their families, could  be  'thrown  out'  of  home  and
         forced into sex work. The same source noted 'People identifying  as
         LGBTI from wealthy and influential families in large urban  centres
         face less discrimination and violence than  poor  people  in  rural
         areas. Nonetheless, even wealthy individuals face  high  levels  of
         discrimination,  and  their  families  often  force  them  into   a
         heterosexual marriage  to  preserve  the  family's  reputation  and
         social standing.'70

         5.4.3   The Director of  the  Neengar  Society  told  the  IRB,  in
         January 2019, that

         "individuals belonging to low socio-economic  groups  have  limited
         access to  justice,  sexual  and  reproductive  health  rights  and
         safety" and that out of 150  cases  reported  to  their  legal  aid
         center, 135 "belonged to [a] low socio-economic class."'

107. That completes the evidence before the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

108. For the respondent, Mr Melvin had provided written  submissions  as  to
    the weight to be given to the medical evidence, and  to  the  witnesses
    who gave evidence before us.  He argued that the appellant's co-workers
    would have had no direct knowledge of his orientation  and  that  their
    evidence was hearsay.  In  oral  argument,  Mr  Melvin  said  that  the
    respondent would rely on the refusal letter and skeleton argument,  and
    that the events in 2002/3, 2007, 2012 and 2013 should not be accepted.

109. It was not  credible  that  the  appellant  would  have  been  able  to
    maintain his relationship with Mr N over such vast distances, nor  that
    he would have continued two other 'enjoyment' relationships at the same
    time.  The appellant was not working and had only limited pocket  money
    to pay for transport. He relied on his  written  submissions  about  Dr
    Cohen's evidence, the lack of analysis of the age of the scars and  the
    appellant's general lack of credibility.

110. The evidence of a photograph of the  appellant  kissing  a  man  having
    reached Sargodha from the United Kingdom was not credible.   There  was
    no evidence, apart from the appellant's assertion, to back it up and Mr
    Melvin  described  this  element  of  the  account  as  'preposterous'.
    Similarly, the Upper Tribunal should not accept the appellant's account
    of his difficulty in Islamabad in 2013: it was extremely unlikely  that
    he would have  run  into  people  from  Sargodha  there.   One  of  the
    witnesses said that the appellant tried to speak to his family while he
    was in Pakistan, which was a serious discrepancy.   The  appellant  had
    not produced a copy of his own FIR field in Islamabad nor any  evidence
    from the friend he was with, whether or not that friend was Mr N.

111. Mr Melvin turned then to the United  Kingdom  witnesses,  who  had  not
    worked with the appellant for some time, and all of whom considered him
    to be gay.  There was not much evidence apart from the photographs  and
    their accounts (and that of the appellant) to support  the  appellant's
    account of going to gay clubs.  He had not attended any LGBTI events or
    joined any LGBTI organisations.  The Tribunal should consider carefully
    why the 2015 human rights application did not mention  the  appellant's
    sexual orientation.  There was little evidence of gay sexuality in  the
    last 6 or 7 years.

112. Mr Melvin referred us to various passages in the  CPIN.   He  contended
    that the appellant's claim was fictional, made only to  enable  him  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

113. For the appellant, Mr Turner also relied on the CPIN.   The  key  issue
    was whether this appellant was an openly gay man.  He relied on  Chiver
    and Kasolo.  There were two strands to the appellant's claim, the first
    being his on-off relationship with another man in the small village  in
    Jhelum area where he grew up, and about which he lied  to  his  family.
    There were short, furtive meetings, with the  appellant  slipping  away
    when he could.  There were beatings.  He relied on Dr Cohen's report.

114. The appellant had not sought to overstate his  case.   There  had  been
    some contact with his mother, but none with his  father.   Perhaps  the
    maternal bond was stronger.  Mr Turner accepted that there was not much
    evidence about the provenance of the photograph or how it  reached  the
    appellant's family.

115. When the appellant came to the United Kingdom  he  remained  afraid  of
    being returned, and that was why he did  not  disclose  his  sexuality.
    When he made his human rights claim in 2015, the  solicitor  filled  in
    the form and the appellant merely signed it.

116. Mr Turner observed that Mr Melvin had not  put  to  the  appellant  the
    respondent's  case  that  he  was  lying  about  his  sexuality.    The
    appellant's evidence as to the date of Pride could be  checked  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

117. The appellant's account, that he had a relationship with Mr U while  he
    worked at Burger King and that they went to gay clubs together was also
    unchallenged and should be accepted.  The witnesses had known  him  for
    seven years and were transparently honest and  credible  witnesses,  as
    the First-tier Tribunal had also found.  Their perception was that they
    knew he was gay immediately; they answered questions even  though  they
    found them difficult, and had treated  him  as  a  friend  despite  his
    orientation.  Mr Melvin had not suggested that the witnesses  had  lied
    to the Upper Tribunal and Mr Turner invited us to find the three United
    Kingdom witnesses credible.

118. If the witnesses' evidence was credible,  taken  with  what  was  known
    about Pakistan, the appellant's case was made out to the lower standard
    and he was a gay man who would be persecuted  on  return.   The  appeal
    should be allowed.

119. We reserved our decision, which we now give.

The test in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)

120. The question for the Upper Tribunal is that posed in HJ (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC  31
    at [35] in the opinion of Lord Hope JSC, with  whom  Lord  Rodger  JSC,
    Lord Walker JSC, Lord Collins JSC and Sir John Dyson SCJ  agreed.   The
    HJ and HT test may be summarised as follows:

      1) Is the appellant gay?

      2) What will be his situation on return?  There is specific  reference
         to the CPIN for background information on the  country  of  origin.
         Lord Hope said this:

             "The question is how each applicant, looked  at  individually,
             will conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to
             what he does. Those others will include everyone with whom  he
             will come in contact, in private as well as in public. The way
             he conducts himself may vary from one  situation  to  another,
             with varying degrees of risk. But he cannot and  must  not  be
             expected to conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he
             is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort  to  concealment  may  be."
             [Emphasis added]

      3) The appellant cannot necessarily  expect  to  live  as  freely  and
         openly as he does in the United Kingdom.  The focus is on what will
         happen in the country of origin.

      4) If the appellant will in fact conceal aspects of his  sexuality  on
         return, why will he do so?  If this is not at all because of a fear
         of persecution, international protection is not  required.   If  he
         does  so  in  part  because  he  fears  persecution,  then   having
         established the subjective fear, the Court or Tribunal must  go  on
         to consider whether it is well-founded.

      5) If there is a well-founded fear of persecution in  the  country  of
         origin, the appellant is entitled to asylum.

121. At [36], Lord Hope said this:

         "36. It should always  be  remembered  that  the  purpose  of  this
         exercise is to separate out those who are  entitled  to  protection
         because their fear of persecution is well founded  from  those  who
         are not. The causative condition is central to  the  inquiry.  This
         makes it necessary to concentrate on what  is  actually  likely  to
         happen to the applicant. As  Lord  Walker  says  in  para  88,  the
         inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the  future  if  the
         applicant is  returned  to  his  own  country.  An  approach  which
         disregards what is in fact likely to occur there in the case of the
         particular applicant is wrong and should not be adopted."

122. At [110], Sir John Dyson put it even more emphatically:

         "110.    The Convention must be  construed  in  the  light  of  its
         object and purpose, which is to protect a person who "owing to well-
         founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons  of  race,  religion,
         nationality, membership of a particular social group  or  political
         opinion, is outside the country of his nationality  and  is  unable
         or, owing to such fear,  is  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
         protection of that country". If the price that a person must pay in
         order to avoid persecution  is  that  he  must  conceal  his  race,
         religion, nationality, membership of a social  group  or  political
         opinion, then he is being required to surrender the very protection
         that the Convention is intended to secure for him.  The  Convention
         would be failing in its purpose if it were to mean that a  gay  man
         does not have a well-founded fear of persecution because  he  would
         conceal the fact that he is a gay man in order to avoid persecution
         on return to his home country."

123. That is the basis on which we approach our analysis of the evidence  in
    this appeal.

Analysis

124. The key question of fact  is  whether  the  appellant  is  gay,  as  he
    alleges.  In reaching a finding  of  fact  on  the  appellant's  sexual
    orientation, we have regard to all the evidence before us including the
    letters of  support,  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses, and the medical and country  evidence  in  the  bundle.   We
    treat the appellant's three witnesses, Mr A, Mr M and Mr K as  credible
    witnesses.  Despite their discomfort in talking  about  gay  sexuality,
    all of them gave straightforward evidence to the Upper Tribunal,  which
    we accept.

125. We have not been able to place much weight on Dr Latif's  psychological
    report, which was not prepared with reference to the Istanbul Protocol,
    and appears to be based largely on 'self-reporting'.  It  lacks  rigour
    and save where it is corroborated elsewhere, we have  not  relied  upon
    it.  Similarly, Ms  Moeen's  country  report  is  mainly  unsourced  in
    relation to the matters on which  the  appellant  seeks  to  rely.   Mr
    Turner did not rely on it in his oral submissions and we have not  been
    able to give it significant weight.  We prefer and give weight  to  the
    summary of country evidence in the CPIN.

126. The serious harm  the  appellant  says  he  suffered  in  the  past  is
    supported by the medico-legal report of Dr Juliet  Cohen,  prepared  to
    the Istanbul Protocol standard.  Dr Cohen is a very experienced  writer
    of medico-legal reports and  her  opinion  is  carefully  and  cogently
    reasoned.  Dr Cohen did not consider the appellant's account  to  be  a
    fabrication and in  her  opinion,  13  of  his  21  body  lesions  were
    'significant clinical evidence'  of  the  assaults  he  had  described.
    Unlike Dr Latif, she did not find that the appellant has post-traumatic
    stress disorder (though he had some of the symptoms) but she  did  find
    that he  met  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  moderate  depression  and
    anxiety.  We give weight to Dr Cohen's report.

127. There are some difficulties in  the  appellant's  own  account  of  his
    history in Pakistan: the long distances asserted  between  the  various
    places in his account, how he financed his visits to Mr N after he  was
    sent away to school, and so on.  We  have  regard  to  the  appellant's
    mental health difficulties and we consider that  the  core  account  is
    credible, to the appropriate lower standard.

128. The appellant's core account of events in Pakistan has been  consistent
    throughout and the hearsay references to what he told  his  friends  in
    the United Kingdom about it match his own account.  We therefore accept
    that he was discovered with Mr N and beaten for his  sexuality  on  two
    occasions in his original home in the Jhelum area, and  also  that  his
    family were very angry with him in Sargodha and said bad things to  him
    and beat him.  We accept  to  the  lower  standard  that  he  has  been
    disowned by his family and has not been able to get in touch with them.
     If returned to Pakistan, he would have no immediate or extended family
    support.

129. We note that when the appellant began working at  the  Soho  branch  of
    Burger King, his two  witnesses  from  that  employment,  who  are  now
    friends of his,  became  aware  of  the  appellant's  sexuality  almost
    immediately, before  he  admitted  it.   That  is  significant  on  the
    question of risk on return because it indicates  that  other  men  from
    Pakistan perceived him without difficulty  as  being  a  gay  man.   Mr
    Turner for the appellant asked all three of his  witnesses  whether  he
    was fabricating his account of his sexuality: all of them were positive
    that he was not, and that he was indeed gay.

130. Mr Melvin for the respondent did  not  explore  this  issue  in  cross-
    examination,  although  he  did  ask  questions   about   whether   the
    appellant's family had  explained  the  consequences  of  his  reckless
    actions in his affair with Mr N.   Mr Melvin did not ask the  appellant
    how he would behave if he returned to Pakistan, but we note  that  when
    he lived there before, and despite the difficulties it caused  for  his
    family members, the appellant both maintained a long-term  relationship
    with Mr N, and had at least two 'enjoyment'  relationships  with  other
    men.

131. Having found the appellant and his witnesses to be credible, we  accept
    that the appellant is a man of homosexual sexual orientation,  who  has
    had gay relationships both in Pakistan and in the  United  Kingdom  and
    that in the United Kingdom he lives an openly gay life, including going
    to gay clubs with his friends, and would wish to continue to do  so  on
    return. We find that the appellant would be likely to continue to  lead
    an actively gay life in Pakistan, and that if he did conceal his sexual
    orientation there, he would be doing so  for  fear  of  persecution  or
    serious harm, which means that we must discount any increase in  safety
    which such concealment might bring him.

132. We have considered whether internal relocation  is  available  to  this
    appellant.  We have regard to the passages  from  the  CPIN  and  other
    international sources, set out at [102]-[107] above.  The gay community
    in Pakistan is 'underground' because  there  are  homophobic  attitudes
    throughout the country and state protection is not generally  available
    (CPIN 2.6.2).  We note that, when he returned to Pakistan at the end of
    2013 the appellant attempted to  relocate  within  Pakistan,  with  the
    intention of being able to live there again, and that he also tried  to
    reconnect with his mother, unsuccessfully.   The appellant  spent  time
    then with friends in three major cities, but was recognised and  chased
    in Islamabad by people from his  home  area,  while  out  with  a  male
    friend. We do not consider, on the facts of this appeal, that  internal
    relocation would avail him.

133.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  subjective  fear  of
    persecution in Pakistan.  The only reason why the appellant might  seek
    to conceal his sexual orientation in Pakistan, we find, is  because  of
    that subjective fear, driven by his past experiences and the homophobic
    nature of Pakistani society today. This is an appellant who has already
    suffered serious harm at the level of persecution in his home areas  of
    Sargodha and Jhelum before coming to the United Kingdom, both from  his
    family and from other non-state actors.

134. We remind ourselves that under paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules
    HC 395 (as amended):

         "339K.   The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

135. There is a failure of state protection  throughout  Pakistan.   We  are
    not satisfied on the individual and country evidence before us that the
    respondent has shown good reasons to consider that the  persecution  or
    serious harm of this appellant which occurred  in  Pakistan  before  he
    came to the United Kingdom would not be repeated, even if the appellant
    were to relocate internally, because he would wish to  live  an  openly
    gay life and is a man whom other men from his country  easily  perceive
    to be gay.

136. We find that the appellant's subjective fear of persecution or  serious
    harm is objectively well founded, both in his home area  and  elsewhere
    in Pakistan.  He is therefore entitled to asylum, applying the test  in
    HJ and HT.

DECISION

137. For the foregoing reasons, our decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   We set aside the previous decision.

    We remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     10 September
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



