
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA022192015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th May 2016                              |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   N O S T


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Atreya, instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  December  2012  with  his
    wife and two of his sons.  The basis upon which leave  was  granted  at
    that stage was on medical grounds of treatment for his son.   The  visa
    expired in October 2014 and the appellant claimed asylum on 20th  April
    2015.  The claim for asylum is  multifaceted.   He  claims  that  as  a
    member of the Al-Bouaichi tribe he will be targeted by militant groups.
     In the light of  the  expert  report  of  Alison  Pargeter  the  Judge
    concluded that being of that tribe would not without more  now  attract
    adverse attention.

2.   Further what is relied upon specifically by the appellant  is  that  he
    was for a time the director of  Ministry  of  Education  and  therefore
    would be seen to have been part of the Gaddafi regime.  In  support  of
    that matter he produces a warrant issued in 2015.

3.   The respondent having refused to grant asylum or other protection,  the
    matter came for hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton  on
    18th February 2016.  The Judge for various reasons as set  out  in  the
    determination did not believe that the appellant held the  position  in
    education that he claims.  He does not find  that  the  appellant  came
    within any of the risk categories as noted in the guidance case  of  AT
    and Others (Article 15c; risk categories)  Libya  CG  [2014]  UKUT  318
    (IAC).  Thus it was that the appeal was dismissed.

4.   Detailed grounds have been submitted critical of the approach taken  by
    the Judge.  In particular it is alleged that  the  Judge  has  paid  no
    regard or insignificant regard to important items of  evidence  in  the
    overall decision that was made.  The witness S A in his witness summons
    was the one who was instrumental in locating the warrant of arrest.  He
    confirms the position of the appellant and speaks as to the appellant's
    son's  kidnap.   No  reference  is  made  whatsoever  to  that  witness
    statement and no evaluation is made.

5.   Similarly the appellant's son and wife gave evidence, his wife  orally.
    There is a passing reference to that evidence  but  little  by  way  of
    analysis upon it.

6.   There is little  reference  if  any  to  the  kidnapping  of  the  son,
    certainly little by way of analysis of the warrant of arrest.

7.   Ms Atreya who represents the appellant before me  and  represented  him
    before the First-tier  Tribunal,  submits  that  the  determination  is
    fundamentally flawed by reason of the significant omissions.

8.   In addition to the issue of asylum is of course  that  of  humanitarian
    protection, having regard  to  the  country  conditions  of  Libya  and
    bearing in mind in particular the evidence of the kidnapping of the son
    to which scant reference if any has been made.

9.   It is perhaps unnecessary to go further into the criticisms made as  Mr
    Kandola most fairly conceded, having heard what Ms Atreya had  to  say,
    that the determination was not sustainable.

10.  In those circumstances the appeal is allowed to the extent that  it  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing  on  all
    material issues.  It will be for that Tribunal to issue  directions  in
    due course.

11.  In the circumstances therefore the decision of Judge Swinnerton is  set
    aside to be remade in accordance with the decision to which I have just
    referred.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 14 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

