

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02639/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated                 |
|On 16 January 2018                  |On 15 March 2018                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Dixon instructed by IAS (Manchester)


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Davis who, in a decision  promulgated  on
        18 October 2017,  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  protection
        (Refugee Convention) grounds.



Background


     2. FV is an Iranian national who was  arrested  by  the  police  on  3
        October 2015 having walked through the Channel Tunnel  and  entered
        the United Kingdom illegally. FV claimed asylum and  was  convicted
        at the Canterbury Crown  Court  on  4  April  2016  of  an  offence
        relating to his unlawful entry into the Channel Tunnel for which he
        was sentenced to 14 months imprisonment.  As a result,  FV  is  the
        subject of an automatic deportation decision.
     3. The basis of the asylum claim is a real risk on return as a  result
        of his conversion to Christianity which FV asserts entitles him  to
        the benefit of an exception to his deportation provided for in  the
        UK Borders Act 2007.
     4. The Judge found FV to be a  credible  witness  and  his  supporting
        witness Pastor Morton to be "an entirely convincing  witness".  The
        Judge sets out the finding in the following terms:

             'The Respondent's decision to make a deportation order was not
             in  accordance  with  the  law  because  there  is  a  serious
             possibility or reasonable likelihood that if the Appellant  is
             returned to Iran he will or may be persecuted for a Convention
             reason. That Convention reason is on the basis of his religion
             as a convert to Christianity. This appeal is allowed on asylum
             grounds.'

     5. The Judge also allow the appeal on human rights grounds on the same
        basis.
     6. The Secretary State sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge
        should have considered, in accordance with HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31
        whether the appellant would live discreetly in Iran and  failed  to
        consider whether FV would proselytise of return to Iran or continue
        to practice  his  religion  discreetly.  The  Secretary  of  States
        grounds place reliance on AS (Iran) [2017] EWCA Civ 1539.
     7. FV opposes the appeal in his Rule 24  response  dated  27  December
        2017.



The law





        The February 2017 country policy and information note on Christians
        and Christian converts can be found at
        https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data
        /file/594899/CPIN_-_Iran_-_Christians_-_v3_0.pdf


        Apostasy, the conversion of Muslims to  another  religion,  is  not
        acceptable in Islamic law.


        It is also noted that for practical purposes the respondent is now,
        in some cases at least, conceding cases of Christians from Iran, if
        found to be genuine converts under the HJ  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 principle.


        In the case of AS (Iran) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1539 the  appellant
        had converted to Christianity and lived  in  Iran  as  a  Christian
        "privately" for 3 years without evangelizing  or  proselytizing  or
        experiencing difficulties.  The judge found  that  she  could  move
        from her home and live as a Christian in an area where she was  not
        known to be a convert (she would be relocating  for  reasons  other
        than her religion).   It was  argued  by  the  appellant  that  her
        history as a  convert  was  an  intrinsic  part  of  her  religious
        identity and she should not have to conceal that through fear.  The
        Court of Appeal found that her personal history of  conversion  was
        not a part of her religious  belief  or  identity  as  a  Christian
        although it might be otherwise if she was a member of  a  Christian
        denomination which taught that  active  evangelizing  was  a  duty.
        This case may be relied upon to suggest that  the  earlier  country
        guidance cases which say that an ordinary convert is not at risk of
        persecution is still good  law.   Care  is  needed  however.   This
        appellant had lived without any problems in Iran in the past  as  a
        Christian convert.  The judge's findings that the  appellant  would
        be able to  live  in  a  place  where  she  was  unknown  were  not
        challenged.  The argument was about whether the fact she  would  be
        unable to reveal that  she  was  a  convert  meant  she  should  be
        entitled to asylum.


        In FG v Sweden (App No 43611/11 ECtHR  Grand  Chamber  (2016))  the
        Court  noted  that  both  the  Swedish  government  accepted   that
        Christian converts were at risk in Iran.


        The decision in FS and others (Iran- Christian  Converts)  Iran  CG
        2004 UKIAT 00303 promulgated on 17 November 2004  was  intended  to
        provide the definitive approach  to  Iranian  Christian  cases  and
        reconcile the inconsistencies in earlier case law on  the  subject.
        In FS the Tribunal made the following findings.


             (i)  At paragraph 153 the Tribunal indicated that  Christians,
             who were not converts, were at risk of discrimination but  not
             a real risk persecution.   ("The  evidence  shows  that  those
             Christians who are not converts from Islam and who are members
             of ethnic minority churches are not persecuted, at least as  a
             general rule."   The  Tribunal  accepted  that  they  suffered
             societal discrimination but did not accept that this  amounted
             to persecution.)


             (ii) At paragraph 186 the Tribunal acknowledged the extent  of
             the discrimination faced  by  Christians  in  Iran  generally.
             ("All Christians suffer from  significant  legal,  social  and
             economical discrimination.   All  known  converts  live  in  a
             society where these forms of  discrimination  are  reinforced.
             The legal regime, in theory, can be very harsh;  they  can  be
             seen as enemies of the theocratic state and  their  lives  and
             well being can be threatened by the apparatus of the state and
             the  violent  attentions  of  covertly  sanctioned   religious
             zealots.  There is no state  protection.   There  would  be  a
             pervasive climate of fear, varying in  degree,  from  time  to
             time, and place to place.")


             (iii)    At paragraph 187 the Tribunal found that the ordinary
             convert would not be at a real risk of persecution. ("For  the
             ordinary convert, who is neither a leader,  lay  or  ordained,
             nor a pastor, nor a proselytiser  or  evangelist,  the  actual
             degree of risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3
             is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  the  protection  of   either
             Convention.  The reality is that a social  and  economic  life
             can  be  maintained;  Christianity  can   be   practiced,   if
             necessary,  cautiously  at  times,   by   church   attendance,
             association with Christians and bible study.  There  may  well
             be monitoring of services and identity checks.  They would  be
             able to practice, however, as most Iranian converts do. It  is
             realistic to expect that they may  sometimes  be  questioning,
             disruption, orders not to attend church, which may require the
             convert to stay away for a while.  But there is no evidence of
             a real risk of ill treatment during  such  questioning  or  of
             anything more than a  short  period  of  detention  at  worst.
             There is evidence of random or sporadic violence by the  likes
             of the Basiji, but at too infrequent a level to  constitute  a
             real risk  to  the  ordinary  convert.   The  longer  official
             questioning,  detentions  and  the  greater  risk  of  charges
             trumped up or menacingly vague or simply threatened are not  a
             real risk for the ordinary convert.")


             (iv) At paragraph 189 the Tribunal found  that  proselytisers,
             evangelists and church leaders would be  at  a  real  risk  of
             persecution with the risk increasing the  higher  the  profile
             and role. ("We would regard the more active  convert,  pastor,
             church leader, proselytiser or evangelist as being at  a  real
             risk.  Their higher profile and role would be more  likely  to
             attract the  malevolence  of  the  licensed  zealots  and  the
             serious attention of the theocratic state when it  sought,  as
             it will do on occasions, to  repress  conversions  from  Islam
             which it sees as a menace and  an  affront  to  the  state  of
             God.")


             (v)  At paragraph 190 the  Tribunal  found  that  an  ordinary
             convert with additional risk factors may be at a real risk  of
             persecution,   particularly   women.   ("Where   an   ordinary
             individual convert has additional risk factors, they  too  may
             be at a real risk.  We have already said that we  accept  that
             the conversions would become known  to  the  authorities,  but
             that is not of itself an additional factor because it  is  the
             very assumption upon which we are assessing risk.  These  risk
             factors may not relate to religious views at all.  It  is  the
             combination which may provoke persecutory attention where,  by
             itself, the individual conversion would have been  allowed  to
             pass  without  undue  hindrance.   A  woman  faces  additional
             serious discrimination in Iran, although  it  falls  short  of
             being persecutory merely on the grounds of gender.  But for  a
             single woman, lacking such economical social protection  which
             a husband or other immediate family or friends might  provide,
             the difficulties she faces  as  a  convert  are  significantly
             compounded.  Her legal  status  in  any  prosecution  is  much
             weaker; the risk  of  ill  treatment  in  any  questioning  is
             increased.   This  factor  tips  the  overall  nature  of  the
             treatment and risk into a real risk of persecution.")  By  way
             of further example, at paragraph 191 the Tribunal  noted  that
             FS had a past adverse political profile.  That profile was not
             one  which,   of   itself,   would   cause   any   significant
             difficulties.   However,  coupled  with  his  conversion,  the
             Tribunal concluded that  it  would  lead  the  authorities  to
             target FS for questioning and a higher  level  of  harassment,
             more akin to that which might be experienced by a proselytiser
             or evangelist,  generating  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
             treatment breaching Article 3.


             (vi) At paragraph 192 the  Tribunal  said  that  fact  finders
             would have to decide how a convert was  likely  to  behave  if
             returned - cautiously and in a quiet way or  otherwise.  ("The
             issue  which  primary  fact  finders  will  need  to  consider
             carefully is the likely way in which a genuine  convert  would
             practice if returned.  It does not  follow  at  all  that  the
             particular practices adopted in the United  Kingdom  would  be
             those followed in Iran."  The  Tribunal  took  the  view  that
             primary fact finders should decide  whether,  in  practice,  a
             convert would behave cautiously on return or not.   Those  who
             behave cautiously and went about their Christianity in a quiet
             way were  unlikely  to  draw  the  adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities")


             (vii)    At paragraph 161 the Tribunal noted that  there  were
             those who,  although  not  strictly  proselytising,  would  be
             impelled to share or expound their beliefs with those who  had
             not yet received the Gospel. The Tribunal considered arguments
             on the difference between proselytisation and "bearing witness
             in ones daily life" for want  of  a  better  expression.   The
             latter  was  covered  by  the   Adjudicator's   reference   to
             evangelising.   The  Tribunal  said   "In   any   event,   the
             distinction between proselytising and  bearing  witness...  is
             one which is likely to  be  lost  on  ...  any  suspicious  or
             zealous Muslim.  Both would be likely to be perceived by those
             in authority, the religious zealots, and those Muslims unaware
             of the distinction ...as people who are trying to persuade the
             hearer of the theological correctness of Christianity and  the
             joy of adhering to it. It is but a short step from proclaiming
             the advantages and joy it  has  brought  and  suggesting  that
             others should  likewise  benefit.   Neither  proselytising  or
             bearing witness or evangelising could be regarded as  cautious
             approaches in Iran."


        In SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082
        the Tribunal held that conditions for Christians in  Iran  had  not
        deteriorated sufficiently to necessitate a change in  the  guidance
        in FS and others (Iran- Christian Converts) Iran  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
        00303.   For  some  converts  to   sacrament-based   churches   the
        conditions may be such that they could not reasonably  be  expected
        to return and their cases must be considered on HJ  (homosexuality:
        reasonably tolerating living discreetly) Iran  [2008]  UKAIT  00044
        (not a CG case) grounds (now HJ (Iran above).   It  remains  to  be
        seen whether the proposed inclusion  of  apostasy  in  the  amended
        criminal code will make a material difference.  The  amendments  to
        the code are part of a wholesale change in the criminal law and not
        solely  aimed  at  converts.   The  proposals  are   still   before
        Parliament. 'Proselytising' and 'evangelising' are not terms of art
        and distinctions should not be drawn between them. Note however the
        Supreme Court's comments in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 (07 July 2010).  This  puts  a  very
        different take on this case.





Discussion



     8. The Judge considered the evidence provided in support of the appeal
        and found the appellant to be a credible witness.
     9. The appellant was found to be a Christian convert who had  attended
        an underground house church in Iran which had been  raided  by  the
        authorities. The Judge  finds  that  Christians  in  Iran  are  not
        allowed to openly worship and practice their faith  and  that  they
        are persecuted and at risk of serious harm.
    10. Having found the appellant is a convert from Islam to Christianity,
        which is an offence in Iran, the  appellant  will  be  at  risk  on
        return in any case regardless of whether or  not  he  proselytised.
        This is not a case of a person born  into  a  Christian  family  in
        Iran.
    11. The Judge also refers to social media activities of which there  is
        evidence in the appeal bundle which does not support  a  contention
        that the appellant regards his religion as a private matter.
    12. The findings of the  Judge  are  in  accordance  with  the  country
        material. The decision is within the range of  those  available  to
        the Judge on the evidence.  Whilst the respondent may disagree with
        the outcome that is not the relevant test.
    13. It has not been made out the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in
        law in a manner material to the decision to allow the appeal to the
        extent this Tribunal can interfere with the decision.


Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 14 March 2018
