
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02705/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st September 2016                        |On 3rd October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    M J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  3rd
    November  2015  to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Rhys-Davies  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22nd July 2016.  The Appellant appeals  against
    that decision with permission granted on 18th August 2016.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant arrived in  the  UK
    with entry clearance as a student on 27th October 2009 and was  granted
    leave to remain until 31st August 2012.  He returned to  Bangladesh  in
    September 2011, coming back to the UK in November 2011.  On 29th August
    2012 he made an application for further leave to remain as  a  student.
    That application was refused but later reconsidered and  the  Appellant
    was granted further leave to remain as a  student  from  15th  December
    2013 until 10th July 2014.

 3. The Appellant again visited Bangladesh between 9th  February  and  20th
    April 2014 and following his return, on 25th April 2014 he was  refused
    leave to enter and his existing leave  to  remain  was  curtailed.   He
    appealed against that decision  and  was  granted  temporary  admission
    until it was resolved.  He appealed against the decision to refuse  him
    leave to enter and that appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Taylor in a decision promulgated  on  19th  December  2014.   The
    Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal on 22nd May 2015.  On  17th
    June 2015 the Appellant claimed asylum and his application was  refused
    on 3rd November 2015, that decision is the subject of this appeal.

 4. In summary, the basis for his claim for asylum was that he had  been  a
    supporter of the Bangladesh National Party (BNP) since he was 18  years
    old.  He said that he joined the student wing of the party in 2006.  He
    claims that he participated in a BNP demonstration on  7th  March  2007
    during which he was beaten by police and detained overnight, sustaining
    soft tissue injuries.  He claims that he was injured on  29th  December
    2008 escaping from an attack by Awami  League  supporters.   He  claims
    that he attended another BNP demonstration on 17th July 2009  in  Dhaka
    and that when police broke up that demonstration he was hit on the back
    with a rubber bullet and arrested.  He  claims  that  he  was  detained
    overnight and then released.  He claims that he had decided after  that
    to leave Bangladesh and applied for and was granted a student visa  and
    travelled to the UK in October 2009.

 5. The Appellant claims that he joined the BNP in  the  UK,  attending  an
    event  in  December  2009  and  continuing  to  be  involved  in  party
    activities alongside his studies including  attending  a  demonstration
    outside Downing Street in 2010 when the Awami League Prime Minister  of
    Bangladesh visited.  He claims that  he  went  back  to  Bangladesh  in
    September 2011 to visit his family and during that visit he married his
    cousin in an arranged marriage.

 6. He returned to the UK and continued his studies whilst he says  he  was
    continuing with his activities with BNP UK.  He returned to  Bangladesh
    in February 2014 having been told that his mother  was  unwell  and  he
    says that he wished to have physiotherapy  treatment  there.   He  says
    that he was attacked in Bangladesh on 7th April 2014 when walking alone
    in his hometown.  He says that he recognised one of his attackers as  a
    local Awami League thug and he was beaten with an iron rod  and  a  gun
    was held to his head.  He claims that he went to hospital where he  was
    treated for a bleeding leg and general bruising.   He  claims  that  he
    received a threatening phone call and then returned to the UK where  he
    resumed  his   political   activities   including   attending   another
    demonstration against the Awami League prime minister.

 7. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rhys-Davies  found  that  the  Appellant's
    account of events in Bangladesh was wholly incredible [21] and  gave  a
    number of reasons for reaching that conclusion.   The  judge  took  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  in  relation  to  the
    cancellation of his previous leave as a starting  point  in  accordance
    with the decision in Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   He  noted  that
    Judge Taylor found that  the  Appellant's  account  lacked  credibility
    generally, based on his failure to offer any  adequate  explanation  or
    corroboration for various parts of  that  account.   Judge  Rhys-Davies
    acknowledged that Judge Taylor was not determining an asylum appeal but
    considered that his findings remained  relevant  and  decided  that  he
    should  treat  the  Appellant's  evidence   with   caution   in   those
    circumstances.

 8. Further Judge  Rhys-Davies  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted
    medical evidence to Judge Taylor in support of his claim  that  he  had
    returned to Bangladesh in February 2014 and had become  ill  whilst  he
    was there.  Judge Rhys-Davies noted  that  Judge  Taylor  recorded  the
    Appellant's evidence as being that the injury was a cricket injury  and
    that it became worse when he was in Bangladesh and that  this  required
    hospital admission.

 9. Judge Rhys-Davies noted that the medical evidence before  Judge  Taylor
    differed from that before  him  and  considered  that  the  Appellant's
    decision to deploy  different  medical  evidence  at  different  appeal
    hearings damaged his credibility. He considered that the Appellant  had
    submitted a partial picture in each appeal  and  that  the  differences
    between  his  accounts  were  matters  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    accordance with the Devaseelan guidelines. Judge Rhys-Davies  concluded
    that the Appellant deliberately misled Judge  Taylor  or  at  the  very
    least withheld very relevant evidence and this damaged his credibility.

10. Judge Rhys-Davies went on to find that the Appellant's credibility  was
    damaged by  his  failure  to  claim  asylum  earlier  than  he  did  in
    accordance with Section 8 of the 2002 Act.  Judge Rhys-Davies  did  not
    accept the Appellant's explanation for  his  failure  to  claim  asylum
    earlier or to claim asylum in 2014 on his re-entry to the UK  in  light
    of his alleged recent attack. The  judge  went  on  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum when his leave to  enter  had  been
    curtailed and his continued delay thereafter significantly damaged  his
    credibility.

11. Judge Rhys-Davies found that  documentary  evidence  submitted  by  the
    Appellant from Bangladesh  was  unreliable  including  arrest  warrants
    submitted in relation to very different offences which the judge  noted
    contained the same reference to the Bangladesh penal code despite being
    different offences.  The judge noted that the Appellant  has  a  lawyer
    acting on his behalf in Bangladesh and,  despite  having  seven  months
    before making his witness statement, he did not use that time to obtain
    evidence from that lawyer.

12. Judge Rhys-Davies considered  video  footage  played  to  the  Tribunal
    during the hearing of an alleged attack on the Appellant's brother  and
    family home but for reasons set out in paragraph  39  the  judge  found
    that this did not show a genuine attack and  was  a  further  piece  of
    unreliable evidence submitted by the Appellant.  The judge  also  found
    it not credible that the Appellant's mother and younger  brother  would
    have been attacked in the way claimed.

13. Judge Rhys-Davies went on to consider an expert report  from  Dr  Hoque
    but found that Dr Hoque's  report  does  not  provide  any  opinion  or
    evidence  that  addresses  particular  problems  with  the  Appellant's
    account but simply confirms  that  his  professed  individual  fear  is
    consistent with the country background evidence.  The judge pointed out
    that this may be because Dr Hoque was unaware of the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's account making no reference at all  to  the  alleged  April
    2014 incident.

14. Judge Rhys-Davies went on to consider a number of letters in support of
    his claim submitted by the Appellant and  found  that  he  attached  no
    weight to these letters because none of the authors  of  the  documents
    provided a witness statement or attended to give evidence despite  some
    of them purportedly being from other BNP UK members or party  officers.
    The judge also noted that the Appellant  had  provided  no  real  paper
    trail of his claimed membership of the BNP and that the  letters  which
    had been submitted were dated relatively recently.  The judge concluded
    that the Appellant does not risk persecution in Bangladesh.

15. Judge Rhys-Davies  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  had
    established that he is  a  refugee  sur  place  based  on  his  alleged
    activities in the UK but found that  the  Appellant  does  not  have  a
    profile in Bangladesh, he does not have a leading or organising role at
    the events in the UK and that he had not  been  presented  any  country
    background material which might support his claim to be at risk  solely
    because of the sur place activities.  The judge further noted that  the
    expert report did not consider this aspect of  the  Appellant's  claim.
    The  judge  concluded  that  the   Appellant's   claims   for   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR must  be
    dismissed.

16. The Grounds of Appeal contend  that  Judge  Rhys-Davies  was  wrong  to
    conclude  that  the  evidence  given  to  Judge  Taylor  is  materially
    different to his account given in relation to the asylum appeal.  It is
    contended that the judge failed to address the basis of the Appellant's
    claim.   It  is  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's humanitarian protection claim properly and the judge failed
    to consider Article 8 adequately.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne,
    who decided that it was arguable that the judge  failed  to  separately
    consider the issues of humanitarian protection and Articles 3 and 8 and
    that this is an arguable  error  of  law  but  that  all  grounds  were
    arguable.

Error of law

18. At the hearing Mr Saini accepted that Article 8 had not been pleaded in
    the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and  did  not  pursue
    that ground before me.

19. The judge approached the appeal by taking the decision of Judge  Taylor
    as his starting point. Mr Saini submitted  that  the  findings  in  the
    previous appeal skewed Judge Rhys-Davies' findings.  He submitted  that
    it was of particular importance that the context of the  appeal  before
    Judge Taylor was a revocation of the Tier 4 licence where the Appellant
    was trying to explain his absence from his course whereas  the  context
    of this appeal was the Appellant's allegations of torture.   I  do  not
    accept Mr Saini's submission that the different context of  the  appeal
    before Judge  Taylor  detracted  from  the  discrepancies  between  the
    evidence. The judge was clearly aware of the  context  of  the  earlier
    appeal and how to approach Judge Taylor's decision and he  said  so  at
    paragraph 24 highlighting the guidance from the Court of Appeal in  the
    case of R (On the application of YH) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116.

20. Mr Saini submitted that the decision of Judge Taylor was  not  in  fact
    contradictory to the evidence before Judge Rhys-Davies. In  considering
    Judge Taylor's decision  Judge  Rhys-Davies  noted  that  Judge  Taylor
    referred to a medical report of 12th February 2014 and a report of  7th
    March 2014 advising the Appellant that he was not  fit  to  travel  for
    four weeks.  It appears that neither of those reports were before Judge
    Rhys-Davies.  The only medical evidence before Judge Rhys-Davies was  a
    note from New Squire General Hospital dated 7th April 2014 at F1 of the
    Respondent's bundle  which  refers  to  "soft  tissue  injury"  on  the
    Appellant's right arm and right thigh.  The judge dealt  with  this  at
    paragraph 32 noting that that had not been  before  Judge  Taylor  even
    though it ought to have been available to the Appellant  at  that  time
    and at any event it refers to soft tissue injuries and  no  mention  is
    made of any back injury.

21. Mr Saini also submitted that the report before Judge Taylor was from  a
    physiotherapist and that it was therefore of less weight  in  assessing
    the injuries.  However, this report was not  before  Judge  Rhys-Davies
    and there is nothing in the evidence to indicate that a report  from  a
    physiotherapist is of less weight in any event.

22. Mr Saini submitted that the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  had
    deliberately attempted to mislead Judge Taylor was perverse, given that
    the only purpose of the hearing before Judge Taylor was in establishing
    the background to the Appellant's absence from the  college.   However,
    Judge Rhys-Davies took into  account  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    asserted the truth of the content of his witness statement and evidence
    before Judge Taylor and of the different medical evidence submitted  at
    each appeal. The judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant  had
    decided to  deploy  different  medical  evidence  at  different  appeal
    hearings and was submitting a partial picture in each appeal  and  that
    this damaged his credibility. In my view  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant deliberately misled Judge Taylor or at  the
    very least withheld very relevant evidence and that  this  damages  his
    credibility [34].

23. After dealing with Judge Taylor's decision Judge Rhys-Davies went on to
    consider Section 8 and the damage to the  Appellant's  credibility  for
    failing to claim asylum earlier. Mr  Saini  submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in considering this at that stage without having  considered  the
    other factors in the decision.  He submitted that the correct place  to
    consider Section 8 is towards the end of a decision in the way that the
    Secretary of State had done in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.  He
    submitted that the judge considered  delay  prematurely  and  that  the
    judge did not consider any  internal  consistency  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.

24. However, I accept Mr Kotas' submission  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    appeal in relation to credibility for a multitude of reasons.  I accept
    that the issue in relation to Section 8 is a quibble in relation to the
    format of the judge's decision  but  does  not  affect  the  substance.
    There is no guidance indicating that Section 8 should be considered  at
    any particular stage of the decision. The judge did not decide that the
    delay meant that the Appellant's entire  claim  was  not  credible  but
    properly, as he was entitled to, concluded that the  Appellant's  delay
    damaged his credibility.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to
    do so on the basis of the proper application of Section 8.

25. Mr Saini  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's claim is "wholly incredible" at the outset of his  findings
    [21].  He submitted that the judge reached that conclusion before going
    on to analyse the evidence.  However, it is clear to me from paragraphs
    21 and 22 that the judge was stating his conclusion at the  outset  but
    going on to give reasons for that conclusion.   This  is  an  issue  of
    style rather than substance and does not amount to a material error  of
    law.

26. Mr Saini submitted that the judge did not grapple with the facts in his
    decision.  However he did not point to any piece of  evidence  said  to
    have been disregarded by the judge. The judge made findings on  all  of
    the evidence and it is not clear how he could be said to have failed to
    have grappled with the facts. Contrary to  Mr  Saini's  submission  the
    judge did deal  with  the  substance  of  the  Appellant's  claim.   At
    paragraph 38 he dealt with  the  documentary  evidence  submitted  from
    Bangladesh including the arrest warrants.  At  paragraph  39  he  dealt
    with the video footage submitted by the Appellant.  At paragraph 41 the
    judge dealt with the expert report.  At paragraph 42  the  judge  dealt
    with the letters from the UK and Bangladesh.  The  judge  talked  about
    the lack of a  paper  trail  to  corroborate  the  Appellant's  claimed
    membership of the BNP and organising and attending  demonstrations  and
    meetings at paragraph 43.  The judge had sufficient evidence  to  reach
    the conclusions he did and these conclusions were open to him.

27. Mr Saini submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 47 in his approach
    to the sur place claim.  He submitted that the judge  should  not  have
    dealt with the sur place issue after having found that the  Appellant's
    late claim damaged his credibility. However the Appellant's credibility
    was very much in issue and the credibility findings  were  relevant  to
    the assessment of the sur place activities, for  example  at  paragraph
    47.a in relation to the  appellant's  claimed  profile  in  Bangladesh.
    Further, the judge noted that there was no country background  material
    to support the Appellants' claim to be at risk solely  because  of  his
    sur place activities.  It is difficult to see what more he  could  have
    done on the evidence before him.

28. Mr Saini complained that  the  judge  had  not  dealt  separately  with
    humanitarian protection.  However, I accept Mr Kotas'  submission  that
    this appeal turned on credibility and there is no separate freestanding
    Article 3 or humanitarian  protection  claim  in  the  context  of  the
    judge's decision that the Appellant's claim was not credible.

29. In conclusion I do not accept that the approach taken by the  judge  in
    considering this appeal in any way skewed his analysis of the  evidence
    before him.  I do not accept  the  submission  that  the  findings  are
    perverse.  The judge's findings were open to him on the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.

30. In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that there is  no  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

    There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 30 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


