
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02662/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    N W S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Marcus of Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  her  appeal
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of   State   refusing   her
    international protection.

 3. The appeal was dismissed largely because the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    did not believe the appellant and the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    given an unlawful reason for disbelieving the  appellant.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has  discounted  expert  evidence  because  in  the
    judge's view it was not for the expert to comment on  the  plausibility
    of various aspects of  the  appellant's  account.   That  is  quite  an
    astonishing observation and I wonder if it is  what  the  judge  really
    meant because it is plainly a matter  for  the  expert  in  appropriate
    cases to indicate whether an account is plausible.  What an expert must
    not do is indicate whether an appellant is truthful which is  a  matter
    for the judge, but that is entirely different from saying that a  story
    measured against the background evidence is or is not plausible.

 4. The parties before me agree goes to the very core of the  findings  and
    makes the whole decision unsound.  The parties  also  agreed  that  the
    appeal ought to be heard again in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  of
    course is a matter for  the  Tribunal  not  for  the  parties  but  the
    parties' view is something to which some weight should be  given.   The
    point is that the appellant has not had a proper hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal because the analysis of the appellant's case is  entirely
    wrong.  It is relevant that in those circumstances she wants to go back
    to the First-tier Tribunal and try again.  I agree  that  that  is  the
    just thing to do and I direct the case to be heard again in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Marcus indicated that the  appellant  is  hoping  to  serve  further
    evidence.  That is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal  to  decide  in
    accordance with its procedures but I draw attention to  the  fact  that
    the request has been made before me.

 6. I allow the appeal to the extent that I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and rule that the appeal  be  heard  again  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I make it clear that no findings are preserved.

    Notice of Decision

 8. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and  I
    order that the case be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 October 2019                 |



