
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02309/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons           |
|Centre                                        |Promulgated                  |
|On 4 June 2021                                |On 16 June 2021              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Nigeria. She appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  21
    February 2020 refusing her  international  protection.  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision prod on 22 October 2020, dismissed her  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 4 June 2021, Mr Bates, who appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, told me that the  respondent  considered  that  the
    judge had erred in law such that his decision fell to be set aside. The
    Secretary of State agrees that the judge's finding at [27] that it  was
    not reasonably likely that  the  appellant,  having  escaped  from  one
    demonstration 'with  her  life',  would  have  attended  another  rally
    ignored the possibility that a committed individual would take  such  a
    risk in pursuit of a political aim. To make such a finding  against  an
    appellant is to proceed on an assumption that  her  political  opinions
    are not genuine before making a holistic assessment of all the relevant
    evidence. The appellant relies on the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  EG
    (Russia) [2007] EWCA Civ 354 at [6-7]:

         "But before I come to it, I want to say something about  the  first
         of the immigration judge's grounds for dismissing  the  asylum  and
         human rights claims. This is what the immigration judge said  after
         summarising the applicant's evidence, but  before  turning  to  the
         critique of the detail of it. At paragraph 28 in  the  decision  of
         Immigration Judge Birkby, prepared on 3 October 2005, one reads:

             "What I find of most concern was why the First  Appellant  and
             the First Appellant's husband continued their involvement in a
             civil rights organisation bearing in mind that the  more  they
             got involved the more they suffered horrendous treatment  from
             the authorities. It was not  just  treatment  as  against  the
             First Appellant, the mother, but also the treatment as against
             her daughter, the Second Appellant, her husband and  her  son.
             Despite all of that ill treatment the First Appellant and  her
             family allegedly continued their involvement and continued  to
             seek to publicise their case. Both the  First  Appellant,  the
             Second Appellant and the First Appellant's husband were simply
             not credible in the explanations they  gave  as  to  why  they
             continued to take the risks that they did. They were  hesitant
             in accepting that what they were doing was risky in any event.
             There evidence in my view was evasive. Their main  reason  for
             saying that they continued to pursue  their  plight  with  the
             human  right's  organisation  was  in  order  to  secure  more
             protection  as  they  said  the[y]  believed  that  the   more
             publicity they obtained the safer they would  be.  Bearing  in
             mind  that  the  First  Appellant  is   obviously   a   highly
             intelligent lady, who I accept to have worked in Russia  as  a
             paediatrician and a TB specialist, and that the husband was  a
             highly qualified  engineer,  and  that  the  daughter  was  at
             university, their evidence beggars belief."

         I am bound to say that as at present advised, I find  this  passage
         disturbing, even shocking. Russia, on  the  in-country  and  expert
         evidence, is a state where things like  this  can  and  do  happen.
         There may well of course be asylum seekers  who  falsely  claim  to
         have faced local or state sponsored violence and threats, but there
         must also be brave and principled people who, for as long  as  they
         can stand it, refuse to be cowed and who fight  back,  if  only  by
         joining with others and trying to  obtain  publicity  for  what  is
         happening to them."

 3. The parties agree that the fact-finding exercise conducted by the judge
    has been wholly vitiated by the error and that the appeal will have  to
    be considered again in the First-tier Tribunal. I agree.







    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Mailk; first available  date  after  1  July  2021;
    Manchester; no interpreter) for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision
    following a hearing de novo.



         Signed                              Date 4 June 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

