
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02074/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 20 February 2018                  |on 26 February 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  MING [Y]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain instructed by Kingswell Watts Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 29 June 2017 in  which
       the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human
       rights grounds; relied upon by the appellant as an exception  to  the
       order for his deportation from the United Kingdom  under  UK  Borders
       Act 2007.

Background


    2. The appellant, a national  of  China,  born  on  [  ]  1981  has  two
       convictions for drug-related activity being a conviction  on  4  June
       2008 for being concerned in the production of a  Class  C  controlled
       drug by a jury at Chester Crown Court for  which  the  appellant  was
       sentenced on 8 April 2016  to  18  months  imprisonment,  and  on  19
       September 2016 a conviction and sentencing at Glasgow  Sheriff  Court
       of  twelve  months  imprisonment  for  the  offence  of  supplying  a
       controlled drug.

    3.   The   Judge   sets   out   more   detail   of    the    appellant's
       immigration/criminal history at  [5  -  15]  of  the  decision  under
       challenge.

    4. The appellant is in a relationship with a British national who he met
       in 2006. They began their relationship and commenced cohabitation  in
       April 2006. The appellant and his partner have four children; K  born
       on [ ] 2008, S born on [ ] 2010, C born on [ ] 2012, and D born on  [
       ] 2016.

    5. The Judge  records  that  since  the  appellant  was  imprisoned  his
       partners mental health suffered and that she struggled in caring  for
       the children as a result of which the children were placed on a Child
       Protection plan under "emotional abuse" category and considered to be
       "looked after children".

    6. Having considered the evidence with the required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny the Judge did not find the appellant was able to satisfy the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules or outside the rules such as to
       entitle him to succeed with his appeal.

    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially refused
       by another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  application  was
       renewed to the Upper Tribunal where  permission  was  granted  on  20
       September 2017 in the following terms:

             1. it is arguable for the reasons outlined in the grounds  that
                there has been a failure to take  into  account  a  material
                consideration.

             2. There has been an arguable failure  to  address  whether  it
                would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the  UK
                without the appellant (399 (a) (i)/(ii) (b)) in light of the
                apparently cogent evidence demonstrating that  the  children
                may become 'looked after' by social services if their father
                is deported.

             3. It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  has  failed  to
                consider the impact of China's population  policy  upon  the
                children  when  considering  together  with  their  mother's
                mental health, the medical condition of The and their wishes
                and feelings, a set against the strong reasons in favour  of
                deportation. These were arguably relevant  matters  to  take
                into account when addressing 399 (a) (i)/(ii) (a).

Error of law


    8. During the course of the hearing Mr Harrison confirmed that this is a
       family splitting case in that the appellant's wife and  children,  as
       British citizens, will not be forced to leave the United Kingdom  and
       will not have to leave as a consequence of any decision made. It was,
       as  Mr  Harrison  submitted,  a  matter  for  the  appellant's  wife.
       Accordingly, Grounds 2, 3 and 4 which  refer  to  China's  One  Child
       Policy, availability of safe blood transfusions  in  China,  and  the
       British citizenship of the children, fall away and were  not  pursued
       by Mr Hussain.

    9. The remaining ground of challenge asserts the Judge  failed  to  take
       into account material evidence and provide reasons in relation to the
       children.

   10. It is not disputed that the children are  'qualifying  children'  and
       that as they will remain in  the  United  Kingdom  the  question  was
       whether it would be unduly harsh  for  them  to  do  so  without  the
       appellant's presence.

   11. In MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ  450  it  was  held  that  the  phrase
       'unduly harsh' plainly meant the same in section 117C(5) of the  2002
       Act as it did in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.  It  was  an
       ordinary English expression coloured  by  its  context.  The  context
       invited emphasis on two factors: first, the public  interest  in  the
       removal  of  foreign  criminals  and,  secondly,  the  need   for   a
       proportionate assessment of any interference with Article  8  rights.
       The public interest factor was expressly  vouched  by  Parliament  in
       section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) provided that the more  serious  the
       offence committed, the greater the public  interest  in  deportation.
       That steered the tribunals and  the  court  towards  a  proportionate
       assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any   given   case.
       Accordingly, the more pressing the public interest  in  his  removal,
       the harder it would be to show  that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
       partner would be unduly harsh. Any other approach would dislocate the
       'unduly harsh' provisions from their context such that  the  question
       of undue hardship would be decided wholly without regard to the force
       of the public interest in deportation. In such a case 'unduly'  would
       be mistaken for 'excessive', which imported a  different  idea.  What
       was due or undue depended on all the circumstances,  not  merely  the
       impact on the child or partner in  the  given  case.  The  expression
       'unduly harsh' in  section  117C(5)  and  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)
       required  consideration  of  all  the  circumstances,  including  the
       criminal's immigration and criminal history. MAB was wrongly  decided
       (paras 22 - 26).

   12. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that  there  was  evidence
       before the Judge, as noted at [19] that since the appellant had  been
       imprisoned in 2016 his partners mental health has  suffered  and  she
       has struggled in caring for the children.  It  is  argued  the  Judge
       failed to take into account the letter from the Social  Worker  Peter
       Hanlon, dated 2 May 2017, in which  he  confirms  the  appellant  can
       offer significant support to  his  partner  and  children,  that  the
       children have received consideration for Edge  of  Care  Support  and
       that the children were Looked After children for a time but have been
       rehabilitated home and that there  is  concern  that  they  could  be
       Looked After Children once again without the support of the appellant
       for his family. It is argued the  Judge  does  not  factor  into  the
       findings the fact this might occur  again  and  the  children  become
       Looked After children as a result of emotional abuse.

   13. Mr Hussain asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  such
       evidence and that the assessment cannot be considered to have been in
       compliance with the principles set out by the Supreme  Court  in  the
       case of Zoumbas v Secretary State the Home Department [2013] UKSC  74
       when that Court set out a number of matters when considering the best
       interests of a child. It is asserted principles 5 and 6 are  relevant
       to this appeal. The Grounds refer only  to  (1),  (2),  (5)  and  (6)
       whereas the relevant paragraph of the judgment in full reads:

            10. In their written case counsel for Mr Zoumbas set  out  legal
                principles which were relevant in this case and  which  they
                derived from  three  decisions  of  this  court,  namely  ZH
                (Tanzania) (above), H v Lord Advocate 2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and
                H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC
                338. Those principles are not in doubt and  Ms  Drummond  on
                behalf of the Secretary of State did not challenge them.  We
                paraphrase them as follows:

                (1)    The best interests of a child are an integral part of
                the proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

                (2)    In making that assessment, the best  interests  of  a
                child must be a primary consideration, although  not  always
                the  only  primary  consideration;  and  the  child's   best
                interests do not  of  themselves  have  the  status  of  the
                paramount consideration;

                (3)    Although  the  best  interests  of  a  child  can  be
                outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations,
                no other consideration can be  treated  as  inherently  more
                significant;

                (4)    While different judges might approach the question of
                the best interests of a  child  in  different  ways,  it  is
                important to ask oneself the right questions in  an  orderly
                manner in order to avoid the risk that the best interests of
                a  child  might  be   undervalued   when   other   important
                considerations were in play;

                (5)    It is important to have a clear  idea  of  a  child's
                circumstances and of what is in  a  child's  best  interests
                before  one  asks  oneself  whether  those   interests   are
                outweighed by the force of other considerations;

                (6)    To that end there is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
                examination of all relevant factors when the interests of  a
                child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

                (7)    A child must not be blamed for matters for  which  he
                or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

   14. The best interests of children are therefore  not  the  determinative
       factor  but  a  factor  of  great   importance   as   part   of   the
       proportionality balancing exercise.

   15. The letter from the social worker, dated 2 May 2017 was clearly taken
       into account by the Judge  as  the  same  forms  an  exhibit  to  the
       appellants bundle. The  letter,  written  by  Peter  Hanlon  a  Child
       Protection Social Worker with Manchester City Council, addressed  "to
       whom it may concern" states:

           "The  situation  is  that  Children  were  placed   upon   Child
           Protection plans on 19 July 2016. The Child Protection  concerns
           are about Mother's mental health,  physical  health,  issues  re
           ability/capacity to care for children  (including  guidance  and
           boundaries).

           Father  can  offer  significant  support  to  his  partner   and
           children. Children have received consideration for Age  of  care
           support. They were Looked After Children for  a  time  but  have
           been rehabilitated home. There is concerned that they  could  be
           Looked After Children, once again, without the support  of  Ming
           for his family.

           There are for children aged from eleven months  to  9  years  of
           age. They continue upon child protection plans due  to  Mother's
           mental health which is affected by the uncertain immigration.

           There is support for Ming to stay in the UK as  he  could  offer
           the  oversight  for  the  children  which  would  stabilise  the
           situation."

   16.  A  further  letter  dated  21  June  2017  written  following   risk
       assessments and multiagency meetings confirms the appellant continues
       to live with his wife and children and thereafter states:

           "I am writing as the above children are on the child  protection
           plans due to Mother's mental health, issues relating to  ability
           to care for children (including  guidance  and  boundaries)  and
           isolation from any supporting extended family.

           It is positive that Ming is meeting  the  children's  needs  and
           appears to be ensuring they are kept safe.  Mother's  well-being
           in her presentation regarding this has improved since father has
           been released  from  prison  into  the  community.  However  his
           immigration status continues to remain an issue and needs to  be
           stabilised the sake of children and family.  Ming  has  attended
           all meetings asked of him.

           Should father be deported from UK mother is likely  to  struggle
           to manage this and this may have a  detrimental  impact  on  her
           well-being and her ability to be consistently available  to  the
           children to meet their needs and not expose them to harm in  the
           future.

           Probation have completed risk assessments  of  father  and  have
           rated him as a low risk to parents and the children,  they  have
           also assessed that there is a low risk from the community to the
           family.

           Children's wishes and feelings can be evidenced in drawings  and
           comments to Social Worker that they have  missed  their  father,
           and they are now much happier and settled."

   17. At the outset of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Hussain was
       asked to assist by clarifying the period for which the  children  had
       been taken into care as 'Looked after Children' as suggested  in  the
       evidence available to the Judge. Having spoken to the  appellant  and
       his wife Mr Hussain confirmed that  he  had  been  advised  that  the
       children were never taken into care and had always  remained  in  the
       family.

   18. If the children have remained with the family throughout  this  would
       have included a period during which the appellant was in prison.  The
       local authority must have therefore been satisfied that the  children
       could be adequately cared for within the family home. If the children
       had been placed outside the family but  subsequent  returned  to  the
       appellant's wife the details of the same have not been  provided  and
       nor has it been made clear  what  packages  were  made  available  to
       assist the appellant's wife. The fact the children were in the family
       home clearly shows that it was not considered necessary for  them  to
       be taken into care.

   19. The reference to Edge of Care is interesting. The  evidence  suggests
       this was being considered by social services but there is no evidence
       that such support was deemed necessary. Edge of Care  is  devised  to
       strengthening families and improving relationships to enable children
       to remain living within the family home safely and sustainably.  Such
       plans are structured evidence-based  intervention  that  is  normally
       undertaken to enable  families  to  develop  problem-solving  skills,
       build  resilience,  and  achieve  positive  sustainable   behavioural
       changes.  Properly  trained  and  experienced  staff  are   required,
       including those able to deal with a crisis situation, and to overcome
       difficulties in families at risk of breakdown. The reference  by  the
       Judge to support being available from Social Services in the event of
       the appellants deportation is clearly a reference  to  the  statutory
       support that must be provided, if required.

   20. It is not known whether prior to  social  services  intervention  the
       authorities were  aware  of  the  appellant's  wife's  mental  health
       issues. They are now clearly aware and it has not been made out  that
       appropriate assistance or treatment would not  be  available  in  the
       United Kingdom to assist in  managing  the  same  in  the  event  the
       appellant was removed or to provide a comprehensive Edge of Care plan
       to assist the children within the home environment, if required.

   21. It is accepted that in most situations the preferred option would  be
       for the children to be brought up in a loving and caring  environment
       with both parents and  they  seem  to  be  doing  well  in  the  home
       environment since their father has been released from  custody.  But,
       as  stated,  the  best  interests  of  the  children  are   not   the
       determinative factor and although the appellant's  removal  will,  on
       the face of it, be a distressing time for all, it was  not  made  out
       before the Judge that requisite intervention will not be available.

   22. As confirmed in the case law all competing aspects have to  be  taken
       into account to assess  whether  the  decision,  although  harsh,  is
       unduly harsh. In this respect Mr Harrison referred to the  nature  of
       the appellant's criminal offending relating to  two  counts  of  drug
       dealing. It is known  that  drugs  have  a  devastating  effect  upon
       society generally as well as an extremely destructive effect upon the
       individuals who become addicted to the same.

   23. The Judge set  against  the  considerations  weighing  in  favour  of
       deportation prejudice to family and private life including the effect
       on the appellant's family and the family  life  of  his  partner  and
       children  in  relation  to  which  the  Judge  stated  she  was  most
       concerned. The  Judge  noted  the  appellant's  wife's  situation  of
       anxiety and depression and receipt of medication at [48]. At [49] the
       Judge writes:

           49.    In conclusion, deportation in this case is  conducive  to
                the public good. There is a small risk of reoffending, given
                his past. The importance of deterrence  cannot  be  ignored.
                The Judge made it clear that  the  essential  offence  which
                triggered deportation was serious. Set against that, private
                life is prejudiced but not  unduly  so.  The  appellant  can
                develop as private life at home in China and his family life
                does not have to be severed. Bearing  in  mind  the  factors
                weighing in favour of deportation to which I  have  referred
                given my comments on the actual nature of  the  family  life
                and other issues I have referred to above, I have  concluded
                that the decision to deport was and is proportionate.

   24. As stated above, it was conceded before the Upper Tribunal that  this
       is a family splitting case,  but  the  conclusion  by  the  Judge  in
       relation to the proportionality of the decision appears to be  within
       the range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence.
       At [39] the Judge states she needed to look at whether  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the children to go to China with the appellant or to
       remain in the UK without him. The Judge also referred to the decision
       of the Supreme Court in Makhlouf [2016] UKSC 59  and  the  fact  that
       where a decision was taken about deportation of  a  foreign  criminal
       who had children residing in  the  United  Kingdom  consideration  of
       their best interests was required especially if they did not converge
       with those of the parent to be deported. The Judge also refers to  MA
       (Pakistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 163 and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012
       in which it is said that court held that it would  be  rare  for  the
       best interests of the child to outweigh the strong public interest in
       deporting foreign criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation
       from  a  parent  was  required,  even  though  such  separation   was
       detrimental to the child's best interests.  It  would  undermine  the
       specific exceptions in the rules if the interests  of  the  child  in
       maintaining a close and  immediate  relationship  with  the  deported
       parent were as a matter  of  course  to  "trump"  the  strong  public
       interest in deportation. Paragraph 399 (a) of the Rules identified  a
       particular circumstance where it was accepted that the  interests  of
       the child would outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The
       conditions were onerous and would only rarely arise. No  doubt  there
       will be some emotional damage to  the  children,  but  that  was  not
       unusual whenever a parent was deported and the child  was  unable  to
       live with that parent outside the UK.  Separating  parent  and  child
       could not, without more, be  a  good  reason  to  outweigh  the  very
       powerful public interest in deportation.

   25. The language of the letter from social services is also of importance
       as it says that things "could" or "may" occur  if  the  appellant  is
       removed rather than being written in absolute terms. It  is  accepted
       the author could not write a letter in such terms especially in light
       of the fact there are packages available to enable the best interests
       of the children to be protected within the home.

   26. The best interests  of  the  children  were  clearly  considered  and
       factored into the decision-making  process.  There  was  no  evidence
       before  the  Judge  to  indicate  the  conclusion  in   relation   to
       proportionality is arguably perverse or irrational or contrary to the
       material. This is a sad  case  in  which  the  appellant's  wife  and
       children may  undergo  a  further  period  of  upset,  distress,  and
       readjustment, all of  which  flows  from  the  appellant's  offending
       behaviour.

Decision

   27. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   28. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 20 February 2018
