
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02878/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 November 2017                        |On 01 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence, promulgated on 16 May 2017,  in
     which he allowed SA's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
     to refuse to grant asylum.


  2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to SA as the Appellant and to
     the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting their positions as
     they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


  3. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "With the respect to the submissions made the judge does highlight that
     one of the document refers to a dating 2017 (sic).  However that having
     been said as there was a country guidance case on the issue, it was for
     the judge to refer to the country guidance and give reasons as  to  why
     the  background  evidence  now  submitted  led  him  to  conclude  that
     Christians were at risk or rather why the appellant in  particular  was
     at risk.  The appellant had ceased studying and there was no suggestion
     that she would be returning to study.  The source  of  the  appellant's
     persecution was in the context of the University she had  attended  and
     not otherwise.  The judge had carried out his own research but gave  no
     reason why that research should override the findings  in  the  country
     guidance case."

The hearing


  5. The Appellant did not attend the hearing and no adjournment request had
     been received.  The file showed that notice of the place, time and date
     of the hearing had been sent to  the  Appellant  at  the  address  last
     notified to the Tribunal.  This was the same address  as  held  by  the
     Respondent.  I note that the Appellant did not attend  the  hearing  in
     the First-tier Tribunal.  I considered that I was able  to  proceed  to
     hear the appeal and that it was in the interests of justice  to  so  in
     accordance with rules  2  and  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
     Tribunal) Rules 2008.


  6. Mr. Nath made brief submissions.   I  stated  that  I  found  that  the
     decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
     full reasons would follow.


Error of law decision


  7. As set out in the grounds of appeal, the judge made no reference to the
     country guidance case of AK and SK (Christian: risk) Pakistan CG [2014]
     UKUT 00569 (IAC).  The Respondent had made reference to  this  case  in
     the reasons for refusal letter.  The judge instead relied on  a  bundle
     of evidence which he himself had prepared in advance of the hearing.


  8. By relying on this evidence, the judge found that the  Appellant  would
     be at risk  on  return,  and  effectively  departed  from  the  country
     guidance case.  It is well established that if departing  from  country
     guidance caselaw, reasons must be  given  for  this  departure.   I  am
     mindful of the case of DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from  CG)
     Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC), the headnote to which states: "A
     judge may depart from existing country guidance  in  the  circumstances
     described in Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the UT (IAC) Guidance
     Note 2011, no. 2, paragraphs 11 and 12."


  9. Practice direction 12.2 states:


     "A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or the  IAT  bearing
     the letters CG shall be treated as authoritative finding on the country
     guidance issue identified in the determination, based on  the  evidence
     before the members of  Tribunal....that  determine  the  appeal.  As  a
     result, unless it has been expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by  any
     later CG determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that is
     binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case is  authoritative
     in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:-  a)  relates  to  the
     country guidance issue in question; and b) depends  upon  the  same  or
     similar evidence."


 10. The Guidance Note states:


     "If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that has not
     been considered in the Country Guidance case or, if a  subsequent  case
     includes further issues that have not been considered in the  CG  case,
     the judge will reach the appropriate conclusion on the evidence, taking
     into account the conclusion in  the  CG  case  so  far  as  it  remains
     relevant." [11]


 11. However, the judge did not even refer to the country guidance case when
     reaching his conclusions.  I find that this is a material error of law.


 12. The Appellant did not attend the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
     The Respondent had accepted that she  was  a  Christian.   However  the
     Respondent had not accepted her account of  events  in  Pakistan.   The
     Appellant had failed to address how she had  returned  to  Pakistan  in
     2013.  She had failed to address the inconsistencies in  her  evidence.
     The headnote to the country guidance case states as follows:


    "1. Christians in Pakistan are a religious minority  who,  in  general,
    suffer discrimination but this is not sufficient to amount  to  a  real
    risk of persecution.


    2.  Unlike the position of Ahmadis, Christians in general are permitted
    to practise their faith, can attend church,  participate  in  religious
    activities and have their own schools and hospitals.


    3.  Evangelism  by  its  very  nature  involves  some   obligation   to
    proselytise. Someone who seeks to broadcast their faith to strangers so
    as to encourage them to convert, may find themselves facing a charge of
    blasphemy. In that way, evangelical Christians face a greater risk than
    those Christians who are not  publicly  active.  It  will  be  for  the
    judicial fact-finder to  assess  on  a  case  by  case  basis  whether,
    notwithstanding attendance at an evangelical church, it is important to
    the individual to behave in evangelical ways that may lead  to  a  real
    risk of persecution.


    4. Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus may all be
    potentially  charged  with  blasphemy.  Those  citizens  who  are  more
    marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less able
    to deal with the consequences of such proceedings.


    5.   The risk of becoming a  victim  of  a  blasphemy  allegation  will
    depend upon a number of factors and must be assessed on a case by  case
    basis. Relevant factors will include the place of residence, whether it
    is an urban or rural area, and the  individual's  level  of  education,
    financial and employment status and level of public religious  activity
    such as preaching. These factors are not exhaustive.


    6. Non state agents who use  blasphemy  laws  against  Christians,  are
    often motivated by spite, personal or business disputes, arguments over
    land and property. Certain  political  events  may  also  trigger  such
    accusations. A blasphemy allegation, without more, will  not  generally
    be enough to make out a claim under the Refugee Convention. It  has  to
    be actively followed either by the authorities in the form  of  charges
    being brought or by those making the complaint. If it is, or  will  be,
    actively pursued, then an applicant may be able  to  establish  a  real
    risk of harm in the home area and an insufficiency of state protection.


    7. Like other women in Pakistan,  Christian  women,  in  general,  face
    discrimination and may be at a heightened risk but this falls short  of
    a generalised real risk. The need for  a  fact  sensitive  analysis  is
    crucial in their case. Factors such as their age,  place  of  residence
    and socio-economic milieu are all relevant factors when  assessing  the
    risk of abduction, conversions and forced marriages.


    8. Relocation is normally a  viable  option  unless  an  individual  is
    accused  of  blasphemy  which  is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
    situation there is, in general, no internal relocation alternative."


 13. In order to assess risk on return, it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to
     make findings regarding the Appellant's account of events in  Pakistan.
     It was incumbent on him to make findings regarding her circumstances on
     return.  In the absence of the Appellant, the Respondent did  not  have
     the opportunity to cross-examine the Appellant, and the  Appellant  had
     failed  to  address  the  inconsistencies  in  her  witness  statement.
     However, the judge simply accepted her evidence and found that she  was
     "persecuted" on account of her Christian faith in Pakistan.  He  failed
     to address  the  reasons  why  the  Respondent  had  not  accepted  the
     Appellant's account.

 14. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  There has been  no  testing  of  the  Appellant's
     evidence.  I cannot  rely  on  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge as a basis for any remaking  of  the  decision.   Having
     regard to the  overriding  objective,  I  therefore  find  that  it  is
     appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction to the Appellant

There have now been two hearings  in  your  asylum  appeal  which  you  have
failed to attend.  You have  not  given  any  reason  for  your  failure  to
attend.  You are directed to contact the Tribunal  Service  to  inform  them
whether or not you are still pursuing your appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision to refuse asylum, and whether  you  are  intending  to  attend  the
rehearing of your appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If  you  are  now
represented, your representatives are directed to contact  the  Tribunal  to
be put on record.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 30 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
