
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02636/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2019                               |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                           MR SAFAR ARSALAN MAHMOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A
K Hussain promulgated on 9 April 2018 dismissing an appeal against a
decision of the Respondent dated 9 February 2018 refusing a protection
claim.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is given as 1
January 1996.  He is Kurdish and originates from what is now the IKR.  His
application for asylum was based on his claimed conversion from Islam to
Christianity; he expressed his fear specifically in terms of a risk from
his father.


3.   The application for asylum was rejected by the Respondent for reasons
set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 9 February 2018.
The Respondent did not accept the basis of the claim in any material
respect.  It was not accepted that the Appellant was a religious convert as
claimed; in any event, the Respondent considered that there would be a
sufficiency of protection (paragraphs 48 to 50 of the RFRL); in the
alternative, internal relocation was a reasonable and viable option -
including relocation within the IKR.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


5.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision of Judge
Hussain.


6.   Judge Hussain found that whilst he did not accept the Appellant's
account of a religious conversion whilst in Iraq, he did accept that the
Appellant had converted to Christianity whilst in the United Kingdom.
Nonetheless, the appeal was refused for the reasons set out in the
Decision.


7.   In the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the
Appellant raised a single basis of challenge.  The challenge is focused on
the Judge's consideration of country information materials and in
particular what is stated in this regard at paragraphs 23 and 24 of the
Decision.  Those paragraphs appear under the subheading 'Objective evidence
about Christians in the IKR', and are in these terms:

"23. The Appellant was a Sunni Muslim and converted to Christianity.  This
is not against Iraqi Penal Law which permits conversion from Islam.  But
this does not mean that there is no animosity towards converts from Islam.
Such conversions would, according to the Home Office Country Information
and Guidance Iraq: Religious Minorities August 2016, likely result in
ostracism and/or violence at the hands of the converts community, tribe or
family.  Many reportedly believe that apostasy from Islam is punishable by
death or even that the killing of an apostate is a religious duty.  However
that is to state the general position.  The position in the IKR is very
different.  The UN Special Rapporteur on minority issues said on 1 March
2016: "what the [IKR] has done for minorities and different ethnic and
religious groups who have fled to this region is very well appreciated and
recognised internationally".

24.  The Special Rapporteur was there referring in part to the law passed
in 2015, referred to in the Secretary of State's refusal letter, where
followers of religion have the right to declare their religion, practise
the rituals, and found their places of worship.  And whilst the law does
not address the issue of converting from one religion to another, there
were no reported cases in Kurdish courts of anyone being tried for changing
their religion.  The appellant himself confirmed the relaxed attitude
towards Christians in Shaqlara from the local populace.  There is no reason
why this should be any different in any other town in the IKR where there
was a sizeable Christian population."


8.   The challenge - and in turn the grant of permission to appeal - is
entirely focused on an assertion that the UN Special Rapporteur's report or
statement of 1 March 2016 was not material that was before the First-tier
Tribunal; it is submitted that in such a circumstance there was procedural
unfairness in that the Appellant had not been afforded the opportunity of
commenting upon it.


9.   In a Rule 24 response dated 6 September 2018 - which for reasons that
are unclear has not seemingly made its way to the appeal file, and of which
Mr Howard was unaware until the morning of the hearing - the Respondent
points out that the quotation from the UN Special Rapporteur at paragraph
23 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal is to be found in the Country
Information and Guidance report 'Iraq: Religious Minorities' of August
2016, to which the Judge had just referred. In this context, Mr Mills has
taken me to the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, in which
the Country Information and Guidance Report is reproduced (starting at page
183).  At paragraph 7.2.1 under the heading 'Kurdistan Regional Government
(KRG)' reference is indeed made to the UN Special Rapporteur on Minority
Issues, and the quotation that appears in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal at paragraph 23 is set out.


10.  Consequently it is plain that the premise of the challenge to the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is factually misconceived.  In such
circumstances, I find that the ground of appeal is not made out.  The
comments of the UN Special Rapporteur were before the First-tier Tribunal -
and indeed had been placed before the First-tier Tribunal by the Appellant
himself.  Necessarily, it does not behove him to say in such circumstances
that he has not had the opportunity to comment on such materials.


11.  For completeness I note that Mr Howard on behalf of the Appellant has
valiantly invited my attention to the fact that the full report of the UN
Special Rapporteur was not before the Tribunal, and to that extent, it is
not possible to see whether or not the quotation in the Country Information
report - and in turn the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision - is in some
way a misrepresentation of the overall report, or is materially out of
context.  Whilst it is correct that the full statement or report of the
Special Rapporteur was not before the First-tier Tribunal, neither is it
before the Upper Tribunal and so the Appellant cannot point to anything
indicative of material error. In any event, given the scope of the
challenge before the Upper Tribunal, such an argument is not one that can
avail the Appellant.


12.  In any event, it seems to me that it is difficult to see from the
Decision that internal relocation was being considered as anything other
than an alternative finding:  the Judge had in substance found that the
Appellant's only fear was in respect of his father, and did not accept that
the Appellant's father "holds an animus towards him" (paragraph 22).  In
this context, the Judge also noted that the Appellant, when specifically
questioned by the Home Office Presenting Officer before the First-tier
Tribunal, "admitted that were it not for the fear of his father he would
have no qualms about returning to the IKR to practise his religion there"
(paragraph 25).


13.  It also seems to me that this latter quotation renders essentially
empty any technical or abstract arguments based on the safety for Christian
converts in IKR, by way of relocation or otherwise, on the facts of this
particular case.  It is difficult to see how the Appellant can establish a
subjective fear - never mind an objectively well-founded fear - if he
himself acknowledges that there would be no difficulties for him practising
his religion as a Christian convert in the IKR but for the localised
difficulty with his father.


14.  For all these reasons, I reject the challenge to the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
stands.


16.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


17.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 14 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
