

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02243/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15th November 2017                |On: 10th January 2018                |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed by Broudie
Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Iraq  born  in  1989.    He  seeks
    international protection.


 2. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 13th October 2015, the day that  he
    arrived in the country, hidden in the back of a lorry. He told officers
    that he was a Sunni Arab from Kirkuk and as  such  had  faced  problems
    from all sides in Iraq. Because he is an Arab in a Kurdish area he  had
    faced racism and discrimination from the local population;  because  he
    lived in Kirkuk he faced a real risk of indiscriminate violence because
    of ISIS/Daesh and the  conflict  that  they  brought  with  them.   The
    Respondent accepted that both of those things were true, and found that
    the Appellant faced a real risk of harm in his  home  area.  Protection
    was however refused, on the grounds that the Appellant could avoid harm
    by going to live somewhere else in Iraq, for instance in Baghdad.

 3. The Appellant appealed  and  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Birrell). The Respondent argued that there had  been  a
    change in position and sought  to  withdraw  her  concession  that  the
    Appellant was at risk in Kirkuk. The Respondent argued that since Daesh
    had been defeated it was no longer a  'contested  area'  where  Article
    15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  was  engaged.  Judge  Birrell
    rejected that argument, pointing out that on a proper analysis  of  the
    evidence presented by the Respondent the  situation  for  civilians  in
    Kirkuk had actually worsened since the Upper Tribunal had found, in  AA
    (Iraq)  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC),  there  to  be  a  real  risk  of
    indiscriminate  violence  arising  from  the  armed  conflict.    Judge
    Birrell dismissed the appeal, however, for the same  reasons  that  the
    Respondent had refused protection. Having regard to the fact  that  the
    Appellant is a healthy male who speaks Arabic, and who is in possession
    of the requisite identity documents, she was satisfied  that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Smith on the 5th  May  2017.   The  matter  came  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hall who in a decision dated the  15th  September  2017,
    found an error in approach in  Judge  Birrell's  decision  and  set  it
    aside. He did so on the basis of a concession by  the  Respondent,  who
    accepted that in reaching her decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had overlooked the evidence before her relating to  sectarian  violence
    against Sunnis in Baghdad (and other regions in  central  and  southern
    Iraq).  The  Respondent  invited  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision as it related to internal flight.

 5. The matter came before me on the 15th November 2017; as set  out  above
    my task was  limited  to  considering  whether  it  would  be  safe  or
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to go and live elsewhere in Iraq. In
    his submissions Mr  Harrison  confirmed  that  the  place  of  proposed
    internal relocation was confined to Baghdad.

    Legal Framework

 6. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads:

      1.    As part of the assessment of the application  for international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


      2.  In examining whether a part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


      3.    Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin.

 7. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 the House of Lords make clear that the question of whether  internal
    flight is "reasonable" is not to be equated with the test under Article
    3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his  own  guidance  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:


         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:


           'The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to  do  so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
           observed in Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
           [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.  The  decision-
           maker must do his  best  to  decide,  on  such  material  as  is
           available, where on the spectrum the  particular  case  falls...
           All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts'.


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
         It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed  to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
         consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
         persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
         in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
         expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
         to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
         founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
         it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
         around the world, desirable though of course that is."

117.   At 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view that  the test
    is whether the individual will be able to  live  a  "relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi [9]:


         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:


           '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness  of
           IRA [internal relocation  alternative]  is  to  assess  all  the
           circumstances of the individual's  case  holistically  and  with
           specific reference to the  individual's  personal  circumstances
           (including past persecution or fear thereof,  psychological  and
           health condition, family  and  social  situation,  and  survival
           capacities). This assessment is to be made in the context of the
           conditions in the place of  relocation  (including  basic  human
           rights,   security   conditions,   socio-economic    conditions,
           accommodation, access to health care facilities),  in  order  to
           determine the impact on  that  individual  of  settling  in  the
           proposed place of relocation and whether  the  individual  could
           live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the  country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."

    Personal Characteristics of the Appellant

 8.  On the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal  and/or  accepted  by
    the   Respondent   the   Appellant   has   the    following    personal
    characteristics, relevant to my consideration of internal flight:


              i) He is of Arab ethnicity


             ii) He speaks fluent Arabic

            iii) He was born in Kirkuk to a family who had been there for at
                 least three generations (in his unchallenged evidence to me
                 he said that as far as he was aware  his  grandparents  had
                 been born there)

             iv) He has no tribal affiliation

              v) He is a practising Sunni Muslim  whose  observance  of  his
                 faith  includes  regular  attendance  at  Mosque  (in   his
                 unchallenged  evidence  before  me  he  told  me  that   he
                 currently attends Mosque at least once per day)

             vi) The Appellant has parents and three sisters living in Iraq.
                 He claims to have lost contact with  them  but  their  last
                 known whereabouts was Kirkuk

            vii) He is unmarried and has no dependents

           viii) He has no known connections to Baghdad; he has  never  been
                 there and has no family living there

             ix) He has a CSID and an Iraqi passport


 9. In respect of  his  name  the  Appellant  told  me  that  it  would  be
    identifiable as a Sunni name by a process of elimination. It is  not  a
    Kurdish or tribal name, and it is not one of the set names  that  Iraqi
    Shi'ites have.   People would therefore recognise him to  be  Sunni  if
    they were aware of his name.


    Country Guidance & Background Evidence


10.  In reaching her original decision on internal  flight  the  Respondent
    had placed reliance upon the reported 'country guidance'  case  of  AA.
    Heard in May 2015 (but not promulgated until November of that year) the
    Upper Tribunal found as follows:

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

           (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part
         C above);

           (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely
           to find employment);

           (c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad  able  to
           accommodate him;

           (d) whether P is a lone female (women face greater  difficulties
           than men in finding employment);

           (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or  rent
           accommodation;

           (f) whether P is from a minority community;

           (g) whether there is support available for  P  bearing  in  mind
           there is some evidence that returned failed asylum  seekers  are
           provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


11. In finding there to be an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision Judge Hall noted the findings in the decision in  BA  (Returns
    to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC). This country guidance  was
    heard in August 2016 and was reported in January  2017.  As  the  title
    suggests, this decision was concerned specifically with  the  situation
    in Baghdad. Two paragraphs of the headnote deal  with  Sunni  religious
    affiliation:


         (v)      Sectarian violence has increased since the  withdrawal  of
             US-led coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen
             in 2006-2007. A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia
             militias in Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are
             more likely to be targeted as suspected  supporters  of  Sunni
             extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni  identity  alone
             is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious harm.


            ....


         (vii)    In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and  in
             the case of Sunni complainants, are likely to be unwilling  to
             provide sufficient protection.


12. On the matter of Sunni identity the Tribunal in BA noted that it is not
    simply a matter of  religious  identity:  it  has  become  a  badge  of
    political affiliation [at 84]. After the invasion of Iraq in 2003  many
    Iraqis turned to their own communities as a source of  protection,  and
    by 2006-07 the country was engulfed in a ferocious civil war  drawn  on
    sectarian lines, characterised by 'ID killings' , primarily perpetrated
    by Shi'ite death squads manning  checkpoints  in  the  city.   After  a
    period of decline since the end of that phase of civil war, the  number
    of  sectarian  attacks  started  to  rise  again  in  2013.   This   is
    attributable  to  the  Shi'ite  response   to   the   rise   of   Sunni
    fundamentalists Daesh.  It has reignited resentment towards  the  Sunni
    minority, who continue to be  associated  with  the  regime  of  Saddam
    Hussain [86] Iraq expert Dr George referred  the  Tribunal  to  the  US
    Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) Annual Report on
    Iraq dated 02 May 2016 [at 85 BA]:


         "While ISIL was the most egregious perpetrator of human rights  and
         religious  freedom  violations,  the  Popular  Mobilization  Forces
         (PMF), recognized by Prime Minister al-Abadi in September  2015  as
         officially part of  the  Iraqi  state,  have  continued  to  commit
         systematic attacks against  Sunni  Muslim  civilians,  exacerbating
         sectarian tensions. Although al-Abadi attempted to  bring  the  PMF
         into the fold of government-sanctioned armed  groups  through  this
         maneuver so far it has  remained  clear  that  the  group  -  which
         technically reports to the  Ministry  of  Interior  -  exercises  a
         significant amount of autonomy  and  espouses  strong,  pro-  Shi'a
         leanings, mostly to  the  exclusion  of  Iraq's  Sunni  population.
         However, because the PMF is one of the  most  effective  groups  in
         fighting  ISIL,  the  Iraqi  government  has  not  curtailed  their
         activities  or  prosecuted  those  who  have  perpetrated   violent
         attacks."


13. Examples of such sectarian killings include an incident  in  Diyala  in
    2015 when Shi'ite militias killed 70 Sunnis [at 86].  The BBC  reported
    the discovery of 53 bodies  in  a  Shi'ite  neighbourhood  in  Baghdad,
    believed to be Sunnis murdered in revenge attacks [87].    Pathologists
    reported that a typical day in 2014 would see the bodies of 9-10 Sunnis
    being brought  to  mortuaries  bearing  the  signs  of  "Shi'ite  style
    execution", ie having their hands tied behind their back and being shot
    in the back of the head [91].  The UNHCR confirmed that in  their  view
    these killings were  driven  by  fear  of/revenge  against  Daesh  [92]
    Amnesty International reported Sunnis being  harassed  at  checkpoints,
    driven from  their  homes  and  threatened  by  Shi'ite  militias,  all
    justified by the fight against Daesh [88].  In respect  of  checkpoints
    the Tribunal  was  told  that  there  are  an  estimated  200  official
    checkpoints, and a number  more  that  are  run  illegally  by  Shi'ite
    militias. Even the 'official' checkpoints are sometimes manned by these
    forces, and it is often difficult to tell whether the  'officials'  are
    members of the security  services  or  militiamen.   Civilians  passing
    through are required to produce identity documents and answer questions
    about their religious affiliation [89].    Some  Sunnis  have  acquired
    fake identity documents giving them 'Shi'ite' sounding names, in  order
    to get through checkpoints [90].


14. The  Tribunal  in  BA  also  had  regard  to  an  August  2016  Country
    Information and Guidance (CIG)  report  entitled  'Iraq:  Sunni  (Arab)
    Muslims'. Paragraph 7.6.3 of that report quotes  from  a  UNHCR  report
    'Relevant COI for Assessments on the Availability of an Internal Flight
    or Relocation Alternative (IFA/IRA) in Baghdad  for  Sunni  Arabs  from
    ISIS-Held Areas' (May 2016):


         "According to reports, there has been a renewed surge  in  targeted
         violence against Sunni Arabs in Baghdad  since  2014...  There  has
         reportedly been a renewed increase in bodies discovered, mostly  of
         Sunni  Arab  men,  who  are  found  blindfolded,   handcuffed   and
         apparently executed on a daily basis, mostly in Baghdad.  According
         to reports, the mode of killing and the geographic  location  where
         the bodies are  found  often  correspond  with  known  patterns  of
         Shi'ite militias killing for sectarian  or  political  motivations.
         Families  of  those  abducted  or  killed  are   reportedly   often
         apprehensive about  reporting  the  abduction  or  killing  to  the
         police, or checking the morgue, as they  fear  being  subjected  to
         reprisals."


15. The Tribunal note [at 95] that the Home Office policy summary  relating
    to the risk to Sunnis states [at 3.1.1 of the CIG]:


         "Sunnis may face a real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  from
         the Shia militia  in  Baghdad  and  the  'contested'  governorates.
         However, there may be circumstances, including  tribal,  family  or
         political links, which mean a person is not at risk and can  return
         or relocate to Baghdad."


16. Having had regard to all of that evidence the Tribunal in BA concluded:

    98.    Both parties are in agreement that the evidence  does  not  show
         that a person would be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  solely  on
         account of his or her religious identity if returned to Baghdad  at
         the current time. This is consistent with the findings made by  the
         Tribunal in AA (Iraq) [136]. However, the evidence  indicates  that
         the number of sectarian attacks has increased since the  withdrawal
         of US-led coalition forces in 2012. Dr George considered that there
         was a significant level of  sectarian  violence  although,  in  his
         view, it had not yet reached the heights seen in the  period  2006-
         2007.


    99.    The evidence shows that ISIL is capable of launching attacks  in
         public areas of Baghdad largely populated by Shias. In response the
         Shia militias which control the city  are  reported  to  carry  out
         targeted killings of Sunnis. The balance of  power  in  Baghdad  is
         firmly with the Shia controlled government; supported by  militias.
         A large number of checkpoints are set up  throughout  the  city.  A
         number of checkpoints are illegal and by  definition  may  move  to
         different areas of the city. Many  are  manned  by  Shia  militias.
         There are reports of some Sunnis being identified  and  taken  away
         from checkpoints.


    100.   While it is difficult to ascertain the reasons  behind  some  of
         the killings in Baghdad there is evidence  to  suggest  that  young
         Sunni men  are  more  likely  to  be  targeted  as  perceived  ISIL
         supporters. Although a purely statistical analysis  does  not  give
         risk to a real risk solely on account of Sunni identity, the number
         of  kidnappings  and  killings,  even  taking  into   account   the
         likelihood of underreporting, is a concern. Although  the  majority
         of Sunnis are likely to be able to lead a relatively normal life in
         Baghdad it  is  not  without  risk.  The  level  of  political  and
         sectarian violence in Baghdad remains high even if it does not meet
         the threshold required to show a generalised risk of indiscriminate
         violence.


    101.   The respondent's most recent policy  statement  recognises  that
         Sunnis may face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  from
         Shia militias in Baghdad. It goes on to state that  tribal,  family
         or political links, might mean a person is  not  at  risk  and  can
         return or relocate to Baghdad. We find that the significance  of  a
         person's  religio-political  identity  to  risk  on   return   will
         inevitably depend on the circumstances of each case. The increasing
         levels of sectarian violence in Baghdad, albeit not  sufficient  if
         taken alone,  are  likely  to  be  an  important  consideration  in
         assessing   whether   a   person   can    demonstrate    individual
         characteristics that would place him or her at real risk of serious
         harm.


17. Mr Holmes took me to some more recent evidence.   The June 2017 version
    of the CIG Iraq: Sunni  (Arab)  Muslims  maintains  the  position  that
    religious identity is not alone sufficient to give rise to a real  risk
    of serious harm, but acknowledges that Sunni men are more likely to  be
    targeted as Daesh suspects [2.2.1].  In  particular  it  is  noted  [at
    2.2.8] that:


         Sunni Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), who generally lack
         support networks and economic means, are more vulnerable to
         suspicion and abuse. Decision makers need to consider each case on
         its merits.


    It is estimated that there are over half  a  million  IDPs  in  Baghdad
    [4.2.2]. Large numbers of IDP  men  and  boys  have  been  detained  at
    checkpoints [9.2.5].


18. The 2017 CIG cites various reports on Shi'ite militias in Baghdad. Many
    of the already established groups reactivated  upon  the  emergence  of
    Daesh. There are two main blocs.  The  first  is  generally  aligned  -
    politically and theologically - with Iran and are  heavily  armed.  The
    second are a federation of militias who are  loyal  to  Prime  Minister
    Abadi and follow  the  teachings  of  Iraqi  Shi'ite  cleric  Ayatollah
    Sistani [6.1.4].  Recent campaigns have seen Sunni Arabs as their major
    target. Whilst attacks have some correlation with actions by Daesh, the
    Minority Rights Group report scepticism about the claim that these  are
    defensive actions: "there is no consistency in who is targeted,  or  as
    one IDP framed it: 'revenge is carried out  on  whoever  crosses  their
    [the militias] path" [7.1.2].  The UNHCR report that  Sunni  Arabs  are
    also targeted by the security forces who use wide powers under the Anti-
    Terrorism Law of 2005 to arrest without warrant;  detention  conditions
    are harsh and torture is frequently reported [9.1.1]


19. In addition to these security issues the 2017  CIG  reports  on  socio-
    economic  difficulties  faced  by  Sunnis  in   Baghdad,   who   report
    discrimination and difficulties in obtaining  employment  and  housing,
    attributed to direct prejudice as well as the fact  that  such  matters
    are usually organised through nepotism and connections, so  in  Shi'ite
    dominated areas it will generally be more difficult for non-Shi'ites.

20. The last matter raised in the 2017 CIG, relied upon by  Mr  Holmes,  is
    the matter of access to Baghdad.   The UNCHR report that access to  the
    city has become increasingly difficult for IDPs since 2014.  IDPs  from
    ISIS areas require a sponsor to enter the city, (with the exception  of
    those  requiring  medical  treatment).    Since   December   2015   the
    sponsorship requirement has been intermittently halted and  reinstated,
    but in February 2016 entry has been put on  hold,  even  to  IDPs  with
    sponsors.   Large numbers of those seeking safety in the city have been
    forcibly removed to camps in Al-Anbar. Those already in the  city  face
    severe restrictions on their freedom of movement [at 9.2.5]:

         "Within Baghdad, IDPs could, in principle, freely choose the area
         in which they wish to settle. However, as a result of the sectarian
         segregation within Baghdad, which followed the large-scale
         sectarian violence of 2006/07, many areas where one sect is in the
         majority are reportedly not accessible for members of the other
         sect, or only at the risk of serious security incidents. At
         checkpoints within the city, the ISF/Shi'ite militias reportedly
         ask people for their national ID card, which often gives an
         indication of the individual's religious (Sunni/Shi'ite)
         affiliation based on the person's first name, family or tribal name
         and area of origin. Therefore, Sunni Arabs generally remain in
         Sunni-dominated neighbourhoods. Incidents of IDPs being stopped at
         checkpoints inside the city and interrogated by the ISF have been
         reported. Some IDPs were reportedly asked for a second sponsor at
         checkpoints inside Baghdad, or in the areas where they intended to
         reside. As a result, some IDPs limit their movements to their
         initial sponsor's area of residence, which may impact on their
         ability to join other family members, and/or to access services or
         employment.

    Discussion and Findings

21. I begin with AA. The factors identified as relevant in AA, pertinent to
    this case, led Judge Birrell to conclude that internal relocation would
    not be unduly harsh for this Appellant. Looking at  the  considerations
    listed in that country guidance, her conclusion is understandable: this
    is a healthy young man who speaks fluent Arabic,  is  of  the  majority
    ethnic group,  and  importantly,   who  has  a  full  set  of  identity
    documents which would enable him to freely move  and  find  employment.
    Before me the parties agreed, however,  that  since  that  decision  in
    November 2015  the  situation  for  Sunni  Arab  IDPs  in  Baghdad  has
    deteriorated. The question for me is whether it has deteriorated to the
    extent that it would be unduly harsh for this man,  with  his  personal
    characteristics and history, to relocate there.


22. The evidence given to the Tribunal in BA makes grim reading.  The fight
    against Daesh and the understandable desire of the  Shi'ite  population
    in Baghdad to keep the militants out of the capital has led,  it  would
    seem, to a resurgence of the sectarian hatred that led  to  the  brutal
    civil conflict in in 2006-2007. The evidence shows that Sunnis  in  the
    city  live  with  the  constant   threat   of   violence,   harassment,
    intimidation, discrimination and arbitrary arrest. At one  end  of  the
    spectrum of harm Sunnis may face discrimination in the workplace or  in
    securing accommodation; at the other  they  live  with  the  threat  of
    kidnap and  murder  by  Shi'ite  death  squads.   The  Tribunal  in  BA
    nevertheless concluded, having regard to the overall size of the  Sunni
    population, that  there was not a real risk of harm to all  Sunnis.  An
    assessment of risk must take into account individual  circumstances.  I
    accept that must be so. A Sunni  who  comes  from  a  neighbourhood  in
    Baghdad where his family have lived for centuries  is  likely  to  have
    strong links in the community, to have a wide  network  of  family  and
    friends, which would  likely  include  local  Shi'ites:   some  of  the
    evidence before the Tribunal in BA spoke of such men being rescued from
    militias by their Shi'ite neighbours [at 88].   I do not  underestimate
    the difficulty that such Iraqis  face,  but  they  have  a  measure  of
    protection from the fact that they are known in the city. A  Sunni  who
    has lived in a Baghdad neighbourhood all  of  his  life,  and  who  has
    established links there, is far less likely to be suspected of being  a
    Daesh infiltrator or sympathiser.


23. This is not however the position that the Appellant finds  himself  in.
      He is not from Baghdad. He has no connections and has never even been
    there.  He has no prospect of being able to find a sponsor to vouch for
    him. Even supposing that he was permitted to enter the  city  from  the
    airport (the evidence on the imposition of the sponsorship  requirement
    at the airport is unclear) he would face considerable  difficulties  in
    trying to establish himself.

24. Knowing no-one, his starting point might be a Sunni  mosque.  The  fact
    that he attends mosque regularly is something of a double- edged sword.
    On the one hand it might mean that he is able to meet other Sunnis  and
    establish some kind of tentative social support network; on  the  other
    it would make him readily identifiable as  a  Sunni  to  any  observant
    Shi'ite militiaman. I have  not  seen  any  specific  evidence  on  how
    Baghdadi Sunnis are reacting to incomers, but given the  general  tenor
    of the evidence, that communities are retreating inwards as a means  of
    self-protection it would seem likely that a single Sunni Arab male from
    an area of high Daesh activity would be  viewed  with  some  suspicion,
    even by his co-religionists. Even if they felt some  sympathy  for  his
    position, it would be understandable if they wanted to keep a  distance
    from him, given the ever-present threat from the militias.  Accordingly
    I find his prospects of gaining support from other Sunnis in Baghdad to
    be slim.




25.  He is from Kirkuk, an area associated  with  Daesh.   His  accent  and
    identity documents  would  plainly  confirm  that  to  any  prospective
    employer  or  landlord,  or  anyone  at  a  checkpoint.   I  note   the
    Respondent's policy position that persons in  that  position  are  more
    vulnerable  to  suspicion  and  abuse,  and  the  background   evidence
    indicating that there is a high level of violence,  discrimination  and
    harassment being directed against Sunnis. I find it very  difficult  in
    those circumstances to see how the Appellant could  lead  any  sort  of
    normal existence there. The very factors that might have worked in  his
    favour at the time that AA was heard  -  a  single  Arab  man  with  no
    dependents - now work against him, since he has precisely  the  profile
    that a Shi'ite militiaman, on the lookout for Daesh infiltrators, might
    be interested in: a cursory check of his CSID would reveal his place of
    origin and give rise to a real risk of harm.  I  am  satisfied,  having
    regard to the individual characteristics of  this  Appellant,  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him to try  and  relocate  to  Baghdad.
    That being the only  place  of  internal  relocation  proposed  by  the
    Respondent, that disposes of the appeal in the Appellant's favour.


    Decisions

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside.


27. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on protection grounds.

28. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          24th November 2017


