
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Pa/02643/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2020 by Skype                   |On 24 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     JG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Pipi, Counsel instructed by Templeton Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent's decision which is the subject of this appeal  is  that
    dated 2 March 2020, being a decision to refuse a protection  and  human
    rights claim by the appellant, a citizen of Kenya, born in 1960.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade ("the FtJ"), following a hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") on 30 July 2020.

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he would be at risk from the
    Mungiki sect on his return to Kenya, he having been a  member  of  that
    group. He would be regarded as a defector.  He was subjected to threats
    from the group before he left Kenya and his office was burnt  down.  He
    left in 2002.

 4. He also claims that his removal would breach his right  to  family  and
    private life.

    The appeal to the FtT

 5. The FtJ made a number of detailed findings.  She  did  not  accept  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim to  have  been  a  member  of  the
    Mungiki. She found that there  was  significant  inconsistency  in  his
    account, as well as it being inherently incredible in various respects.

 6. In the alternative, she found that he would be afforded  protection  by
    the authorities, and that in any event he had the  option  of  internal
    relocation.

 7. As regards the Article 8 aspect of the  claim,  although  she  accepted
    that the appellant is the father of his child, D, that child is  not  a
    'qualifying  child'  within  the  meaning  of  section  117D   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. She did, however,  accept
    that the appellant does have contact with his son, and that contact has
    been consistent. She further found that he has been  a  consistent  and
    good force in his son's life. She did not, however,   accept  that  his
    role in the child's  life  was  one  of  co-parenting  and  co-decision
    making.

 8. The FtJ noted that neither D nor his mother had  any  lawful  basis  of
    stay in the UK. The child's best  interests  would  be  served  by  his
    remaining with his mother and continuing contact  with  the  appellant.
    That contact could be maintained when the appellant returns  to  Kenya,
    and more closely when D and his mother return there.

 9. The FtJ concluded that there would not be very significant obstacles to
    the appellant's integration in Kenya. The appellant did not meet any of
    the Article 8 Rules and his was not a case in  which  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances meaning that it would be unduly harsh for  him
    to be removed.

    The grant of permission

10. The First-tier Tribunal judge who granted permission to appeal, in  the
    headline to the grant, stated that "Permission to Appeal  is  GRANTED",
    not expressing any limitation on the grant.

11. In his reasons for granting permission the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    summarised  the  grounds  and  said  as  follows  in  the   penultimate
    paragraph:

         "Given the length of the decision the discussion of the Appellant's
         health issues is conspicuous by its absence.  On  that  basis  that
         ground is arguable and permission is  appropriate  on  that  ground
         alone and is refused on the other grounds raised."

12. Finally, he said: "The grounds disclose an arguable error  of  law  and
    permission to appeal is granted."

13. In the 'rule' 24 response, the Secretary of State  contended  that  the
    grant of permission was only on the basis that it was arguable that the
    FtJ did not take into account the medical evidence submitted on  behalf
    of the appellant.

14. The appellant's skeleton argument for  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is also  predicated  on  the  basis  of  a  limited  grant  of
    permission. The respondent's skeleton argument cites  Safi  and  others
    (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) in support  of
    the proposition that the grant of permission is a limited one.  Relying
    on Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez; Mandalia and
    Patel v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  2,  it  is  argued  that  the  grant  of
    permission is "unambiguously clear".

    The scope of the grant of permission

15. Before me, Mr Kotas reiterated  the  contention  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal were limited. It was submitted that the decision in  Safi  could
    be distinguished on the basis that in that case the grant of permission
    was not clear, whereas in the appeal before me it was clear.

16. Mr Pipi acknowledged that in his skeleton argument no issue  was  taken
    on behalf of the appellant in terms  of  the  scope  of  the  grant  of
    permission, it having been accepted that  the  grant  was  limited.  He
    confirmed on behalf of the appellant that  it  was  only  the  'medical
    ground' that was pursued before me but that the remaining grounds would
    be "left as they are".

17. Notwithstanding Mr Kotas' contention that the grant of permission is  a
    limited one, and Mr Pipi's implicit, if not express, acceptance of that
    position, I am satisfied that the grant of permission is not limited to
    the medical ground and that the grant of permission is to be  construed
    as a grant on all grounds advanced.

18. In coming to that conclusion I have in mind the clear guidance in Safi,
    stated in the headnote at paragraph (2), which  reflects  [46]  of  the
    decision which states as follows:



           "Henceforth, it  is  likely  to  be  only  in  very  exceptional
           circumstances that the  Upper  Tribunal  will  be  persuaded  to
           entertain a submission that  a  decision  which,  on  its  face,
           grants permission to appeal without express limitation is to  be
           construed as anything other than a grant of permission on all of
           the grounds accompanying the application for  permission.   That
           is highly likely to be so, regardless of what may be said in the
           reasons for decision section of the document. "


19. In Safi, the scenario in terms of the  grant  of  permission  was  very
    similar to that which arises in the present case. The first section  of
    the grant of  permission  in  that  case,  as  in  this,  indicated  an
    unrestricted grant. The 'reasons' section of  the  grant  in  Safi  was
    found not to be 'unambiguous' as to the terms of the  grant,  which  it
    was required to be. In Safi, the language used in the  reasons  section
    was in terms of the 'arguability' of certain grounds.

20. In the appeal before me, the permission judge stated that the  'health'
    ground was "arguable" and in relation  to  the  other  aspects  of  the
    grounds it was said that those matters (the judge's conduct or  general
    reasoning) do not have any merit.  The  language  of  'arguability'  is
    absent from that part of the reasons section, although  admittedly  the
    grant did go on to state that permission was granted  on  the  'health'
    ground alone and refused on the other grounds.  However,  there  is  no
    escaping the fact that the headline of  the  grant  is  in  unambiguous
    terms. As was also said in Safi, the reasons  part  of  the  permission
    decision is to be construed as just that,  i.e.  the  reasons  for  the
    decision that has just been made.

21. Neither party suggested that Safi was wrongly decided.  I  respectfully
    agree with the reasoning in that case and adopt it.  I  do  not  accept
    that there is any reason to distinguish the decision in Safi  from  the
    facts in the appeal before me. I construe the grant  of  permission  in
    this case as one that has no limitation.

    The grounds and submissions

22. Given the view I have expressed  as  to  the  scope  of  the  grant  of
    permission, it is  necessary  to  summarise  all  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. The grounds  contend  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  give  any
    consideration  to  the  medical  evidence.   Although   at   [56]   she
    acknowledged that the appellant  had  been  prescribed  medication  for
    depression, that was only mentioned in the context of him as a witness.
    It is argued that there was no discussion of the impact on  his  mental
    health of his  return  to  Kenya.  The  decision  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 was in favour
    of the appellant.

23. It is also argued in the grounds that the video hearing was flawed. The
    appellant  had  asked  for  a  face-to-face  hearing  in  view  of  his
    vulnerability and the credibility issues arising.  During  the  hearing
    there were technical difficulties in that the appellant's counsel could
    not connect to the hearing and the appellant was,  therefore,  left  on
    his own at the hearing. It was wrong for the FtJ to  state  that  there
    was no apparent difficulty at the hearing.

24. The appellant "did not have the ease of access and support  of  counsel
    that he would have had at  a  face-to-face  hearing".  The  FtJ  had  a
    discretion to adjourn the hearing and re-list the matter as a  face-to-
    face hearing.

25. It is further argued that the FtJ was wrong to draw adverse  inferences
    from the fact that the appellant's wife did not undergo  FGM,  when  in
    fact this supported his explanation as to why he and his wife fled from
    the Mungiki. The appellant's evidence in his witness statement was that
    he and his wife feared that the Mungiki would discover  that  his  wife
    had not undergone FGM, which is one of the reasons  that  he  left  the
    Mungiki. In addition, it was unreasonable for the  FtJ  to  expect  the
    appellant to adduce evidence as to how his wife escaped FGM, as it  was
    not for the appellant to testify on his wife's behalf.

26. Further, the FtJ incorrectly stated at  [63]  that  the  appellant  was
    taunted by the Mungiki because he married a woman who  could  not  give
    him a child and who did not undergo FGM. In fact, the appellant did not
    state that he was taunted by the Mungiki but  that  "he  was  taunted".
    There was also further clarification in his witness statement dated  30
    April 2020 on the issues surrounding the threats of FGM to his wife.

27. The grounds also maintain that the appellant's difficulty in  answering
    questions in relation to his wife is linked to his mental health, as he
    had explained in his witness statement, and taking into account that he
    was giving evidence of events that took place 19 years ago.

28. It is lastly said that the FtJ applied too high a standard of proof.

29. In the 'rule 24' response, the respondent argues that the FtJ expressly
    took into account the appellant's mental health in terms of  return  to
    Kenya, at [77]. Furthermore, the medical evidence before  the  FtJ  was
    limited to two brief paragraphs in the  appellant's  witness  statement
    and seven pages of evidence in the appellant's bundle, and some of that
    evidence only refers to medical appointments.

30. His medical conditions of type-2 diabetes and depression are ones  that
    he could receive treatment for in Kenya, as the FtJ  had  said.  It  is
    pointed out by the respondent that there is no challenge in the grounds
    of appeal to that finding. Even if there was any error of  law  in  the
    FtJ's decision in relation to the appellant's health, the error is  not
    material given the lack of severity of the appellant's conditions,  for
    which treatment is available in Kenya. There is plainly  no  Article  3
    breach in terms of what was decided in AM (Zimbabwe).

31. In submissions, Mr Pipi confined his arguments to  the  health  ground,
    although the other grounds were not disavowed. It  was  submitted  that
    the FtJ did not properly engage with the medical  report,  or  properly
    apply Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813 in relation to the appellant's integration in Kenya.

32. There were only two references to the appellant's  medical  conditions.
    The reference at [56] was in the context of reasonable  adjustments  in
    relation to the hearing, and at [77] there was just one  sentence.  The
    latter did not  represent  the  careful  evaluation  of  the  issue  of
    integration that was required.

33. At page 20 of the appellant's bundle, the medical report dated  11  May
    2020 from the GP's practice stated that his condition may  be  affected
    by his return to Kenya. The FtJ needed to decide whether his  condition
    would be affected and whether he would be able to integrate.

34. The "expert report" at page  24  showed  that  the  appellant  received
    counselling and that if he was returned to Kenya he would not  be  able
    to see his son at all. There needed to be an assessment on the part  of
    the FtJ in terms of how that would affect the appellant's mental health
    or his integration on return.

35. Mr Kotas relied on  his  skeleton  argument  in  relation  to  all  the
    grounds, including those not argued orally before me. It was  submitted
    that it was for the appellant to show how his medical  condition  would
    prevent his integration.

36. The appellant's witness statement only contained three brief paragraphs
    on the issue of his health. At [28] he refers to his medical conditions
    and at [30] to his receiving talking  therapies.  The  grounds  suggest
    that the medical evidence is substantial but it is limited. The  letter
    from the GP refers to stress, diabetes and  hypertension.  The  Talking
    Therapies referral letter dated 11 March 2020 does not take the medical
    evidence any further, and pages 22-24 of  the  appellant's  bundle  are
    only a write-up of the notes of the sessions, which might in fact  only
    relate to one session.

37. Mr Kotas reiterated that there was no challenge  to  the  finding  that
    treatment would be available to him in Kenya and there was no  evidence
    to show that it was not. The FtJ had noted at [77] that he had lived in
    Kenya for 45 years. It  was  inconceivable  that  the  FtJ  could  have
    concluded that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration on return. It was not said why he could not work  or  leave
    the house. Even if there was an error of law in the FtJ's assessment in
    this context, it was not material.

38. In reply, Mr Pipi submitted that it was for the FtJ to put the evidence
    within the appropriate legal framework, even if it was correct  to  say
    that the case was not argued in a particular way before the FtT. Kamara
    concluded that the question  of  integration  is  not  limited  to  the
    question of earning a living. Although Kamara was referred to  at  [46]
    of the FtJ's decision, there was no conclusion in relation to  it.  The
    FtJ had then just jumped  to  refer  to  s.117B  (of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)("the 2002 Act").

    Assessment and Conclusions

39. I deal firstly with the grounds that  were  not  the  subject  of  oral
    submissions before me, those being the matters that were the subject of
    my analysis of Safi  and my conclusion that permission was  granted  on
    all grounds.

40. First is the contention that the hearing before the FtJ was  flawed  by
    reason of it having been a remote hearing as opposed to a  face-to-face
    hearing, and in terms of the asserted  failures  in  the  hearing  that
    occurred on the day.

41. The grounds (not  apparently  drafted  by  Mr  Pipi)  assert  that  "On
    numerous occasions prior to the hearing, the Tribunal  was  invited  to
    list the appeal for a face to face hearing in view of  the  appellant's
    vulnerability and the issues of credibility". It is  true  that  on  24
    April 2020 the appellant's solicitors wrote to the FtT asking that  the
    hearing be a face-to-face hearing and stating that  the  appellant  did
    not feel comfortable having a hearing by remote means.  However,  at  a
    case management review hearing ("CMR") on 15 June  2020  (at  which  Mr
    Pipi appeared on  behalf  of  the  appellant)  it  was  agreed  on  the
    appellant's behalf that the hearing could proceed remotely.  There  was
    no subsequent objection to the hearing proceeding remotely in  response
    to the directions sent after the CMR.

42. At the substantive hearing before the FtJ (at which Mr Pipi  appeared),
    there was no objection to the hearing proceeding remotely.  Nothing  to
    that effect is evident from the  FtJ's  decision  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal do not assert that to be the case.

43. At [21] of her decision, the FtJ noted that at the start of the hearing
    the parties successfully joined the hearing. She went on to state  that
    there were  some  initial  problems  with  hearing  the  appellant  but
    fortunately his solicitors were on hand and able to ensure that he  was
    able to  mute  and  unmute  the  microphone  and  that  there  were  no
    difficulties with the line dropping out or parties not being able to be
    heard. It appears from the FtJ's written directions that  followed  the
    CMR, that the appellant was to be at the solicitors' office during  the
    remote substantive hearing.

44. The FtJ said at [56] that there was no  apparent  difficulty  with  the
    remote hearing. Whilst it is asserted in the  grounds  of  appeal  that
    there were technical difficulties  which  meant  that  the  appellant's
    counsel could not connect to  the  hearing,  that  the  appellant  was,
    therefore, effectively left alone, that he did not  have  the  ease  of
    access to counsel that a face-to-face hearing would  afford,  and  that
    the hearing was prolonged, none of this  is  apparent  from  the  FtJ's
    decision. On the contrary.

45. Indeed, it is apparent from the FtJ's decision that no submissions were
    made on behalf of the appellant,  during  the  hearing  or  in  closing
    submissions, to the effect that the hearing was flawed by reason of any
    technical difficulties. The grounds of appeal do not suggest otherwise.
    It is not apparent, either, that any application was made to the FtJ to
    adjourn the hearing because of technical difficulties with  the  remote
    hearing, and again, the grounds do not assert as much.

46. If, in fact, the appellant was at the  office  of  his  solicitors,  as
    appears to be the case, the contention that he was left "on his own" is
    not borne out by the facts.

47. Lastly, I note that at [56] the FtJ said that she was not asked to make
    reasonable adjustments at the hearing (because of his depression),  but
    nevertheless, breaks were regularly given.

48. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in the complaint made  about
    the form or conduct of the hearing.

49. As regards the issue about FGM in relation to the appellant's wife, the
    FtJ referred in detail to the matters that she had to bear in mind with
    regard to an assessment of the appellant's credibility, namely that  he
    gave evidence through  an  interpreter,  that  he  gave  interviews  in
    English (rather than his first language, Kikuyu), that the hearing  was
    conducted remotely, and that the appellant suffered from depression.

50. Between [60] and [67] she gave very thorough reasons for rejecting  the
    credibility of his claim. At [63] specifically, she explained  why  she
    did not accept his explanation as to how  his  wife  managed  to  avoid
    undergoing FGM, despite the rules of the Mungiki requiring it. Part  of
    his explanation was that he had avoided introducing  his  wife  to  the
    group and they did not ask about her, but the FtJ pointed out that that
    was undermined by his claim that his cousin was  a  senior  member  who
    would know that he was married.

51. She rejected the explanation that although he went  to  the  group  for
    several years they had not got to the point of asking  him  (about  his
    wife), given the conservatism of the group and their belief in FGM.

52. In addition, she pointed out that his claim not to have introduced  his
    wife to the Mungiki, and so  shielded  her  existence  from  them,  was
    undermined by paragraph 7 one of his witness statements.  The  FtJ  did
    not identify the witness statement but  it  is  a  statement  dated  15
    September (probably 2019) in the respondent's bundle. The FtJ misquoted
    it but it states that "...I was being taunted because I married a woman
    who did not give me a child and she  did  not  undergo  Female  Genital
    Mutilation (FGM)." The FtJ quoted that part of the witness statement as
    "I was taunted because...".

53. Not only are the grounds wrong to say that the FtJ quoted  the  witness
    statement as 'I was taunted by them' and that  he  actually  said  only
    that 'he was taunted', the witness statement  itself  expressly  states
    that he was taunted by the Mungiki. The FtJ was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant's evidence in this respect was  inconsistent,  quite
    apart from the other inconsistencies to which she referred.

54. As regards the contention in the grounds that the FtJ applied too  high
    a standard of proof, there is no merit in that contention. She gave  an
    appropriate self-direction on the standard of proof at [49]  and  there
    is nothing in her decision which indicates that she departed from  that
    self-direction. She reiterated the appropriate  standard  of  proof  at
    [56].

55. The only remaining ground  is  that  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    health. The grounds make the bold assertion that  the  FtJ  "failed  to
    give any consideration to the  appellant's  medical  evidence"  in  her
    decision. That assertion is patently incorrect. The  skeleton  argument
    before me, prepared by Mr Pipi, puts the matter in a more reasoned way.

56. The appellant's medical conditions and prescriptions are referred to in
    the skeleton argument, as is the Talking Therapies report. The skeleton
    argument refers to his being recorded as being anxious,  having  memory
    problems, being tired, with poor concentration and having broken sleep.
    The report refers to his worrying about not being able to see his son.

57. It is pointed out that there are only two  references  to  his  medical
    conditions,  at  [56]  (in  terms  of  reasonable  adjustments  at  the
    hearing), and at [77] where the FtJ said that "he clearly  has  medical
    conditions but there is  medical  treatment  and  facilities  available
    there." It is argued that this is inadequate in terms of the  need  for
    the "broad evaluative judgment" described at [14] of Kamara. It is also
    argued that the FtJ did not make any assessment of how  his  depression
    and complete severance of contact with his son would affect his ability
    to integrate in Kenya.

58. In submissions before me, [46] of the decision was  criticised  in  its
    reference to Kamara but with no conclusion being expressed in  relation
    to it, and in terms of the decision at that point simply then moving to
    a consideration of s.117B of the 2002 Act. In fact, that  paragraph  of
    the decision is the last paragraph in the summary  of  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the appellant. It does not form any part of the FtJ's
    actual reasoning.

59. Before me, the Talking Therapies report was referred to  as  an  expert
    report. However, as I pointed out, it  is  not  an  expert  report  but
    merely a record of what appears to have been two counselling  sessions.
    The author of the  report  is  not  identified,  nor  are  his  or  her
    qualifications. There is, in fact no, or very little,  opinion  offered
    in the report.

60. Nevertheless, the FtJ  did  accept  that  the  appellant  "clearly  has
    medical conditions" [77].  However,  she  also  found  that  there  was
    treatment available  for  those  conditions,  a  finding  that  is  not
    disputed.

61. The FtJ  referred  at  [77]  to  Kamara  and,  consistently  with  that
    decision, found that he would be "enough of an insider" in order to  be
    able to reintegrate. She referred to his having lived in Kenya  for  45
    years and his understanding of how Kenyan society works.  It  was  then
    that she referred to the availability of treatment in Kenya.

62. It is evident that the FtJ did undertake the broad evaluative  judgment
    that was required. In terms of the effect  on  the  appellant's  mental
    health of a lack of contact with his son, it is important  to  bear  in
    mind that the FtJ pointed out at [74], [75] and [78] that his son  (and
    his son's mother) have no right to remain in the UK and  she  concluded
    that eventually the appellant would be  able  to  re-establish  contact
    with his son in Kenya from where his son and the mother  come.  In  the
    meantime, the telephone contact that he has could continue, she found.

63. The medical evidence in relation  to  the  appellant's  health,  either
    physical or mental, plainly fell far short  of  establishing  the  high
    threshold for an Article 3  claim  to  succeed.  Contrary  to  what  is
    asserted in the grounds, the decision in AM (Zimbabwe) does  not  avail
    the appellant at all. Indeed, no such argument was advanced before  the
    FtJ.

64. In all the circumstances, I am  not satisfied that there is  any  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and its  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal must stand.

    Decision

65. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.  Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal,
    therefore, stands.









Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





A.M. Kopieczek

Upper   Tribunal   Judge    Kopieczek                               22/02/21




