
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/02077/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 23 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     A R
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Reid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Turfan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1994.  He is a  Kurd  and  a
    Sunni.  He appealed against a decision of the  respondent  made  on  20
    February 2019 to refuse his claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that his father was a smuggler who  was  shot
    by Iranian border forces in 2010.  This galvanised the  appellant  into
    campaigning for Kurdish rights.  He was detained  twice  in  2015,  the
    second time for forty days during which he was  tortured.   Later  that
    year, he got a phone call from Etella'at telling him to come  to  their
    office.  He did not, but a week later, returning  home  saw  they  were
    raiding his house.  He fled eventually leaving Iran illegally  overland
    to Finland where he claimed asylum which was refused,  after  which  he
    travelled to France for several months before coming to the UK.

 3.  The  respondent,  in  summary,  did  not  believe  the  appellant  was
    politically active as claimed.  His father had not been targeted  as  a
    Kurd but because he was a smuggler.  His reasons  for  being  motivated
    into political activity were  vague  and  not  credible.   It  was  not
    accepted that the authorities had an interest in him.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 3 April 2019 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Housego dismissed the appeal.

 6. His findings are  at  paragraph  36ff.   In  summary,  the  appellant's
    account as to his motivation was not credible.   His  father  was  shot
    because he was smuggling not because he was a Kurd; the  appellant  did
    nothing  about  activism  for  the  Kurdish  cause  for  several  years
    thereafter, his claim to have found out about human  rights  abuses  of
    Kurds through social media was inconsistent in content and time because
    he was living in a Kurdish area.

 7. Further, his claim to have been tortured was unspecific apart from  his
    assertion that his toenails were pulled out.  He  made  no  mention  of
    such in his screening interview when also he did not say  he  had  been
    detained for forty days. Moreover, it was not plausible that  Etella'at
    would have told him to come in, they would simply have picked him up.

 8. The judge also found against the appellant a lack of political activity
    in the UK until just before the hearing, and his failure to seek asylum
    in France.

 9. He sought permission to appeal which was refused but granted on 27 June
    2019 on re-application to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

10. In her submissions Ms Reid noted that the  appeal  turned  entirely  on
    credibility.  The fundamental flaw on the part of the judge, who  found
    the account to be inherently implausible, was that he  relied  entirely
    on his own reasoning; there was no reference to any background evidence
    as a frame of reference.  As such the judge framed  his  assessment  of
    credibility in the incorrect context.

11. Mr Turfan, in response, agreed that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    examine the claim in  the  context  of  the  background  material.   He
    queried, however, in light of the number of adverse findings which  had
    not been challenged, whether it was a material error.

12. I agree with Ms Reid.  Credibility findings can only really be made  on
    the basis of a complete understanding of the entire picture, placing  a
    claim in the  context  of  the  background  information  regarding  the
    country of origin (see UNHCR Handbook paras 42-43), although going into
    detail about the background circumstances will not always be  necessary
    or fruitful.

13. In this case, however, I consider that reference to, and  consideration
    of, the background material was necessary. The judge's adverse findings
    (at [36]) were in connection with the appellant's motivation  which  he
    found not to be credible. The judge stated that  the  gap  between  the
    shooting of the appellant's father and his own  activism  in  2015  was
    such that it was  not  credible  that  his  political  involvement  was
    triggered by his father's shooting. In making this  finding  the  judge
    did not consider the evidence in the  appellant's  statement  that  his
    political interest began when his father was shot and escalated to  his
    activism in 2015. The judge then  continued:  "[H]is  father  was  shot
    because he was smuggling not because he was a Kurd." Such  ignored  the
    background evidence, which was before him and to which he was  referred
    in submissions, which states that there is arbitrary shooting and other
    mistreatment of Kurds who are transporting goods across the border (see
    respondent's CPIN "Iran:  Kurds  and  Kurdish  political  groups"  para
    4.1.2). The judge failed  to  have  regard  to  a  material  strand  of
    evidence. There is no reference to any background evidence as  a  frame
    of reference for the assessment of the appellant's  credibility.  That,
    in the context of this case, was a material error.

14. As Mr Turfan said several adverse findings by the judge have  not  been
    challenged. However,  paragraph  36  was  the  starting  point  of  his
    analysis.  I consider the errors  shown  there  must  taint  the  other
    findings with the result that the case must be  remitted  to  be  heard
    again.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material error of law.  It  is
set aside.  The nature of the case is such  that  it  is  appropriate  under
section 12(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing on all issues.  No findings stand.  The member(s) of the  First-tier
Tribunal chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Housego.

An anonymity order is made.  Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  Failure to comply with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway  22 August 2019

