
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                        |On 10 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    H C L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi (counsel) instructed by ATM Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal,  I  make
an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information  regarding   the
proceedings which would be likely to lead members of the public to  identify
the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Amin promulgated on 27 February  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 01 January 1994 and is a national  of  Vietnam.
The appellant claims to have arrived in the  UK  in  November  2012.  On  20
November 2012 he was encountered and detained. He then  claimed  asylum.  He
was granted temporary release on 23 November 2012, and he  absconded  on  28
November 2012. As a result, his asylum claim was withdrawn  on  30  November
2012. The appellant was encountered again on 5 November 2015.  When  he  was
detained he claimed asylum of new.

4. On 06 November 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim. The appellant appealed that  decision  to  the  First-tier
and in a decision promulgated on 13 April 2016 the  appellant's  appeal  was
refused. The First-tier decision promulgated on 13 April 2016 was set  aside
by a decision of the Upper Tribunal promulgated on 28 October 2016.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant's appeal was remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Amin ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25 September 2017  Judge  Ford  gave
permission to appeal stating

      2. It is argued that the tribunal erred in


      (a) Failing to consider whether the appellant's account was consistent
      with the background evidence/expert report. Although there  were  good
      reasons based on internal inconsistencies  to  doubt  the  appellant's
      truthfulness, it is arguable that the background evidence should  have
      been considered as part of the overall credibility assessment  and  it
      was not.


      (b) Failed to consider the appellant's explanation  for  any  internal
      inconsistencies in his evidence. This is arguable as the appellant did
      set out his explanations in his witness statement of 06  January  2016
      and I cannot see that they were considered.


      (c) Making speculative findings as to what the  Vietnamese  government
      would have done that were not  supported  by  evidence.  This  is  not
      arguable.  At  paragraph  30  the  tribunal  was  commenting  on   the
      plausibility of the appellant's account. The is no  arguable  material
      error in its doing so.

The Hearing

7. (a) For the appellant, Ms Saifolahi moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
told me that although there are inconsistencies in the appellant's  account,
the appellant explains the  inconsistencies  in  a  screening  interview  in
2012, yet the judge failed to take account of reasonable explanations  given
for inconsistency in both the appellant's most recent witness statement  and
his full asylum interview in 2015. As a  result,  it  was  argued  that  the
Judge's credibility findings are flawed.  Ms  Saifolahi  told  me  that  the
Judge had taken inadequate account  of  background  information  and  expert
report. She told  me  that  the  Judge  refers  to  neither  the  background
evidence nor the experts report anywhere in her decision.

(b) Ms Saifolahi told me that the Judge's credibility  findings  are  flawed
because no weight has  been  given  to  either  the  expert  report  or  the
background  materials;  she  argued  that  instead  of  taking  an  holistic
approach to each strand of evidence,  the  Judge  compared  the  appellant's
performance at different interviews, decided that  the  appellant  gives  an
inconsistent account and so found that the appellant was neither a  credible
nor a reliable witness, despite the fact that  the  inconsistencies  in  the
accounts are explained. She told me that the Judge does not  deal  with  the
appellant's explanation for the discrepancies in his asylum interviews.

(c) Ms Saifolahi urged me to allow the appeal, to  set  the  decision  aside
and then to remit this case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

8. (a) For the respondent, Ms Isherwood told me that the decision  does  not
contain any  errors.  She  reminded  me  that  this  is  a  case  with  some
procedural history and told me that the expert report relied  on  was  dated
March 2015. She told me that neither the expert report  nor  the  background
evidence had been updated for the First-tier hearing in February  2017.  She
invited me to consider the skeleton argument relied  on  by  the  appellant.
Paragraph 6 of the skeleton argument says

      The only issue  to  be  determined  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the
      appellant engaged in protests against the government as claimed. If he
      did, the Secretary of State accepts  that  political  protesters,  and
      therefore the appellant, are refugees.

(b) Ms Isherwood told me that the challenges argued in  this  appeal  depart
from what was argued before the First-tier. She told me  that  between  [22]
and [41] the Judge gave detailed consideration to the appellant's  evidence,
and that at [4] & [15] of the decision the Judge says plainly  that  he  has
considered all of the evidence. Ms Isherwood argued that the appeal is  just
a disagreement about the weight to be assigned to each strand  of  evidence.
She told me that what the appellant cannot avoid is that the Judge  did  not
believe him.

(c) Ms Isherwood asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision
promulgated on 27 February 2017 to stand.

Analysis

9. The Judge's findings of fact start at [22] of the decision. Between  [22]
and [37] the Judge highlights inconsistencies in the accounts given  by  the
appellant by comparing the account he gave at  the  screening  interview  in
2012 with what he said at the asylum interview in 2015.  The  Judge  focuses
on inconsistencies and starts [28] of the decision by saying

      I find the appellant is dishonest and that his account is fabricated.

10. The account that the appellant gave  in  2012  and  his  performance  at
asylum interview in 2015 are only two of the strands  of  evidence  in  this
case. The appellant provided a witness statement dated 6  January  2016.  In
that witness statement the appellant concedes that he gives an  inconsistent
account, and offers an explanation. The witness statement  dated  6  January
2016 does not form part of the Judge's analysis of  the  accounts  given  by
the appellant.

11. The appellant relies on an expert report by Dr Tran.  The  statement  of
truth attached to that report is dated 17 March 2016.  The  Judge  makes  no
reference to Dr Tran's report. It is not clear  from  the  Judge's  decision
that the Judge has read the report or taken account of the  report.  Because
the appellant's witness statement of 6 January 2016 is not analysed  by  the
Judge, and because Dr Tran's report is not even mentioned by the Judge,  the
decision gives the appearance that two significant sources  of  evidence  do
not form part of the Judge's fact-finding process.

12. In FS (Treatment of Expert evidence)  Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT  00004  the
Tribunal held that Immigration Judges  have  a  duty  to  consider  all  the
evidence before them  when  reaching  a  decision  in  an  even  handed  and
impartial manner. In assessing the evidence before  them  they  must  attach
such weight as they  consider  appropriate  to  that  evidence.  It  may  on
occasions be appropriate to reject the conclusions  reached  by  an  expert.
What is crucial is that a reasoned explanation is given for so doing.

13. In M (DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that it was wrong to  make
adverse  findings  of  credibility  first  and  then  dismiss  the   report.
Similarly, in Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes  J  found  that  an
Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings  as  a  basis
for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without  first  considering  the  medical
evidence itself.  In HE (2004) UKIAT 00321 the  Tribunal  said  that  "where
the report is specifically relied on as a factor  relevant  to  credibility,
the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of the  findings  on
credibility, rather than just as an add on, which  does  not  undermine  the
conclusions to which he would otherwise come".

14. I have to find that the decision is tainted by material  errors  of  law
because of inadequacy in reasoning and fact-finding.    In MK (duty to  give
reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was  held  that  (i)  It  was
axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for   a
tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to   be
implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight
whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination  and  for  such
findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness  was
not believed or that a document was  afforded  no  weight  was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. As the decision is tainted by material  error  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

18. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Amin.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

20. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 27  February  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  8 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



