
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02719/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 10 February 2020                           |On 11 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                J W (zambia)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of J W who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of her or of any member of  her  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision dismissing her appeal against the respondent's refusal  on  13
    March 2019 to grant her refugee protection, humanitarian protection, or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appeared in person at  the  hearing.  She  is  a  Zambian
    citizen who has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully since overstaying
    a visit visa in 2003.  She  has  AIDS  but  is  fairly  well  on  anti-
    retroviral drugs.  The appellant has a daughter here,  who  is  now  26
    years old and a British citizen, and has made some friends  in  the  17
    years of her unlawful residence in the United Kingdom.

Chronology

 3. The appellant's daughter came to the United Kingdom in the early  years
    of this century to live with her grandparents  here.   The  arrangement
    was not always a happy one and  in  2002,  the  grandparents  were  the
    subject of court proceedings for abusing their granddaughter.

 4. In 2002, the appellant was granted a visit visa to enable her to attend
    the Court proceedings about her daughter. In October 2002,  by  consent
    order, the appellant's daughter was taken into care  and  lived  for  a
    time neither with her grandparents nor with the appellant.

 5. The appellant overstayed her visit visa which expired on 19 March 2003.
     In May 2003, she made two abortive attempts to seek  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, the first on 5 March 2003by sending a  letter  which
    was not on the correct application form, and the second in May 2003  by
    attending at the Public Enquiry Office which is not a place  which  can
    receive the application she sought to make.  Neither of these  attempts
    amounted to an  effective  application.   The  applicant  continued  to
    overstay.

 6. In 2009, the appellant began living with a Zimbabwean man who did  have
    leave to remain but after a time,  he  returned  to  Zimbabwe  and  was
    denied re-entry to the United Kingdom.  By this time the appellant  had
    overstayed by six years and after her two abortive  attempts  in  2003,
    she made no further attempt to regularise her position  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. In 2015, the  appellant  was  diagnosed  HIV  positive,  with  an  AIDS
    diagnostic illness.  She has been on ARVs in the United  Kingdom  since
    then and is currently doing well.

 8. On 5 January 2016, almost thirteen years after her visit visa  expired,
    the appellant made an application for leave to  remain  on  family  and
    private life grounds seeking a fee waiver  which  was  rejected.   That
    application was  also  invalid.   On  29  March  2016  the  same  thing
    happened.  She still had not succeeded in making  a  valid  application
    for leave to remain.

 9. On 11 March 2017 the appellant was served with  an  overstayer  notice,
    but she still did not return to Zambia.

10. This application for international protection and leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds was made on 4 May 2017  and  was  the  appellant's
    first valid application.  The respondent refused it on  13  March  2019
    and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The First-tier Judge considered the history but was not satisfied  that
    there were  very  significant  obstacles  for  this  appellant  in  re-
    establishing a private life in Zambia, for the reasons set out  in  the
    decision.  The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Grounds of appeal

12. The grounds of appeal may be  summarised  as  follows.   The  appellant
    contends that under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) she has shown that she  has
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for less  than  twenty  years,
    discounting any period of imprisonment, but that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration on return  to  Zambia  if  she
    were required to leave.

13.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   on
    international protection  grounds:  only  the  Article  8  decision  is
    challenged as the appellant confirmed this morning at the hearing.

Permission to appeal

14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission to  appeal  on  the
    basis that there was an outstanding application  for  leave  to  remain
    dating back to 2003, which had not been considered by the Secretary  of
    State.  That was wrong, both in fact  and  law:  neither  of  the  2003
    applications was a valid application,  and  the  respondent's  decision
    letter under challenge deals with the only valid application for  leave
    to remain before the Tribunal.

Conclusions

15. The appellant says that she has private life  with  her  adult  British
    citizen daughter, now 26 years old, and that she has some friends  made
    during her unlawful stay in the United Kingdom.  She says that  she  no
    longer has family to turn to for support in Zambia  and  might  not  be
    able to afford the medication for her health problems if returned.

16. All of these matters are properly considered in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision,  and  the  Judge  reached  conclusions  which  were   proper,
    adequate, and intelligible on the evidence before him.  The appellant's
    grounds of appeal are really no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings in the First-tier Judge's decision.

17. These grounds do not disclose any material error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, which is upheld.

DECISION

18. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      9 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


