
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02486/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     EN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, instructed by McGlashan MacKay
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I make an order for anonymity pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting disclosure of any  matter  that  may
lead to the identification of the appellants  and  other  parties  to  these
proceedings.  Any breach may lead to contempt proceedings.

 1. The appellant will be referred to as EN in this decision and  his  wife
    as KN.

 2. This is an appeal by a national of Azerbaijan (where  he  was  born  in
    1989) against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A  Green.   For
    reasons given in his decision dated 3 May 2019 the judge dismissed the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  7
    March 2019 refusing his  protection  claim  which  had  been  based  on
    political  opinion  and  his  Christianity.   The  appellant  had  also
    contended that his removal would breach  his  rights  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention, Articles 2, 3 and 8.  The appellant's wife  and  son
    are dependents on his claim.

 3. The political opinion claim is based on membership of  the  Azerbaijani
    Popular Front (APF) which had led to the appellant's detention and ill-
    treatment by the authorities on a date in October 2017; the precise day
    not having been given in evidence, and on 1 and 14 or  15  April  2018,
    the third occasion being  when  the  appellant  contends  he  was  ill-
    treated.  The appellant had applied for a  visit  visa  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 29 June 2018.  He left on his own passport on the grant  of
    that visa and arrived in the United Kingdom on  24  August  2018.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  was  a  "genuine
    member" of the APF nor was it accepted that he had  been  arrested  and
    detained as claimed.  His faith was accepted however but here  too  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that  the  appellant  had  ever  been
    persecuted as a consequence in  the  light  of  the  religious  mix  in
    Azerbaijan.

 4. Judge Green considered the appellant's credibility lay at the heart  of
    the protection claim.  This aspect was  considered  in  detail  in  his
    decision  between  [19]  and  [32].   He  accepted  the  appellant  had
    established that he was a member of the APF which he had joined  on  11
    February 2014.   He also accepted the  appellant  had  been  questioned
    about his party membership by the police as well as  the  account  that
    the appellant had been detained on a second occasion claimed  in  April
    2018 which coincided with the Presidential elections.  As to the  third
    occasion on 15 April 2018, the judge accepted the  appellant's  account
    of having been injured but that he had not established who  had  caused
    those injuries, as explained in [26] of his decision as follows:

         "26. I am prepared to accept the Appellant's evidence that  he  was
             injured.  However, for the reasons given  below,  he  has  not
             established who caused  those  injuries.   I  accept  that  KN
             clearly saw that his head  was  injured  when  he  came  home.
             Whilst  the  hospital  certificate  does  not  refer  to   the
             Appellant's blood pressure or that he was  vomiting,  it  does
             note that he was examined in the emergency department  and  it
             was clear  that  he  had  brain  concussion.   He  had  tissue
             injuries and  bruises.   It  also  confirms  that  he  was  in
             hospital for two days.  I accept KN's explanation  about  high
             blood pressure and vomiting.  It is plausible that these  were
             not observed in hospital but could have occurred when  he  was
             at home.  The Respondent has submitted  that  the  Appellant's
             evidence should not be accepted because he has not provided an
             expert medical report on his injuries.  If,  as  claimed,  the
             Appellant suffered soft tissue injuries just over a year  ago,
             I fail to see what such a report could  achieve.   His  wounds
             would have healed and may well not have resulted in  scarring.
             What I do have is the benefit of KN's contemporaneous evidence
             of his injuries which I give weight."

 5. Thereafter the judge gave detailed reasons why the appellant had failed
    to establish he was of adverse interest to the authorities  leading  to
    his claimed third arrest as follows:

         "27. I do not accept that the Appellant has established that he was
             of adverse interest to the Azerbaijani authorities leading  to
             his claimed third arrest and which places him at  risk  if  he
             returns to Azerbaijan for the following reasons:

             a.   KN  claims  in  her  statement  that  the  Appellant  was
                  arrested.  How could she know that if the Appellant, as he
                  claims, was telephoned and told to attend the Baku  police
                  station?  She did not see him  being  arrested.   One  can
                  only assume that she is relying on hearsay.

             b.   He has not provided objective evidence of the rally  that
                  he claimed to have attended on 14 April 2018.   Given  the
                  interest that the international  media  and  human  rights
                  organisations are taking in Azerbaijan, I think  he  could
                  reasonably be  expected  to  have  been  able  to  produce
                  publicly available evidence of the rally.   I  acknowledge
                  that the Appellant has  provided  background  evidence  in
                  generic terms highlighting the oppressive  nature  of  the
                  regime, but he could have provided further evidence of the
                  demonstration on 14 April 2018.

             c.   If he was detained for 7 days  and  beaten  before  being
                  released, I struggle to understand why he chose to  remain
                  in Azerbaijan until 24 August 2018.  By his  account  this
                  was a severe attack and yet he stayed in that country  for
                  another four months.  A person in genuine  fear  of  their
                  life would not have done that.  They would  have  realised
                  that their life was in danger and would have left as  soon
                  as possible.

             d.   He has provided contradictory  evidence  of  his  actions
                  after being released from custody and prior to leaving  in
                  Azerbaijan.  In paragraph 12 of his witness  statement  he
                  says that throughout that period, he kept  a  low  profile
                  and  stopped  going  to  party  meetings.   He   did   not
                  participate in any demonstrations.  He claims to have gone
                  out as little as possible. When he was cross examined,  he
                  was asked if he engaged in any  political  activity  after
                  his third arrest.  He told  Mr  Wright  that  he  attended
                  meetings and prepared placards.  He said  that  he  posted
                  pictures of political prisoners at  underground  stations.
                  When challenged about the  obvious  contradiction  between
                  what he had said in his witness statement and what he said
                  under cross examination, he simply blamed the interpreter.
                   However, his witness statement was clear, and it confirms
                  that it was read over to him.  He signed it and adopted it
                  as  true.   One  must  assume  in  the  absence   of   any
                  corrections,  he  understood  what  he  had  said  in  his
                  statement and accepted it was true otherwise he would  not
                  have signed it and he would not have adopted it.   It  was
                  taken  as  read  and  stood  as  his  evidence  in  chief.
                  Furthermore, I do not accept  that  putting  up  political
                  posters  in  underground  stations  can  be  described  as
                  keeping a low profile.  He would have put himself at  risk
                  by such behaviour in a public place.   This  contradiction
                  significantly damages his credibility.

             e.   He obtained a 6 month visit  visa  and  travelled  freely
                  from Azerbaijan through an airport without any difficulty.
                   If, as he claims, he  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the
                  authorities,  he  would  have  encountered  problems  when
                  exiting the country.  This  is  not  the  behaviour  of  a
                  person who claims to have been  persecuted  and  fears  he
                  will suffer further mistreatment.

             f.   If the Appellant was such a committed political activist,
                  as he claims, and was prepared to put his and his family's
                  safety at risk, I find  it  surprising  that  he  has  not
                  engaged in any sur place activity in  this  country.   His
                  evidence on this was clear.  He says he has not engaged in
                  any political activity since coming to this  country.   In
                  paragraph 15 of his witness statement, he claims  that  he
                  did not want to put his  family  at  risk  in  Azerbaijan.
                  That contradicts his position in his oral evidence that he
                  continued to be  politically  active  after  he  was  last
                  released.  If what he says is true, he would have put  his
                  family at risk and he would  have  stopped  his  political
                  activism after his release.

             g.   The Appellant has produced official documents purporting,
                  amongst other things,  to  be  summonses.   The  objective
                  evidence produced by the Respondent  indicates  that  fake
                  official documents  such  as  the  type  produced  by  the
                  Appellant are readily available in Azerbaijan and I  agree
                  with the Respondent's analysis  in  paragraph  41  of  the
                  refusal letter.  I give them little weight.

             h.   The objective evidence produced  by  the  Appellant  does
                  indeed  show  that  there  is  widespread  repression   of
                  political  activists  and   journalists   in   Azerbaijan.
                  However, this evidence focusses on  high  profile  critics
                  and activists, journalists and bloggers.  The Appellant is
                  not named in that material.  At best he was a  low-ranking
                  party  member  with  no  evidence  of  blogging  or  other
                  activities.  He may have come to the  authorities'  notice
                  prior to his claimed detention on 13 April 2018 but he was
                  released and was able to freely leave  Azerbaijan  on  his
                  own passport without any problems.  This suggests that  he
                  was no longer of any interest to the authorities."

 6. As to the appellant's  account  of  risk  due  to  his  religion  after
    directing himself in relation to  country  guidance  in  SL  (Unmarried
    mother with mixed race child) Azerbaijan CG [2013] UKUT  46  (IAC)  the
    judge explained at [30]:

         "30. In paragraph 17 of his witness statement, the Appellant admits
             that he did not convert to Christianity.  He was brought up  a
             Christian.  He states that  Christians  may  be  discriminated
             against  without  providing  evidence  of  his  own   personal
             experience.  I would also comment that discrimination does not
             amount to persecution.  As for his claim that his faith  makes
             him more likely that he would be targeted  for  his  political
             beliefs, this cannot succeed because I do not accept  that  he
             has any grounds for claiming asylum because of  his  political
             opinion.   The  objective  evidence  produced  indicates  that
             religious activists are detained.  However, the Appellant  has
             not claimed that he is a religious activist.  I also note that
             the Azerbaijan constitution allows religious freedom."

 7. Finally, the judge rejected the Article 8 claim on the basis that there
    were no exceptional  circumstances  that  warranted  his  appeal  being
    allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  Specifically in respect of  the
    appellant's child best interests, he observed in [32]:

         "32. ... Furthermore, it must be in the child's best  interests  to
             remain with their parents and to return  to  Azerbaijan  as  a
             family unit.  The child is Azeri.  He is young and can  easily
             adapt to moving to Azerbaijan where he will enjoy the benefits
             of his citizenship of that  country  including  education  and
             healthcare.  The decision is proportionate and in  the  public
             interest of maintaining effective immigration control."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Coker on the  basis  that  it
    was arguable the  judge  had  reached  contradictory  findings  in  the
    context  of  the  evidence  before  him.   Those  "contradictions"  are
    explained in the grounds of challenge on the sole ground in [3]:

         "3.  The FTTIJ erred in law because it was not open to him - either
             generally or particularly to conclude that the  appellant  had
             not established  that  he  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the
             authorities in Azerbaijan ... "because ... "

 9. The following points were made in  support  of  those  grounds  in  the
    application for permission to appeal:

    (i)  Witness evidence.  The fact that the appellant had been previously
         exposed to adverse attention indicated that he may be at a  similar
         risk in the future unless there were good  reasons  why  not.   The
         judge had found the evidence of the appellant's wife was  generally
         reliable; if the judge had meant to ascribe little weight  to  that
         evidence he should have said so.

    (ii) The absence of objective evidence.  It was accepted that there was
         evidence  of  widespread  repression  of  political  activists   in
         Azerbaijan.

    (iii)     The  conduct  of  the  appellant.   It  was   irrational   to
         characterise  the  appellant's  behaviour  (after  April  2018)  as
         inconsistent with the fears of a genuine asylum seeker.

    (iv) Political profile.  There was an issue as to  what  constituted  a
         low profile.

    (v)  Documentary evidence.  The documentary evidence should  have  been
         considered  in  the  round.   If  the  judge  did  not  accept  the
         respondent's "submissions"  in  [40]  it  was  irrational  to  have
         accepted them in [41].

10. A final ground was relied on in relation  to  the  risk  based  on  the
    appellant's religion; Mr Forest explained  at  the  hearing  that  this
    ground was no longer relied on.

11. Mr Forest began his submissions with a summary that the challenge was a
    rationality challenge based on the  judge  having  made  findings  that
    appear to be broadly favourable to the appellant in [20] to [24] of his
    decision and there  was  an  absence  of  adequate  reasoning  for  his
    ultimate conclusion having regard to those earlier  findings.   It  had
    been accepted by the judge that the appellant was a member of the  APF,
    that he had been detained by the police and that he had  been  injured.
    Mr Forest clarified that the judge had not found the appellant had been
    detained on the second occasion in April  2018.   It  was  instead  the
    appellant's account that he had.  Nevertheless, it had been accepted by
    the judge that the appellant had been injured  on  an  occasion  around
    that date.


12. Mr Forrest then made his  detailed  submissions  on  the  above  points
    advanced in the grounds of challenge.  I take each in turn.  The  first
    is the witness evidence.  The point had been  made  in  the  ground  of
    challenge which was the rationality of the judge  having  decided  that
    the evidence of the appellant was generally reliable.


13. In his  decision  at  [21],  the  judge  stated:  "By  way  of  general
    observation the appellant and his wife  were  generally  reliable  when
    they gave their evidence.  They were not evasive and they did not  have
    to be reminded to answer questions that they were asked."


14.  Although  the  specific  ground  of  challenge  is  confined  to   the
    observation that the evidence of KN was generally reliable, Mr  Forrest
    submitted that this could be ascribed to the appellant also.


15. I accept Mr Clark's submissions by way of response that  the  point  is
    taken out of context.  The judge  did  not  make  a  finding  that  the
    evidence was generally reliable without qualification.  As will be seen
    from the passage set  out  above  this  observation  was  explained  by
    reference to the manner in which they gave their evidence.  To my  mind
    it was open to the judge to begin his credibility analysis in this way.
     I am not satisfied that despite this observation the  judge  could  be
    said to have been irrational in subsequently concluding  that  not  all
    the evidence could be accepted.


16. Specifically with reference to KN, as will be  seen  from  the  passage
    cited above at [27(a)], it was open to the judge to observe that KN had
    not seen the appellant being arrested.  Mr Forest  is  correct  in  his
    submission that hearsay evidence can be accepted in  a  tribunal.   But
    here again I consider the ground takes the point out  of  context.   In
    [27] the judge gave a number of reasons  why  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant was of adverse interest to the authorities that  had  led  to
    his claimed third arrest.  This is just one  of  a  number  of  reasons
    given.  What the judge was saying was in effect that the  weight  which
    he gave to her evidence was affected by the absence of her having  seen
    him being arrested.  It will be seen that the judge accepted  parts  of
    KN's evidence particularly in relation to the injuries.  This ground of
    challenge relates to a weight  factor  and  in  my  judgment  does  not
    disclose error by the judge and  cannot  on  any  basis  be  considered
    indicative of irrationality.


17. The second point advanced relates to the absence of objective evidence.
     This is clarified in the grounds and was developed in  submissions  by
    Mr Forrest with reference to the judge having accepted that  there  was
    evidence of widespread oppression of political activists in Azerbaijan.
     In effect the ground ghosts a standard of proof challenge by reference
    to the judge having  erred  in  instating  on  detailed  or  particular
    evidence of the event that the appellant claims to have attended.  I am
    not satisfied this ground is made out for the following reasons.


18. First of all, the judge correctly directed himself as to  the  standard
    and burden of proof in this appeal.   Secondly, the challenge takes the
    point out of context.  As reminded by Mr Clark in his submissions,  the
    judge gave a full explanation why he considered that it was  reasonably
    open to the appellant to have provided evidence of the event  that  led
    to his claimed detention on the second date in April 2018.   It  cannot
    be said that the tribunal had insisted on provision  of  that  evidence
    but instead observed that it was reasonably open to the appellant given
    the  interest  that  the   international   media   and   human   rights
    organisations were taking in Azerbaijan.


19. The third ground of challenge relates to the conduct of the  appellant.
    The point is made in the grounds that the  appellant  had  kept  a  low
    profile to protect his family.  In the light of  the  earlier  positive
    findings of credibility made by the judge between [23] and [26]  it  is
    argued that it was irrational to characterise his behaviour (in posting
    pictures  of  political  prisoners  on  the   underground)   as   being
    inconsistent with the fears of a genuine asylum seeker.


20. The matters that the judge  had  accepted  included  the  fact  of  the
    appellant having been a member of the APF, a factor  which  I  observed
    the respondent had not accepted  for  reasons  given  in  [39]  of  the
    refusal letter.  In relation to the adverse interest in  the  appellant
    the judge accepted in [25] the account  that  the  appellant  had  been
    questioned by the authorities about his party  membership.   The  judge
    found also that it was plausible that the appellant had  been  detained
    by the police in October 2017 which had coincided with the Presidential
    elections when he was warned not to participate  in  the  elections  or
    collaborate with other opposition parties.  The judge accepted that the
    appellant had been detained in the morning and released later the  same
    day at about 9pm or 10pm.


21. The contradiction  (and  not  an  inconsistency  as  wrongly  asserted)
    identified by the judge did not however relate  to  these  matters  but
    instead to the appellant's account of his activities after the  claimed
    third detention which  it  is  to  be  remembered  the  judge  had  not
    accepted.  This is explained by the judge in [27(d)]  of  his  decision
    which I have set out above.  In my  judgment  it  was  a  contradiction
    correctly identified  and  one  properly  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.   It  was  an  aspect  that  was  relevant  to  the   overall
    credibility finding.


22. The next ground of challenge relates to the issue  of  the  appellant's
    political profile.  Mr Forrest's submissions were essentially  on  the
    same point in respect  the  third  ground  above  and  answered  in  my
    judgment satisfactorily by the judge in [27(d)] of  his  decision.   It
    was rationally open to the judge to observe that low political  profile
    did not include activity of  the  kind  of  which  the  appellant  gave
    evidence in cross-examination.


23. I turn now to the final  limb  of  challenge  relating  to  documentary
    evidence.  This turns on the judge's rejection of the evidence  by  the
    appellant of the adverse interest in him as will be seen  from  [27(g)]
    above.  The judge agreed with the conclusions of the Secretary of State
    in this regard.  Mr Forest acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had  not
    produced evidence by way of rebuttal to those reasonable  concerns.   I
    accept Mr Clark's submission that the documents the judge had  accepted
    in respect of the appellant's membership of the APF were of a different
    kind, and he did not himself seek to challenge the judge's  conclusions
    on that despite the respondent's evidence relating to the cessation  of
    the issue of membership cards.


24. By way of conclusion therefore I am not persuaded that the judge  erred
    on the basis of the challenge on which permission has been granted.  He
    undertook a careful credibility analysis in  the  course  of  which  he
    explained the matters which he was able to accept and  those  which  he
    rejected, giving adequate reasons for doing so.   His  conclusion  that
    the appellant had not made out a sustainable claim was  one  rationally
    open to him on the evidence and for  the  reasons  given.   Accordingly
    this appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 23 September 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

