
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2020                           |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MMH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in the year 2000 and is a male citizen of  Iraq.
    He is a Sunni Muslim and is of Kurdish ethnicity. It is a settled  fact
    in these proceedings that, in October 2016  when  ISIS  invaded  Kirkuk
    Province, the appellant's mother, father and  sisters  were  killed  by
    them. The appellant had appealed against the decision of the  Secretary
    of  State  dated  7  February  2018  refusing   his   application   for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 October 2018, dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal (Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor)
    which, by a decision promulgated on 13 September 2019,  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision and directed  a  resumed  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. A transfer order was made on 6  January  2020  and  the
    resumed hearing took place before me at Bradford on 25 February 2020.

 2. Since the initial hearing, new country guidance been made available  by
    the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).

 3. The appellant gave brief evidence and adopted his written statements as
    his evidence in chief. He was not cross examined. He was assisted by  a
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter. The burden of proof is  on  the  appellant.
    The standard of proof is whether  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing there to be a real risk that the appellant will  suffer  harm
    if returned to Iraq. The appellant's  most  recent  statement  confirms
    that he has no contact with anyone in Iraq. He  believes  that  he  may
    have aunts and uncles living in Baghdad or Basra but he has  never  met
    these individuals; he does not even  know  their  names.  Likewise,  he
    believes that he may possibly have family on his father's  side  living
    in Hawija but he does not know the names or the  whereabouts  of  these
    individuals.

 4. I am aware that previous parts  of  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    events have been found by the First-tier Tribunal to be unreliable.  In
    addition, the appellant  has  sought  to  rely  upon  a  CSID  identity
    document which the Secretary of State has reason to believe is a  false
    document. Having said that, I am aware that the appellant  is  still  a
    young man and that he left Iraq when he was a minor. I consider that it
    is reasonably likely that he does not  know  the  names  of  aunts  and
    uncles who did not live locally and whom he has never met. I  find  the
    appellant has no prospect of establishing contact  with  any  of  those
    individuals in Iraq. Likewise, I accept that  the  appellant  does  not
    know the volume and page number of his family records; the Tribunal  in
    SMO held that there would be a only a small number of  cases  where  an
    individual would not know these details but I accept that the appellant
    is one  such  case.  I  make  these  findings  acknowledging  that  the
    appellant has previously shown  that  he  is  capable  and  willing  to
    dissemble when it furthers his interests.

 5. The latest country guidance indicates that, without a valid CSID  card,
    which I find he does not possess,  or  family  assistance  in  Iraq  or
    volume/page number of his family records, this appellant  will  not  be
    able to re-document himself either whilst still in the  United  Kingdom
    or within a reasonable time of returning to Baghdad. He will be able to
    enter Iraq on a laissez passer but that document will  subsequently  be
    of no use to him. I note from SMO that 'neither the Central Archive nor
    the assistance facilities for IDPs are likely to  render  documentation
    assistance to an undocumented returnee.' As he is not from Baghdad,  he
    will be unable to obtain a new form INID card there whilst he will  not
    be able safely to travel to his home  area  (Kirkuk)  and  provide  the
    necessary biometrics at a registry  there.  As  regards  relocation  to
    Baghdad, SMO provides that: 'Baghdad is  generally  safe  for  ordinary
    civilians but whether it  is  safe  for  a  particular  returnee  is  a
    question of fact  in  the  individual  case.   There  are  no  on-entry
    sponsorship  requirements  for  Baghdad  but  there   are   sponsorship
    requirements for residency.  A documented individual of working age  is
    likely to be able to satisfy those requirements.'  The  appellant  will
    not be a documented individual. Moreover, he  is  unable  to  meet  any
    sponsorship requirements in Baghdad as regards residency.

 6. In the light of the observations and findings which  I  make  above,  I
    have  concluded  that,  at  the  present  time   and   possessing   the
    characteristics which I have attributed to him,  there  is  little,  if
    any,  prospect  of   the   appellant   obtaining   necessary   identity
    documentation before or within a reasonable period of returning to Iraq
    so as to enable him to either return safely to  his  home  area  or  to
    relocate elsewhere, in particular to remain  in  Baghdad.  I  therefore
    find that  his  appeal  must  be  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds. The appellant should be aware that that status may not pertain
    indefinitely and, should his own circumstances or those in Iraq  alter,
    he may at some time in the future be expected to return to his  country
    of nationality.

    Notice of Decision

    I have re-made the decision.  The  appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed                              Date 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
