
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02995/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2019                  |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    H T D
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of A J Bradley & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  FtT  Judge  Lea  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a   decision
    promulgated on 13 May 2019.

 2. The applicant's grounds of appeal to the UT, set out in her application
    dated 28 June 2019, say that it was an error at [31] to take  it  that,
    "The case of Nguyen shows that there is sufficiency of  protection  for
    victims of trafficking in Vietnam".  The grounds say that Nguyen is not
    authority on that point, and that the FtT failed to consider  that  the
    appellant met several of the criteria for risk on return, including the
    fact that she would be a single mother without a partner.

 3.  The  citation  in  full  is   Nguyen   (Anti-Trafficking   Convention:
    respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC).

 4. UT Judge O'Callaghan granted permission on 9  July  2019,  saying  that
    parties were expected to inform the UT of the status of the  appeal  by
    the appellant's partner, PA/04295/19.

 5. The appellant's partner has in the  meantime  unsuccessfully  exhausted
    his appeal rights.

 6. Mr Bradley said that it had been an error to approach the case  on  the
    basis of the appellant returning to Vietnam with her  partner,  because
    that did not reflect the circumstances as they then stood.

 7. Mr Clark said that any error on that point was immaterial,  because  as
    matters have since developed, it is to be presumed that the  appellant,
    her partner and their child would return as a family unit.

 8. In course of submission it transpired that the judge's view at [31]  of
    Nguyen stems from the refusal letter at [11]  and  [17]  and  from  the
    respondent's Country Policy and Information Note, "Vietnam: Victims  of
    Trafficking" version 3.0, September 2018.

 9. As Mr Bradley submitted, Nguyen is  authoritative,  but  only  to  this
    effect: "The duties of a signatory to the Council of Europe  Convention
    on Action against Trafficking in Human  Beings  include  responsibility
    towards a victim of historical trafficking into the country from  which
    they later travel (untrafficked) to the signatory state".  It is not  a
    reported case on sufficiency of protection in Vietnam.

10. Nguyen at [52] includes the sentence, "There is  evidence,  in  the  US
    State Department Report of 2010, referred to in [50] above, to  support
    the respondent's conclusion in the decision  letter  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection provided  by  the  authorities  in  Vietnam".
    That is a finding for purposes of the individual case  before  the  FT,
    not a general conclusion to be applied in other cases unless  there  is
    evidence to the contrary.

11. The CPIN at 2.5.5 goes on to quote the  USSD  Report  of  2010  on  the
    government making "some efforts to protect victims of transnational sex
    trafficking" although "it did not make sufficient efforts to protect or
    identify victims".  That takes matters even further away  from  general
    sufficiency of protection.

12. Mr Clark submitted that  the  decision  of  the  FtT  was  sufficiently
    thorough at [29 - 30] on factors relevant to risk on return, and should
    stand.  There was also the factor  of  assistance  available  from  the
    respondent, which the judge did not mention.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14. If it was an error to proceed on the basis that the appellant,  if  she
    returned, would do so in family, that is no longer material.

15. It appears that parties in the FtT did not refer the judge directly  to
    Nguyen, and that the respondent's refusal letter and CIPIN have led her
    into error on what that case held.  Further, the underpinning  evidence
    offers poor support for  the  proposition  of  general  sufficiency  of
    protection.

16. The outcome would not necessarily be different,  but  for  that  error.
    However, the matter was given  significance,  such  that  the  decision
    cannot stand as a satisfactory resolution of the case.

17. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.

18. Although Mr Bradley had  filed  some  further  evidence  with  view  to
    remaking the decision, including a psychological report and  a  country
    expert report, he sought a fresh hearing in the FtT, at  which  further
    updating evidence from the appellant and her partner might be led.

19. There was some merit in the submission by Mr Clark that the  UT  should
    proceed to remake the decision.  However, as, in  effect,  an  entirely
    fresh decision is required, it is appropriate under section 12  of  the
    2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to set aside and  to  remit
    to the FtT.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the  case  are
    not to include Judge Lea.

20. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved.

      [pic]

      28 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




