

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02272/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 October 2018                        |On 22 October 2018             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  31  January  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Lea, promulgated on 26 March 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 9 April 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Haria, dated 24 April 2018.

 2. Mr Matthews conceded that the 3 grounds each disclosed error:

      i) By founding on an inconsistency arising from the interview  record,
         but  overlooking  that  the  appellant  advanced   amendments   and
         explanations at an early stage.  The judge was not bound to  accept
         the explanation, but should have dealt with it.

     ii) By finding it unclear what happened between January  and  March  to
         make the appellant ready for baptism, when there had been  evidence
         of his church attendances and completion of  a  preparatory  course
         over that period.



    iii) By founding on absence of a certificate or photographs of  baptism,
         when there was other evidence to show it had taken place, the event
         was not in doubt, and the absence of further  evidence  was  of  no
         significance.

 3. Mr Matthews said that the errors might not  individually  have  made  a
    difference, but that taken together,  the  decision  could  not  safely
    stand.

 4. The appellant agreed to the following outcome.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 6. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2002 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the FtT  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Lea.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            18 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




