


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pA026782016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 June 2017                 |On 8 June 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     DM
                          ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Brooks, Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Abone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant in this decision identified as DM.

Introduction


   1. In a decision dated 11  January  2017  I  found  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal made errors of law regarding its  assessment  of  prospective
      risk for the appellant in Iraq.  It was agreed that there was no error
      of law in the First-tier Tribunal's factual findings and that I  would
      remake the decision at an adjourned  hearing  to  proceed  by  way  of
      submissions only.

Hearing

   2. At the beginning of the hearing there  was  a  preliminary  discussion
      regarding the developments in Iraq and the likely  position  regarding
      the  appellant's  home  area  of   Tikrit   and   obtaining   identity
      documentation for the appellant.  Ms Abone specifically  accepted  the
      following matters:


   i) It is not possible for the appellant or his family members  to  reside
      in Tikrit, given the current country conditions;
  ii) The appellant's family members cannot be expected to return to  Tikrit
      even on a  temporary  basis  in  order  to  assist  the  appellant  in
      retrieving his passport or securing identity documents;
 iii) The appellant faces a real risk of serious harm in his  home  area  of
      Tikrit.

   3. Both representatives agreed  that  the  real  question  now  turns  on
      whether or not the appellant can be expected to internally relocate to
      Baghdad given his particular risk factors and the  factors  summarised
      at 15 of the headnote in AA (Article 15c)  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
      (IAC).  Ms Abone accepted that the appellant does not have a CSID  and
      would not be able to obtain one, he has no friends or family  in  Iraq
      able to accommodate him and will find it difficult to find a  sponsor,
      and he is from the Kurdish and Sunni minority communities.

   4. Both representatives agreed that I should assess  internal  relocation
      by applying the guidance in AA and BA (Returns  to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
      [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC),  together  with  the  updated  country  evidence
      (including the  SSHD's  report  on  Iraq  dated  March  2017,  to  the
      following accepted facts regarding the appellant:

   i) Kurdish ethnicity;
  ii) Sunni Muslim religion;
 iii) his father was involved with the Baath party and the regime of  Saddam
      Hussain;
  iv) he worked as a police officer, based at the army base in  Kirkuk  from
      January 2014 to August 2015;
   v) in January 2015 he and others took photographs of dead  ISIS  soldiers
      and distributed these by Bluetooth with disparaging  remarks,  and  he
      appears in one of the videos;
  vi) in June / July 2015 the appellant  was  threatened  by  ISIS  via  his
      mother and then in a phone call and by text;
 vii) on 6 August 2015 a person unknown shot at the appellant's car when  he
      was on driving duty for the police;
viii) after the shooting incident he  deserted  the  police  and  went  into
      hiding;
  ix) he left Iraq on 15 October 2015;
   x) no CSID and no ability to obtain one;
  xi) no friends or family in Iraq able to accommodate him and  it  will  be
      difficult to find a sponsor.


   5. The appellant attended the hearing and was ready and willing  to  give
      further evidence about the above matters.   Ms  Abone  confirmed  that
      there was no area of factual dispute that she wished  to  put  to  the
      appellant.


   6. Ms Abone submitted that although it is  not  possible  to  return  the
      appellant to Iraq at the present time, he would be able to  reside  in
      other parts of Iraq apart from Tikrit, Kirkuk  and  Baghdad.   When  I
      invited her to particularise where in Iraq  the  appellant  would  not
      face a real risk of serious harm,  she  accepted  she  was  unable  to
      identify any such area.


   7. Mr Brooks relied upon his skeleton argument and invited  me  to  allow
      the appeal.  He helpfully and carefully took me through all  the  risk
      factors to support his submission that the appellant is at  real  risk
      of serious harm at the point of return in Baghdad.


   8. After hearing submissions from both  representatives,  I  reserved  my
      decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Re-making the decision

CSID / feasibility of return

   9. AA clearly states that those who do not originate from the  IKR,  such
      as this appellant, will be returned to  Baghdad.   Ms  Abone  accepted
      that if the appellant could be  returned,  he  would  be  returned  to
      Baghdad.


  10. The appellant shall only be permitted to enter Iraq if  in  possession
      of a passport or laissez passer.  The First-tier Tribunal's suggestion
      that the appellant could obtain a CSID  by  returning  to  Kirkuk  and
      visiting the office there, fails to take into account that  he  cannot
      be returned to Baghdad (and then travel onwards) without the  relevant
      documentation.


  11. AA [11 of the headnote] makes it  plain  that  it  will  generally  be
      necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to  obtain
      one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  This is because a CSID is
      required  to  access  financial   assistance,   employment,   housing,
      education and medical treatment, and in the absence of family support,
      a lack of a CSID is in general likely to result  in  a  real  risk  of
      destitution and serious harm.


  12. Ms Abone conceded  that  the  appellant's  family  members  cannot  be
      expected to return to Tikrit to assist in providing documentation  and
      it is therefore not currently feasible to return the appellant because
      he does not have a CSID or a passport (he left his passport in  Tikrit
      in 2015 when he left Iraq overland illegally).

  13. In my judgment Ms Abone was correct to  concede  that  the  particular
      circumstances of this case and the guidance in AA at [170-186] is such
      that return is not feasible for this appellant.  The Court of Appeal's
      observations when granting permission to appeal in AA  v  SSHD  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 779 are not directly relevant to the facts of this case.

  14. In any event, both representatives agreed that  the  unfeasibility  of
      the appellant's return does not preclude his  claim  to  international
      protection from succeeding if the asserted risk of harm is not  solely
      based on factors rendering his actual return unfeasible - see [169] of
      AA.   That a person  whose  return  is  not  currently  feasible  may,
      nevertheless, still succeed in a claim to international protection, if
      and insofar as the claim is based on a real risk of harm, which arises
      otherwise than by not having the requisite documentation, was  clearly
      anticipated by the Upper Tribunal in AA at [207].  This  approach  has
      been applied in R (H) v SSHD (application of AA (Iraq CG)  IJR  [2017]
      UKUT 00119 (IAC) at [42-43].

Risk in home area

  15. Both representatives agreed that the appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
      serious harm in his home area for reasons relating to the  generalised
      conflict there and an imputed political opinion.  Although it  appears
      that Tikrit is no longer controlled by ISIS, Ms Abone accepted that it
      is still in a state of flux and controlled by Shia militias.


  16. In my judgment when all the appellant's circumstances  are  considered
      together, he is reasonably likely to  be  targeted  by  (a)  the  Shia
      militias - because of  his  Kurdish  background,  Sunni  religion  and
      desertion from the police, as well as (b) ISIS  (who  may  not  be  in
      control but still have the capacity to target individuals) because  of
      the following viewed cumulatively: (i) he was a policeman who had been
      threatened by ISIS in the past; (ii) his car had been targeted  for  a
      shooting; (iii) he had  participated  in  an  anti-ISIS  video  making
      disparaging remarks about ISIS.    ISIS are likely to impute an  anti-
      'Islamic state' opinion to the appellant.

Internal relocation to Baghdad

  17. The AA headnote states the following at 15:


                 "In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh
                 for P to relocate to Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are
                 however, likely to be relevant:
   a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one;
   b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely  to  find
      employment);
   c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate
      him;
   d) whether P is a lone female...
   e) whether P  can  find  a  sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
      accommodation;
   f) whether P is from a minority community;
   g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there is some
      evidence that returned asylum seekers are provided  with  the  support
      generally given to IDPs."


  18. I am satisfied that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect
      the appellant to relocate in Baghdad given the risk factors identified
      above. He is at the "other end of the scale" identified in AA at [202]
      as he has no  family  connections  in  Baghdad,  is  from  a  minority
      community and has no CSID.  He falls within the category of people  AA
      accepts at [203] cannot generally be expected to relocate to  Baghdad,
      notwithstanding the limited support given to IDPs.


  19. The appellant will not  have  access  to  alternate  adequate  support
      mechanisms in Baghdad.  There is no viable family for him to  turn  to
      and he has no friends or contacts  there.   This  is  likely  to  make
      relocation particularly difficult  in  circumstances  where  displaced
      persons often find it  very  difficult.  AA  emphasises  that  careful
      consideration must be given  to  the  ability  of  family  members  to
      support the appellant [197].  It  is  not  disputed  that  his  family
      reside in Kirkuk, where conflict relatively recently  stopped.   Their
      ability to support him from there is most unlikely.  As set out in  AA
      [202] those without family connections in Baghdad are more vulnerable.
       I am satisfied on the evidence currently available that the appellant
      will not have access to family members or resources to enable  him  to
      obtain accommodation in Baghdad.


  20. If returned to Baghdad, he would be going there as a Kurd and a Sunni.
       He will therefore be in a minority community, but  with  no  contacts
      within that community and unlikely to be  able  to  obtain  employment
      notwithstanding his ability to speak Arabic.   I acknowledge that  the
      appellant speaks Arabic as well as Kurdish.  This should increase  his
      prospects of obtaining employment in principle, but in practical terms
      the absence of a CSID will render this very difficult.

  21. These factors must be  viewed  alongside  other  factors  placing  the
      appellant at increased risk and reasonably likely to  render  life  in
      Baghdad to be precarious for him - see the BA headnote, which states:

                 "(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the  withdrawal
                 of US-led coalition forces in  2012,  but  is  not  at  the
                 levels seen in 2006-2007. A Shia  dominated  government  is
                 supported  by  Shia  militias  in  Baghdad.  The   evidence
                 indicates that Sunni men are more likely to be targeted  as
                 suspected supporters of  Sunni  extremist  groups  such  as
                 ISIL. However, Sunni identity alone is  not  sufficient  to
                 give rise to a real risk of serious harm.


                 (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves
                 create a real risk of serious harm on  return  to  Baghdad,
                 might amount to a real risk for the purpose of the  Refugee
                 Convention, Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive or
                 Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed on  a  cumulative  basis.
                 The assessment will depend on the facts of each case.


                 (vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable,
                 and in the case of Sunni complainants, are likely to be
                 unwilling to provide sufficient protection."

  22. Although the majority of Sunnis are able to lead a  relatively  normal
      life in Baghdad, it is not without risk. This appellant, a young Sunni
      man with no experience of Baghdad at all and no contacts there, is  at
      increased risk of being perceived as an ISIS supporter.

  23. The pertinent  AA  risk  factors  must  be  considered  alongside  the
      constant state of anxiety and insecurity the appellant  is  likely  to
      face in the current environment, as set out  in  BA,  because  of  his
      particular profile.  This appellant is reasonably likely to face  many
      different serious challenges as a result of  his  particular  profile,
      and for this combination of reasons it is unduly harsh to  expect  him
      to relocate to Baghdad.


  24. The risk of this is increased because he left the police and  Iraq  in
      order to reside in the UK.   This is reasonably likely to increase his
      risk of kidnapping and killing in the current environment.  The  level
      of political and sectarian violence in Baghdad remains high even if it
      does not meet the threshold required to show  a  generalised  risk  of
      indiscriminate  violence.   The   background   evidence   shows   that
      checkpoints are largely manned by Shia militias,  with  the  attendant
      risks  and  insecurity  that  presents  for  a  young  man  with   the
      appellant's characteristics and history.


  25. In addition to this the appellant is likely to face great anxiety that
      ISIS will target him again, given his activities in the past.


  26. After having  considered  all  the  circumstances  cumulatively  I  am
      satisfied that the appellant's individual  profile  is  such  that  it
      would not be reasonable to return him to Baghdad.  Ms  Abone  did  not
      argue otherwise.

Conclusion

  27. I accept that the appellant faces  a  real  risk  of  persecution  for
      reasons relating to his imputed political opinion in his home area and
      that he cannot internally relocate to Baghdad or  any  other  part  of
      Iraq.


  28. In the alternative, the same factors would give rise  to  an  enhanced
      individual risk for  the  purpose  of  Humanitarian  Protection  under
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive or for  the  purposes  of
      Article 3 of the ECHR.

  29. Having made these findings there is no need for me to consider Article
      8 of the ECHR.

Decision

  30. The decision of the FTT contains errors of law and is set aside.




  31. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal and find that
      his removal would breach the Refugee Convention and Article 3  of  the
      ECHR.




Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
7 June 2017


