
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02835/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 29th May 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HMA
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Williams (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Gardner (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P. J.
    M. Hollingworth, promulgated on 6th September 2018, following a hearing
    at Nottingham Justice Centre on 7th August 2018.  In the decision,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  wherefrom  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  1st
    January 1981.  He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing his application for asylum  and  for  humanitarian  protection
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has  been  targeted  by
    the Taliban specifically on the basis that they wanted him to join them
    because of his medical skills and that this has put  him  at  risk.   A
    suicide bomber tried to assassinate  him  on  his  way  to  work.   The
    Appellant was in a military vehicle with 40 or 50 people.  He  received
    subsequent telephone calls making him aware of the threat to  his  life
    from the Taliban.  The Appellant was a soldier in the Afghan  Army  and
    this too was a feature of the claim.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant was compelled to  leave  Afghanistan,
    and although he "would still be regarded as  a  member  of  the  Afghan
    armed forces", this was because  "having  failed  to  comply  with  the
    requests of the Taliban and having been specifically  targeted  by  the
    Taliban that the Appellant falls within the Refugee Convention  on  the
    basis of actual or imputed political opinion ..." (paragraph 65).

 5. The appeal is allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The Grounds of Application state that the judge failed to abide by  the
    strictures set out in ZQ (serving soldier) Iraq CG [2009] UKAIT  00048.
    This case makes it clear that "There is no reason to  seek  to  develop
    special principles of refugee law to deal with cases of  soldiers"  and
    that "As a general rule fears  a  soldier  may  have  about  having  to
    perform military service cannot give rise to a refugee claim".

 7. On 27th September 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 31st October 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Appellant's
    Counsel.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 17th May 2019, Mr  Williams,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer  before  me,  relied  upon  the
    Grounds of Application and the grant of permission.  He submitted  that
    ZQ (Iraq) had not been properly applied.  This was  because  the  judge
    had stated (at paragraph 65) that, "I find  that  the  Appellant  would
    still be regarded as a member of the Afghan  armed  forces",  and  this
    being so, what the judge appears to have done is to  have  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that the  Appellant  was  at  risk  of  persecution
    simply because he was a member of the  Afghan  armed  forces.   It  was
    true, submitted  Mr  Williams,  that  the  Appellant  was  specifically
    targeted, but this was only because  he  was  a  member  of  the  armed
    forces, and that brought him under the requirements of ZQ (Iraq)  which
    meant that a serving  soldier,  having  to  perform  military  service,
    cannot lay claim to refugee status by that fact alone.

10. For his part, Mr Gardner drew attention to the two submissions set  out
    in his skeleton argument.  First, whereas  it  was  the  case  that  ZQ
    (Iraq) had stated that a soldier who  faces  return  to  serve  in  his
    country's armed forces cannot succeed  in  a  claim  for  international
    protection based solely on his fear that his commanders  will  fail  to
    protect him, this was not the central aspect of the  Appellant's  claim
    at all.  He feared return because of serious harm from the Taliban as a
    result of his refusal to join them, and the status that he  held  as  a
    military man was not relevant to that.  He did not fear  violence  from
    the Taliban simply as a result of military campaigning or having been a
    soldier.  He joined the Afghan Army in 2004.  He was well-aware of  the
    risks of military campaigning.  His fear, on the contrary,  arose  from
    the Taliban because they had approached him to join them because of his
    medical expertise, and he had refused.  He had then  been  specifically
    targeted (see paragraphs 62 to 64 of the  judge's  decision).   Second,
    with respect to his second submission, Mr Gardner  submitted  that  the
    judge had made it clear (at paragraph 68) that, "If the Appellant  were
    to leave the Afghan armed forces I find that the history of his failure
    to co-operate with the Taliban would still create  the  same  level  of
    risk to which I have referred".

11. In reply, Mr Williams submitted that the judge had failed to deal  with
    internal relocation in an appropriate manner.  This meant that even  if
    Mr Gardner was right, internal relocation was a  possibility  that  the
    judge should have properly looked into, and on that basis the Appellant
    would not succeed.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that it falls to be set  aside.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows. First, the judge  was  quite  clear  that  the  Appellant  was
    specifically targeted for failing to join the Taliban for the  specific
    needs that they had with respect to him.  There had been "the number of
    calls which demonstrated the attempt to  secure  the  services  of  the
    Appellant"  (paragraph  62).   A  suicide  bomber  had   attempted   to
    assassinate the Appellant on his way to work (paragraph 64).  The judge
    was clear that "having failed  to  comply  with  the  requests  of  the
    Taliban and having been specifically targeted by the Taliban  that  the
    Appellant falls within the Refugee Convention on the basis of actual or
    imputed political opinion" (paragraph 65).

13. The judge accepted the expert report which had  been  provided  on  the
    Appellant's behalf (paragraph 65).  His conclusion was clear that  "the
    background  material  demonstrates  that  the  Taliban  still  pose   a
    significant threat to members of the Afghan Army" (paragraph 66).

14. Second, this being so, the judge did  address  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation properly because he concluded that:-

         "I do not find that internal relocation would be an option for  the
         Appellant given his membership of the Afghan Army.  I do  not  find
         sufficiency of protection is available to the Appellant  given  the
         circumstances which have arisen and taking into account that  which
         the Appellant has described in relation to the extent of protection
         available to the Brigadier-General and the  absence  of  protection
         which was available  to  him  in  the  circumstances  which  arose"
         (paragraph 66).

15. These findings were open to the judge.   Most  importantly,  the  judge
    ended with the observation that:-

         "I find that a real risk or serious possibility plainly  arises  of
         the Taliban being able to identify the Appellant on  the  basis  of
         information available to them which enables them to  still  pose  a
         significant threat to members of the Afghan Army.  If the Appellant
         were to leave the Afghan armed forces I find that  the  history  of
         his failure to co-operate with the Taliban would still  create  the
         same level of risk to which I have referred" (paragraph 68).

16. All-in-all, this final concluding paragraph makes it quite  clear  that
    the judge had made findings expressly on the basis that  the  Appellant
    did not fall within the class of  potential  refugees  serving  in  the
    armed forces that were described in ZQ (Iraq).   The  Appellant's  case
    was different.  It was found to be different  by  the  judge.   It  was
    undecided.  The conclusions reached by the judge were entirely open  to
    him.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall  stand.   An  anonymity
    direction is made.

18. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th May 2019

