

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02433/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields
Decision Promulgated
On 24th November 2017                                                 On
19th December 2017


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between


                                  MR.B.M.H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                    Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms Adams, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:     Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Judge Doyle who dismissed his claim for protection made on
      the basis of political opinion.


   2.  The appellant is in Iranian of Kurdish ethnicity. He claimed that he
      was a member of the Revolutionary Union of Kurdistan and experienced
      difficulties from the authorities when he refused to act as an
      informer. Frustrated at being detained overnight he burnt the Iranian
      flag and this was filmed by his friend on his mobile. The phone
      developed problems and he left it in to be repaired whereupon the film
      was disclosed to the authorities who charged him with anti regime
      activities. A warrant was issued but he managed to flee.

   3. In making his claim the appellant was able to produce the video clip
      from his phone of him burning a flag. He also produced a number of
      documents to support his claim of membership of the Revolutionary
      Union. He also claimed to have carried out political activity within
      the United Kingdom which would place him at risk.

The First tier Tribunal

   4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle did not find the appellant credible.
      He concluded his activities in the United Kingdom were limited and
      would not bring him to the attention of the Iranian regime. The
      documents produced could not be relied upon.

   5. The judge made a number of adverse credibility findings. The judge
      referred to inconsistencies between the appellant's screening where he
      referred to people observing him burning a flag and his witness
      statement in advance of the substantive interview and at interview. In
      the latter, he said the burning of the flag occurred when only he and
      a friend where present in an orchard. The judge referred to the
      absence of reliable evidence that any flag burning became public.

   6. At paragraph 14 (j) the judge records that in the appellant's asylum
      interview and his statement he said he was a member of the Patriotic
      Revolutionaries of Kurdistan and interview at question 42 he said he
      was a member of the Revolutionary Union of Kurdistan. The judge
      commented that neither was mentioned at screening and this was a
      significant omission as his political affiliation was the foundation
      of his ultimate claim. The judge also commented at para 14(j) `...It
      is also a significant inconsistency because, although the appellant's
      claim is to be a member of one political party, he mentions membership
      of two separate political parties '.

   7. The judge deals with different dates being given for when he joined.
      There was reference to translation issues with the judge concluding
      the date he claimed he joined was 5 January 2015.

   8. In his interview he was asked about the party. The judge concluded the
      answers given were vague and lacking in credibility. For instance, he
      said he only knew three people who supported the party.

   9. The judge commented on his claim that he was involved in hiding CDs;
      memory cards; and pieces of paper received from Iran and Iraq. The
      judge pointed out the appellant said he was illiterate and because of
      this did not know the content of the materials. The judge found this
      difficult to reconcile with the ability to organise materials
      effectively.

  10. Regarding the documentation produced, the judge referred to the
      principle in Tanveer Ahmed -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439.He commented on
      spelling mistakes in the two letters produce in support of the
      appellant's membership. In both letters `revolutionaries' is misspelt;
      with `c' as the second letter instead of `e'. Both letters contain a
      stamp describing the party as `Revolutionares (sic) Union of
      Kurdistan'. An e-mail exchange was produced claiming the spelling
      mistakes in the letters were to prevent forgeries. No expiration was
      given as to the mistakes on the official stamp. The judge did not find
      the explanation adequate and concluded at best the letters were of
      neutral evidential weight.

  11. Regarding activity in the United Kingdom an article was produced
      showing a photograph of the appellant and a friend. The judge
      concluded his activity would not attract the attention of the Iranian
      regime.

  12. The judge also refers to section 8 factors and delay in claiming
      asylum until he arrived in the United Kingdom. This included travel
      through Europe and a 10 1/2 month stay in France where he was
      fingerprinted.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge mistakenly referred to the appellant claiming he was involved
      with two political parties. In fact he only claimed membership of one.
      Reference had been made by the judge to the lack of subsequent
      correction to the absence of reference any political party at
      screening. However, this omission had been corrected by the appellant
      in a statement of the 1st December. Furthermore, the judge had alluded
      to the appellant's lack of education as inconsistent with his claimed
      activity for the party. However, it was noted that in the appellant's
      witness statement he said that he simply hide things rather than
      prepared materials

  14. The respondent lodged a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.
      Irrespective of any error as to whether it was a political party or
      parties, the adverse credibility findings were sustainable. For
      instance, there had been no challenge to the evidence about who was
      present when the flag was burnt or the appellant's lack of knowledge
      of the political party.


  15.  Ms Adams in her grounds for permission contended that First-tier
      Judge Doyle fundamentally misunderstood the appellant's claim. In
      particular, the judge stated he claimed to have joined two separate
      parties on two separate dates whereas the claim made was that he was a
      member of one political party and the difference in dates arose due to
      a mistake in translation. At hearing she submitted that this mistake
      on the part of the judge undermined his ability to reach sound
      conclusions.

  16. First-tier Judge Doyle had been influenced by the appellant's comments
      at 4.1 of his screening that he feared return because he had burnt the
      Iranian flag and had not referred to membership of a political party.
      However, she said he had explained this in his statement of the 1st
      December 2016, stating that he had been tired when screened, having
      only just arrived. The judge had commented that in his statement he
      had not addressed the failure to mention a political party at 4.1.

  17. She also takes issue with the judge's perception of inconsistency
      between the claimed lack of education and his activities for the
      party. She contended that the judge had failed to consider the
      appellant's evidence properly. His reference to `preparing the
      materials' meant transporting them by hiding them amongst vegetables
      and that he had consistently stated he was unaware of their content.

  18. Finally, she takes issue with the way the judge dealt with the
      documentary evidence and the spelling errors. The appellant had
      provided an e-mail exchange which provided an explanation.

  19. She submitted these issues combined together meant that the decision
      was unsafe.

  20. In response, the presenting officer referred to the other credibility
      issues taken by the judge which had not been challenged. It was
      possible that the judge was mistaken as to whether the appellant
      claimed he was involved in one or two parties but there were
      sufficient remaining inconsistencies to justify rejection of the
      claim. Notably, at screening there was no reference to involvement
      with any political party. This was a reasonable point for the judge to
      take. Similarly, the spelling mistakes in the documents produced
      entitled the judge to reject them. There are other fundamental
      credibility issues, such as the implausibility of the appellant
      filming himself whilst carrying out an incriminating matter and then
      giving this to third parties.

  21. In response, Ms Adams said that her challenge was that the judge
      incorrectly said the appellant never subsequently explained not
      mentioning a political party at screening. The issue was not the delay
      in mentioning this. Furthermore, she pointed out the judge did not
      reject the documentary evidence but did not attach weight to it.

Consideration


  22. The respondent did not believe the claim made. It was not accepted the
      appellant was a member of a political party or of any interest to the
      Iranian authorities. Credibility was central to the appeal.


  23.  The refusal letter refers to the translation of the party as the
      Patriotic Revolutionary of Kurdistan or the Revolutionary Union of
      Kurdistan. There were a discrepancy as to when he said he joined,
      being either 5 January 2015 or 6 July 2014. The grounds of appeal
      referred to the appellant being a member of the Patriotic
      Revolutionary of Kurdistan which he joined in January 2015 and the
      Revolutionary Union of Kurdistan which he joined on 6 July 2014. At
      paragraph 10 under the heading `The appellant's claim' Judge Doyle
      records that the appellant claims he is a member of the Revolutionary
      Union of Kurdistan which he joined in 2014 and that he worked for a
      secret branch within the party. At para 14 ( a) the judge refers to
      the appellant claiming to have joined the Revolutionary Union of
      Kurdistan in July 2014 and the Patriotic Revolutionary of Kurdistan in
      January 2015. It now is the case that the appellant is stating he was
      only involved with one political party. Given the use of different
      names, different joining times and the mention of an inner party it is
      perfectly understandable how the judge at paragraph 14 (j) refers to
      two parties. Elsewhere, he refers to the party in the singular. If the
      judge misunderstood this aspect of the claim then it is my conclusion
      this was not a material error.


  24. The judge accepted the appellant had consistently given the date he
      joined as 5 January 2015. The judge does take the point taken in the
      appellant's substantive interview that he did not mention any
      membership of a political party at his initial screening. I appreciate
      the appellant gave the explanation subsequently in his statement of
      December 2016 that he was tired having only recently arrived.

  25. At paragraph 14(f) the judge comments that whilst he may have been
      tired he would have had the chance to seek advice and comment
      afterwards. It is true that the appellant did give an explanation in
      his subsequent statement. However, the references in the appellant's
      statement of the 1st December 2016 do not correspond with the
      screening interview references. The judge at para 14(e) does refer to
      the statement of 1st December and the appellant's comments about
      4.1.which are not on the point of the omission.  In fact in the
      statement an incorrect reference is made to paragraph 5.5, instead of
      4.1 with the explanation he was tired and did not understand the
      question. It may be because of this incorrect referencing the judge
      missed this .It is the responsibility of the person preparing the
      statement to make sure it can be readily understood. I do not find the
      judge's comment that the appellant did not correct the position
      amounts to a material error. The judge makes a point that his claimed
      involvement was the very foundation of his claim. The appellant at
      first instance did not refer to any political party. His explanation
      is several months later.


  26. The decision must be looked at as a whole. Having read the decision I
      am in agreement with the presenting officer that there were sufficient
      issues going to the appellant's credibility to support the judge's
      conclusion.

  27. The appellant at screening claimed he was seen burning a flag and
      people witnessed this. This suggests there were a number of people
      watching him whereas the account he ultimately gave was that it was
      only himself and his friend in an orchard. This change of account is
      commented upon by the judge at paragraph 14(h). Following from this,
      the judge comments that there was an absence of reliable evidence that
      any private protest on his part would have come to the attention of
      the authorities.

  28. Not only was there no mention of a political party at screening but
      the appellant gave vague answers about the party. He said he had not
      attended meetings or rallies and only knew three people who supported
      the party. The judge makes a legitimate point taken from the refusal
      letter about his claimed role and his lack of education. Whilst the
      appellant may be illiterate some awareness of what was involved in the
      material could be expected.

  29. The judge comments on the documentation provided. The points made are
      sustainable. The same applies in respect of his activities in this
      country.

  30. As part of the general credibility assessment the judge refers to the
      appellant's delay in claiming asylum. This is correctly positioned
      after the claim itself has been assessed.

  31. Having considered all these arguments I find no material error of law
      demonstrated on the grounds advanced.

  32. At hearing Ms Adams sought to introduce a further claim in relation to
      the risk for the appellant for having left Iran illegally. The
      presenting officer objected. Permission had not been granted on this
      and I see no merit in relation to the point. The judge did not find
      the appellant to be a member of a Kurdish political party and the
      potential risk as a failed asylum seeker has been considered by the
      judge. In summary, I find Judge Doyle's decision to be comprehensive,
      clear, and ultimately, sustainable. If there are errors they are minor
      and can be explained by the way the appeal was presented.



Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle dismissing the appellant's
appeal on all grounds shall stand. No material error of law has been
established.



Deputy Judge Farrelly of the Upper Tribunal








