
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02330/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 October 2017                     |On 31 October 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                   Md F H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr. Hussain of counsel, instructed by
Raiyad Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Mr. P. Hastings, Home Office
Presenting Officer

ANONYMITY ORDER.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 15  December  1989,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 April 2014 as a Tier
    4                           (General)                           Student

                     Migrant and his leave was extended  in  this  capacity
    until 17 April 2016, when it was curtailed because his college had lost
    its licence.  He had  previously  returned  to  Bangladesh  between  13
    August 2015 and 25 September 2015 in order to visit his family.  Whilst
    there, he had refused to enter into a marriage arranged by his parents.
    He did so as he had recognised that he had been attracted to  men,  and
    not women, since the age of 14.

2.   Whilst in the United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  started  to  attend  gay
    groups and clubs and entered into a relationship with  a  male  partner
    between November 2014 and July 2016.

3.   The Appellant applied for asylum on 23 August 2016 on the basis of  his
    sexual orientation.  The  Respondent  refused  his  application  on  17
    February 2017 and the Appellant appealed against this decision.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver dismissed his appeal  in  a  decision,
    promulgated on 25 April 2017. The Appellant sought permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Baker on 31 August 2017.

THE HEARING

5.   I heard submissions from counsel for the Appellant and the Home  Office
    Presenting Officer and I have  referred  to  these  submissions,  where
    relevant, in my findings below.


MERITS OF THE APPEAL

6.   In paragraph 25  of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver
    accepted that the Appellant is gay and the Respondent  has  not  cross-
    appealed to challenge this finding.

7.   However, in the same paragraph the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  went  on
    to state that he did not accept that the Appellant had  shown  that  he
    would face persecution on return at the hands of his  family  or  state
    actors. He did not give any specific reasons for these findings.

8.   Instead her relied on a general adverse credibility  finding.  He  gave
    two reasons for this finding. The first one was that the Appellant  had
    said that he had not known that he could apply for asylum until shortly
    before he did so. The First-tier Tribunal Judge doubted that  this  was
    the case as one of the Appellant's friends, whom he had known since the
    Summer of 2015, had been granted asylum on the basis of his own  sexual
    orientation. However, in  oral  evidence  this  friend  said  that  the
    Appellant had not told him he had issues about his  immigration  status
    until around October 2016. The Appellant also said that when  he  first
    met this friend he had a valid visa and, therefore, the issue  was  not
    discussed.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge also noted that HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 had been decided in  the  middle  of
    2010 and would "clearly have been well known in  the  cosmopolitan  gay
    circles of London". I looked at the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  record
    of proceedings and also checked with both representatives and find that
    no question relating to any such knowledge was put to the witnesses  or
    could be inferred from any evidence before the Judge.

10.  Furthermore, when considering the credibility of the  Appellant's  fear
    of persecution in Bangladesh, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that
    the delay in claiming asylum counted powerfully  against  him.  In  the
    case of Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]
    EWCA Civ 11 the Court of Appeal held that  the  proper  approach  to  a
    consideration of credibility was to consider all the evidence  provided
    in an appeal, give appropriate weight to each item of evidence and then
    reach a decision in the light of the totality of this evidence.

11.  One element of this overall  assessment  was  a  consideration  of  any
    relevant factors referred to in section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004.  But  it  was  not  the  only
    element.

12.  In paragraph 23 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver,
    referred to the Respondent's Country Policy and Information document on
    Bangladesh: Sexual orientation and gender identity, December 2016.  The
    Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  that  this  was  a  balanced
    document and that there was  an  LGBT  community  in  Dhaka.  She  also
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not obliged  to  refer
    to every piece of evidence.

13.  However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  obliged  to  adopt  the
    approach advocated in Karanakaran and to consider the objective sources
    referred to by the Appellant in his witness statement,  dated  4  April
    2017. His failure to do so meant that he  had  not  applied  sufficient
    judicial scrutiny.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


