

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/02974/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |         Decision and Reasons         |
|                                   |Promulgated                           |
|On 12 September 2017               |         On 18 September 2017         |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                     S K
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms K Smith counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 20 April 1994 and is a national of Iraq.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated on 23 December  2016  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  12
   March 2016 to dismiss his protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Herwald ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision finding that :
   a) He accepted that the Appellant was from Kirkuk  on  the  basis  .inter
      alia, of his original  CSID  card  which  he  produced  to  the  court
      (paragraph 13 (b) )


   b) The Respondent did not produce sufficient evidence  to  allow  him  to
      depart from the country guidance case in relation  to  whether  Kirkuk
      was a contested area ( Paragraph 12(b) )

   c) He left Iraq to avoid ISIS.

   d) The Judge did not accept that he left to avoid a  risk  from  a  tribe
      called the Jaff.

   e) There was no risk to  the  Appellant  as  a  result  of  his  father's
      association with the Ba'ath party.

   f) The Appellants  failure  to  claim  asylum  in  other  safe  countries
      adversely impacted on his credibility.

   g) It was feasible for the Appellant t be returned to Iraq as he had  his
      original CSID card.
   h) At paragraph 19(b) the Judge considered whether  it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for the Appellant to internally relocate to  Baghdad  and  found
      that it would not.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that :
   a) He failed to direct  himself  appropriately  in  accordance  with  the
      country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
      (IAC) in particular paragraphs 202-203 although specifically  directed
      to this.


   b) The Judge gave inadequate reasons for his finding that  the  Appellant
      could relocate to the IKR.

   c) The Judge gave inadequate reasons for his findings that the  Appellant
      was not at risk from the Jaff tribe.

7.  On 8 May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan gave permission to appeal.

8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Smith  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   (a) She had specifically referred to AA in the course of her  submissions
   and taken the Judge to the salient paragraphs not just the headnote.

   (b) In  relation  to  the  issue  of  relocation  to  Baghdad  the  Judge
   considered this at paragraph 19 and nowhere did he refer to AA.

   (c) The Judge had failed to adequately address the impact of the lack  of
   family support and the fact that the Appellant did not speak Arabic.  The
   Judge gave no weight to the fact  that  the  Appellant  could  not  speak
   Arabic.


   (d) The reference to family support in paragraphs 194-197 of AA was not a
   reference to family who lived in other areas of Iraq. The Appellant  does
   not have family in Baghdad to assist him as his mother lives  in  Kirkuk.
   The Judge  boldly  asserts  that  the  Appellants  mother  could  provide
   financial support but this conclusion was reached without  an  evidential
   basis as that possibility had not been explored by the Respondent  either
   in interview or in court.

   (e) The Judge also fails to take into account the impact of the Appellant
   coming from a minority community.
   (f) The Judge makes a fleeting refence to relocation to the  IKR  without
   taking into account any of the factors set out in AA as relevant to  that
   decision.
   (g) In relation to the Judges finding that the only reason the  Appellant
   left Iraq was fear of ISIS the Appellant was  clear  that  this  was  the
   reason he could not return to Iraq but fear of the  Jaff  tribe  was  the
   reason he could not relocate to the IKR.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Diwnycz submitted that :

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) He agreed that the comments in relation to the IKR were not a  finding
      that he could relocate there.

   c) He accepted that AA was relevant.

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

12. In relation to adequacy of reasons I take into account MK (duty to  give
   reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it was held that  (i)  It  was
   axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for  a
   tribunal's decision. (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be
   implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight
   whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination and for  such
   findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness  was
   not believed or that a document was afforded no weight  was  unlikely  to
   satisfy the requirement to give reasons.


Finding on Material Error


13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. The Judge accepted in  this  case  that  return  of  the  Appellant  was
   'feasible' as he produced a valid original CSID card but  that  it  would
   not be unreasonable for him to relocate to Baghdad. It is argued that the
   Judge failed to direct himself properly as to this  in  part  because  he
   makes no specific reference to the country guidance case of AA.

15. It is a matter of well established law that  any  failure  to  follow  a
   clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or to show why it does
   not apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded  as  a  ground
   for review or appeal on  a  point  of  law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  has
   previously stated in R and Others v SSHD (2005)  EWCA  civ  982  that  it
   represented a failure to take a material matter into account.

16. I  have  considered  whether  therefore  although  the  Judge  makes  no
   specific reference to 'AA'  he  has  taken  that  country  guidance  into
   account in assessing whether it was not unreasonable for the Appellant to
   relocate to Baghdad.


17.  I  note  that  the  Judge  refers  to  taking  into  account  the  oral
   submissions of both representatives and taking into account the documents
   in the Appellants bundle and the Respondents  bundle  (paragraph  5)  and
   note that
      . AA was specifically referred to in the refusal letter  which  forms
        part of the Respondents bundle and is referred to a paragraph 10(e)
        of the decision as 'the country  guidance'  when  setting  out  the
        reasons for refusal.
      . The case is included in the Appellants bundle at 1-58.
      . The Judges record of proceedings contains a number of references to
        AA as being relied on both by the HOPO and Ms Smith.
      . In referring to the background material at paragraph 12  the  Judge
        at sub paragraphs (a) considers whether the country  guidance  case
        should be followed in so  far  as  it  refers  to  Kirkuk  being  a
        contested area or whether as argued  by  Ms  Smith  (b)  there  was
        insufficient basis for him to depart  from  'the  country  guidance
        case.'
      . The specifically addresses the issue of whether  it  was  'feasible
        for him to return' to Iraq at  paragraph  19(a).  This  is  a  very
        specific term and issue which is an important factor referred to in
        the headnotes and throughout AA .

18. I am therefore satisfied that it cannot be  reasonably  be  argued  that
   the Judge was unfamiliar with the case of AA, had a copy of it before him
   and was referred to it in submissions by both Mr Scholes who appeared for
   the Respondent or Ms Smith who appeared for the Appellant.

19. It is further argued in the grounds (paragraph  6-11)  and  orally  that
   the Judge has failed to adequately apply the guidance as to relocation to
   Baghdad  particularly  as  summarised  at   paragraphs   202-203.   Those
   paragraphs set out potential personal characteristics  of  someone  whose
   return is feasible, which as indicated above the Judge considered  first,
   suggesting there is a 'wide range of circumstances'.

20. I am satisfied that the Judge at paragraph 19(b) considered all  of  the
   relevant circumstances and gave them the weight he felt  was  appropriate
   even though he did not specifically refer to the paragraph numbers of  AA
   relied on by Ms Smith. Thus he acknowledged that the Appellant could  not
   speak Arabic, had no family members or Sponsor in Bagdad and was  from  a
   minority community all factors set out in 202-3 of AA. There  is  nothing
   in the guidance that states that such a male cannot  relocate  to  Bagdad
   given the other factors that the Judge weighed in the balance:  thus  the
   Judge took into account that the Appellant already had a CSID which is  a
   vital tool for accessing accommodation , food and  work;  he  noted  that
   while the Appellant spoke Kurdish it was also spoken in Baghdad;  he  had
   previous work experience as a labourer and felt such work was  likely  to
   be available in Baghdad; he noted that the Appellant had been in constant
   communication with his mother since he  left  Iraq  and  she  had  indeed
   provided him with his original CSID at his  request;  he  reached  a  not
   unreasonable conclusion rejecting  his  evidence  to  the  contrary  that
   having raised a large sum to fund his flight from  Iraq  and  given  that
   they were in contact while he was in the UK they were likely to remain in
   contact while he was in Iraq and could provide financial support.

21. I am satisfied that the Judge does not have to make  specific  reference
   to country guidance by name: in HH (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2014] EWCA  Civ
   569, it was held that where the Upper Tribunal had considered  the  risks
   that an asylum seeker said he would face on return  to  Afghanistan,  its
   failure to refer specifically to the country  guidance  case  enumerating
   those risks was not an error, or a material error, of law. I am satisfied
   that in this case that the Judge has  applied  the  country  guidance  to
   which he was referred and taken into account all of the relevant  factors
   and given clear reasons why in this Appellants circumstances it  was  not
   unreasonable for him to relocate to Baghdad.

22. In relation to the reasons given for not accepting  that  the  Appellant
   was at risk from the Jaff tribe while I am satisfied that the reasons  he
   gave were adequate given Ms Smiths argument that  this  related  only  to
   return to the IKR it is  unnecessary  for  me  to  consider  that  matter
   further as the Appellant will be returned to Baghdad.

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.



CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
17.9.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


