
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02832/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th April 2017                        |On 9th May 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    A M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iraq (born 13th  March  1999)  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  A
    Khan) dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
    his asylum/human rights claim.

Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 10th September 2015 as a  minor  and
    claimed asylum.  The  core  of  the  Appellant's  claim  centres  on  a
    property dispute which the Appellant's family have with another  family
    from a different clan and who go by the name of M.  The M family, it is
    claimed, have links with both ISIS  and  apparently  with  the  Kurdish
    authorities.  So far as this Appellant is concerned the reason  why  he
    left Iraq was because of difficulties he encountered with men who  came
    to a garage where he worked.

 3. The Appellant worked at the garage with his brother and a cousin.  Some
    men who came to  the  garage  were  in  possession  of  vehicles  which
    appeared to be government/KDP vehicles.  He was asked to do work on the
    vehicles and a letter was produced to him explaining  that  these  were
    official vehicles.  The driver of the car which  brought  the  men  was
    called M A.

 4. Subsequently the Appellant was targeted by the men to plant  explosives
    in Government vehicles.  At that stage, he formed the  impression  that
    these men were working for ISIS.  He refused to do what they asked  and
    a fight broke out. The Appellant was slashed with a  knife  and  beaten
    up.  He attended hospital and the police were informed but  no  arrests
    followed.

 5. After release from hospital the Appellant returned  to  the  garage  to
    wind down the business. A  few  days  after  the  first  incident  M  A
    accompanied by three men returned to the garage and attempted  to  kill
    the Appellant, his brother and his cousin, by shooting at them  from  a
    car. The Appellant escaped and the police were  informed.  Subsequently
    it became known to the Appellant that the perpetrators of the  shooting
    were members  of  the  M  clan.   The  Appellant  therefore  left  Iraq
    travelling to the UK and once in the UK met up with two older  brothers
    who are already here.

 6. The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  but  the  Respondent  disbelieved  the
    credibility of his claim and therefore refused it, following which  the
    Appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal

 7. When the hearing came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  part  of  the
    Appellant's case included evidence from his two older brothers  Rw  and
    Rn, both of whom had come to the UK and claimed  asylum  here.   It  is
    correct to note that both Rw and Rn's asylum claims  cited  the  family
    feud with the M clan and lack of protection  in  Iraq  as  the  central
    reasons for mounting their claims.

 8. The Appellant's brother Rw attended  the  FtT  hearing  and  gave  oral
    evidence.  The Appellant's brother Rn did not give  oral  evidence  but
    there was produced at the hearing, as part of the Appellant's case, the
    determination of IJ Flynn who dealt with Rn's asylum appeal.

 9. The judge made a finding that he did not accept the credibility of  the
    Appellant's claim. He also made a finding that he did  not  accept  the
    credibility of the Appellant's brother Rw's evidence.  So  far  as  the
    evidence of the appellant's brother Rn is concerned including that  set
    out in the determination  of  IJ  Flynn,  the  judge  at  [45]  made  a
    wraparound finding and said as follows:

         "45. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that I should follow
             the finding of IJ Flynn's decision in 2011.  With  respect  to
             Counsel, this tribunal is not bound by the previous  decision.
             Further,  IJ  Flynn's  decision  is  with   regards   to   the
             appellant's brother, Rn's case.  I have Rn's written statement
             before me but he was not in attendance at the hearing and  his
             statement remains untested.  I make my (sic) on  the  evidence
             before me (sic).  Mr Rw who gave evidence before  me,  claimed
             asylum in 2002, he was only given exceptional leave to  remain
             in the UK.  I do not find his  evidence  before  (sic)  to  be
             credible or consistent, he made lot (sic) of evidence up as he
             went along during his oral testimony."

10. The judge then proceeded to assess further matters under  the  headings
    Consideration of Risk on Return and Human Rights.

    He then dismissed the appeal on all counts.

Onward Appeal

11. The Appellant sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  two
    grounds.

       . The FtT had misdirected itself by failing to appropriately consider
         IJ Flynn's decision concerning the Appellant's brother Rn's appeal.
          This was on the basis that certain findings in IJ Flynn's decision
         centred on the same overarching matrix in the present case,  namely
         a family feud with the M clan.

       . The approach and assessment on the credibility of  the  Appellant's
         brother Rw's evidence was flawed in that the judge's  analysis  and
         conclusions that this evidence was not credible,  was  made  absent
         reasoned findings.

Error of Law Consideration

12. I am satisfied that the FtT's decision is marred by error of  law  such
    that I need to set the decision aside.  I now give my reasons for  that
    conclusion and because the appeal will need to be reheard I will try to
    ensure that my decision refrains from making any  indication  that  may
    have an effect on any future findings of fact or credibility.

13. The first issue before me concerned the  judge's  failure  to  consider
    appropriately the evidence disclosed in IJ  Flynn's  determination  and
    which was given in connection with an appeal by the Appellant's brother
    Rn.  It was always a central plank of the Appellant's case  that  there
    was a longstanding feud between his family and the M  clan  in  Kurdish
    Iraq.  In support of this the Appellant has always maintained that  his
    two older brothers both left Kurdish Iraq and travelled to  the  UK  on
    account of this feud.  After assessing  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    finding inconsistencies, the judge said at [40]:

         "40. The appellant stated that he only found out after he had  been
             admitted to the hospital that the people attending the  garage
             were M, (sic) However, his evidence also is  that  when  these
             people came to the garage, they said that they  were  from  M,
             (sic) I find that the appellant's evidence is inconsistent and
             not credible.  It is for the appellant to provide evidence  to
             establish his case  on  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   The
             appellant has not provided any evidence to  show  that  the  M
             family are indeed influential as claimed and  that  they  have
             links to the KDP government or  indeed  with  the  ISIS.   The
             appellant said that although the KDP government may  not  have
             been aware of the M having links with the ISIS but (sic) local
             people knew about it.  I do not find it credible or consistent
             that the Kurdish force who are  fighting  the  ISIS  in  Iraq,
             would not be aware of their existence in one of the major city
             (sic) in Kurdistan."

14. The judge then said at [45] that which I have set out  in  paragraph  9
    above.  The judge is quite correct to say that he is not bound  by  the
    findings made by IJ Flynn, but equally he is not  permitted  to  simply
    sideline that evidence without at least showing that he  has  given  it
    consideration  before  reaching  any  conclusion  upon  it.   He   must
    therefore give some good reason why he discounts this  evidence.   Miss
    Fijiwala submitted that the judge had noted that he had Rn's  statement
    before him and because he (Rn) was  not  in  attendance  his  statement
    remained untested [45].  This she urged upon me was sufficient to  show
    that the judge was entitled to discount Rn's evidence.  I disagree with
    that.  I see nothing in the decision to show that a careful and anxious
    scrutiny has been given to this evidence.  It may well be  that  it  is
    evidence which is not persuasive at the end of  the  day,  but  reasons
    have to be given as to why not.

15. The second issue concerned the approach of the judge to the credibility
    of the Appellant's brother Rw's evidence.  Mr Smyth in his  submissions
    before me pointed out  that  the  Appellant's  brother  Rw  provided  a
    statement which set  out  corroborative  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.  The judge dealt with this evidence in no more  than  a  summary
    manner and was dismissive of the evidence simply saying that he did not
    find "the witness evidence credible and consistent"  and  that  he  was
    "vague and evasive"[42].

16. As Mr Smyth pointed out,  the  judge  only  noted  one  example  of  an
    inconsistency in Rw's evidence and that  example  concerned  peripheral
    matters in any event.

17. Miss Fijiwala in response asked me to look at [31] of the decision  and
    she submitted that  this  clearly  indicated  inconsistencies  (plural)
    between the evidence of the Appellant  and  that  of  his  brother  Rw.
    Therefore the judge was entitled to conclude that Rw's evidence  should
    be discounted.  I disagree with that assessment.  It is incumbent  upon
    a judge to look at the evidence holistically and I  find  force  in  Mr
    Smyth's submissions on this point, namely that the judge has found  one
    inconsistency and has used that as a basis for discounting the whole of
    the Appellant's brother Rw's evidence.

18. Finally whilst both  representatives  were  scrupulously  fair  in  not
    mentioning it, this decision itself has a number of features suggesting
    that the matter did not have the care it deserved.  There are  multiple
    errors and omissions in the wording of the decision.  It is clear  that
    the judge did not  properly  review  what  he  had  written,  and  this
    reinforces my decision  that  this  case  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

19. For the foregoing reasons the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside and remitted to that Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  to  take
    place.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings  of  fact
are preserved.  The hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  take
place before a judge other than Judge M A Khan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




