
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02684/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2019                  |On 17 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 6  September  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Loke  which  refused  the  asylum  and  human
    rights appeal of FC.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania born in 1993. She has a daughter
    born in the UK in 2018.

 3. The appellant maintains that she grew up in Albania but left her family
    home in 2012 and had not had contact with her family since  then.  This
    was because she had been sexually abused  by  her  stepfather  and  her
    mother had been unable to protect her from this  abuse.  She  moved  to
    live with a friend near Durres for a year and half. She met her husband
    during that period and they began living  together  in  2014,  marrying
    soon afterwards.

 4. In 2017 the appellant's husband told her that  he  had  been  receiving
    threats from traffickers who had trafficked  his  sister.   Because  of
    those threats the appellant and her husband left Albania on 6  February
    2018, travelling through Italy and France.  They travelled in  separate
    lorries from France to the UK.  When the appellant arrived in the UK on
    4 March 2018 she was held by the agents who said that her  husband  had
    not paid them the �9,000 fee for bringing the couple  to  the  UK.  The
    appellant was held against her will for two days but on  6  March  2018
    managed to escape.  A passer-by assisted in taking her to hospital  and
    her daughter was born on 7 March 2018.

 5. The appellant claimed asylum on 11 April 2018. She maintained that  she
    would face a real risk on return to Albania because of the threats made
    to her husband by the people who had trafficked his sister and also the
    agents who had detained her in the UK.  She was not in contact with her
    husband and felt  very  resentful  towards  him  because  of  what  had
    happened, believing that he had abandoned her, leading to her detention
    by the agents on arrival in the UK.  The appellant also maintained that
    she would be at risk on return because she  would  be  returning  as  a
    female single parent and was particularly vulnerable because of  having
    been subjected to sexual abuse by her stepfather.

 6. The appellant received a negative reasonable grounds decision from  the
    National Referral Mechanism in response to her claim that her detention
    on arrival in the UK  amounted  to  being  trafficked.  The  respondent
    refused the appellant's asylum and human rights claims  in  a  decision
    dated 7 March 2019.

 7. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  her  hearing
    before Judge Loke took place on 16 August 2019.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal accepted in paragraph 13 of the  decision  that
    the appellant had been subject to sexual abuse during her childhood  by
    her stepfather.

 9. In paragraphs 14 to 17 of the decision the judge set out  why  she  did
    not accept the  appellant's  account  of  threats  being  made  to  the
    appellant's husband from people who  had  trafficked  his  sister.   In
    paragraph 18 the judge found that even were those threats made out, the
    account and country evidence did not show that the appellant  would  be
    at risk on return.  The  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  challenge  those
    findings which remains extant.

10. In paragraph 19 of the decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the appellant was held against her will by agents  on  arrival  in
    the  UK  but  did  not  find  that  this  amounted  to  trafficking  or
    exploitation of the appellant.  The judge concluded  in  paragraphs  21
    and 22 that the appellant would not face a  risk  on  return  from  the
    agents who had detained her for two days when she arrived in the UK  in
    2018.

11. In paragraph 23 the judge assessed whether the appellant  would  be  at
    risk on return because of other aspects of her profile:

         "23.  I  take  into  account  the  guidance  given  in  TD  and  AD
             (trafficked  women)  Albania  CG  [2016]   UKUT   00092   when
             considering the  risk  upon  return  faced  by  the  appellant
             generally.  I make the following findings:

             (i)  The appellant is not a person who  has  been  trafficked.
                  She will be returning to Albania as a  married,  albeit  a
                  non-accompanied female.

             (ii) The appellant will have her daughter with her.

             (iii)    The appellant has  very  little  education  and  very
                  little work experience.

             (iv) While the appellant appears to  have  been  referred  for
                  counselling, there is no medical evidence as to  what  the
                  appellant's diagnosis is or the extent of any issues.   In
                  cross-examination she was asked whether she had any mental
                  health issues and her response was no.  I  therefore  find
                  that  while  she  may  well   have   been   referred   for
                  counselling, there is  no  evidence  that  there  are  any
                  significant mental health issues.

             (v)  The appellant has no  contact  with  her  own  family  in
                  Albania.

             (vi) At [31] of her witness  statement  the  appellant  states
                  that she is  no  longer  in  contact  with  her  husband's
                  family.  However, there appears to be  no  reason  why  if
                  returned she could not resume contact with  her  husband's
                  family.  No reason has been provided as to why they  would
                  not support her, particularly given that  she  now  has  a
                  child.  She would not attract any stigma given she has not
                  been a trafficked person.

             The appellant is not returning as  a  victim  of  trafficking.
             The appellant will be returning as  a  known  married  person.
             She will be returning with her daughter, and  while  they  are
             unaccompanied, her daughter  is  not  an  illegitimate  child.
             Furthermore, while the appellant  has  limited  education  and
             experience, she will  be  able  to  access  support  from  her
             husband's family.  There is no indication  that  she  will  be
             vulnerable to being trafficked upon return.

         24.   The  objective  evidence  indicates  that  there   has   been
             considerable efforts on the part of the authorities to  combat
             trafficking.  The  police  now  have  standard  procedures  to
             respond to victims of trafficking.  Regarding h) of  the  head
             note of TD and AD, I consider my findings at  [23]  above.   I
             also  considered  the  factors  outlined  in  the  appellant's
             skeleton argument at [27].  While  the  appellant  has  a  low
             level of education, I am not satisfied that  she  has  notable
             health issues and I do find that she will  have  some  support
             network upon return.  On balance I am satisfied she can access
             sufficiency of protection from the authorities if required.

         25.  I note that the CPIN Albania: People  Trafficking  V8.0  March
             21019 indicates at section 2.4 that the  Albanian  authorities
             provide shelters for women,  and  there  is  a  reception  and
             reintegration programme. I  take  into  account  Dr  Tahiraj's
             assessment of this assistance at [2.4] of her report regarding
             the inconsistency of  standards  and  the  corruption  of  the
             security services, however in  general  there  appears  to  be
             assistance available and this is improving. The CPIN objective
             material  indicates  that  victims  are  provided  with   free
             healthcare,  which  includes  mental   health   treatment   if
             required. Support provided  includes  assisting  victims  with
             independent living, which involves housing. Any person leaving
             a shelter must receive social welfare until they find work.  A
             single mother can send her child to nursery  free  of  charge.
             While trafficking remains a serious problem in Albania,  there
             have been significant  efforts  to  improve  the  government's
             response to trafficking and  to  increase  the  assistance  to
             victims of trafficking."

12. The judge concluded that the particular profile of this appellant meant
    that she could not make out a protection claim or show very significant
    obstacles to reintegration such that her Article 8 claim could succeed.



13. The appellant appealed against the decision of Judge Loke on three main
    grounds.  The  first  ground  of  challenge  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in finding that  the  appellant  was  not  a  victim  of
    trafficking, applying too high a  standard  of  proof  and  failing  to
    consider material facts.  This ground was not found to be  arguable  in
    the permission decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  15  October
    2019. Having been  refused  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal only on ground one, the appellant  renewed  her  challenge  on
    this ground to the Upper Tribunal. In  a  decision  dated  16  December
    2019, the Upper Tribunal also refused permission to appeal on the first
    ground so it was not argued before me.

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  grant  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    appellant's second and third ground.

15. The second ground of appeal argued  that  the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return in paragraphs 23 to 25 of  the  decision  failed  to  take  into
    account material aspects of the appellant's profile, took an  incorrect
    approach to the expert report and was otherwise unfair  or  irrational.
    The second ground addressed a number of aspects of the findings made by
    the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 23 to 25.  Firstly,  the  grounds
    argued that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal as to the risks the
    appellant would face on return failed to take account of the fact found
    by the judge that the appellant had been a victim of  sexual  abuse  by
    her  stepfather  which  was  "clearly  relevant  to   the   appellant's
    vulnerability to exploitation" on return.

16. The First-tier Tribunal accepted in paragraph 13 that the appellant had
    been subjected to sexual abuse within her birth family.  It was clearly
    an aspect of the appellant's profile in the judge's mind, even  if  not
    referred to overtly in the assessment of risk on return. Further, I was
    not taken to any material which showed that this history,  rather  than
    having been trafficked or having left Albania directly from a situation
    of sexual abuse, would amount to a risk factor on return.  The comments
    on a returnee having background of sexual abuse in Dr Tahiraj's  report
    did not cover the circumstances of this appellant. Her history is  that
    she left her family home in 2012 and lived with a friend for a year and
    half and then married and lived with her  husband.  She  had  not  been
    subjected to sexual abuse for a period of  6  years  prior  to  leaving
    Albania. She did not indicate that she experienced difficulties on this
    basis after leaving her family. It was  therefore  my  conclusion  that
    this was not a factor that was shown either by the appellant's evidence
    or the country evidence to be capable of making a  material  difference
    to the assessment of risk on return. The First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    does not disclose an error where there is no direct reference  to  this
    factor in the assessment in paragraphs 23 to 25, therefore.

17. The grounds also argued that the First-tier Tribunal took an  incorrect
    approach to the appellant's mental health  problems.   The  appellant's
    evidence on this at its highest was that she was anxious, did not sleep
    well and sometimes did not feel  able  to  go  out  or  interact.   Her
    evidence at the hearing was that she did not  have  any  mental  health
    issues; see paragraph 9(a) of the decision.  The evidence was also that
    she had not yet received counselling although had been  referred.   The
    judge was correct to state in paragraph 23(iv) that there had  been  no
    diagnosis or indication of the extent of any problems.  Where this  was
    the evidence at the highest it is not arguable that the judge erred  in
    stating that there were no "significant" mental issues here  suggesting
    that the appellant would be  particularly  vulnerable  or  at  risk  on
    return.

18. The grounds also objected to the finding that the  appellant  could  be
    expected to resume contact with her husband's family  and  expect  some
    support from them.  This was an error  where  the  appellant  had  been
    clear that that she did not wish to continue her relationship with  her
    husband.  It was irrational for the judge to assume that she would have
    contact with his family where that was so. Also, the issue should  have
    been put to the  appellant  at  the  hearing  and  where  it  was  not,
    unfairness arose.

19. I did not find that the judge erred in concluding  that  the  appellant
    could expect some support from her husband's  family.   It  was  argued
    before me that it was simply not open to the judge to conclude that the
    appellant would receive or look for support from her  husband's  family
    where she did not wish to have any contact with him.   It  is  my  view
    that her evidence, particularly  in  her  witness  statement  dated  25
    October 2018 at paragraphs 30 and 31 shows that this was  a  conclusion
    open to the judge.  The appellant stated in paragraph 30 that  she  had
    not been in contact with her own family  since  2013  and  was  not  in
    contact with her husband. She gave reasons for this being so. As above,
    it was accepted that she ceased contact with her own family because  of
    the abuse from her step-father. She also explained in paragraph 30 that
    she did not wish to continue her relationship with her husband  because
    he had left her vulnerable to the traffickers who had detained her when
    she arrived in the UK. The judge accepted that the appellant would  not
    have contact with her own family and her husband on return and accepted
    her reasons for this being so; see paragraph 22.

20. The appellant refers to her husband's family in  paragraph  31  of  her
    witness statement. The appellant stated:

         "31. I am also not in contact with my husband's family in  Albania.
             I lost everybody's phone number when my phone was  taken  away
             in the UK.  They do not use social  media  or  other  ways  of
             communicating, so I am not able to contact them this way."

    This was evidence only that she  had  not  been  able  to  contact  her
    husband's family whilst in  the  UK  as  she  had  lost  their  contact
    details. No reason was given,  other  than  not  having  their  contact
    details, for not being in touch with  them  or  for  not  intending  to
    contact them on return after making enquiries. The appellant was  clear
    as to not intending to be in touch with her own family and her  husband
    on return and gave good reasons. She did not  state  that  she  had  no
    intention of contacting her husband's family on return or  provide  any
    good reason not to do so. Judge Loke was entitled to find in  paragraph
    23(vi) that there was "no reason why if returned she could  not  resume
    contact with her husband's family" and that nothing indicated that they
    would not support the appellant.

21. It was also not my judgment that procedural unfairness arose  from  the
    issue of contact with the husband's family not being put overtly to the
    appellant at the hearing.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal  indicated  in  R
    (Maheshwaran) v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 173 in paragraph 3:

         "3.  Those who make a claim for asylum  must  show  that  they  are
         refugees. The burden of proof is on them. Whether or not a claimant
         is to be believed is frequently very important. He will assert very
         many facts in relation to events far away  most  of  which  no  one
         before the adjudicator is in a position to corroborate  or  refute.
         Material is often adduced at the last minute without warning.  From
         time to time the claimant or the Home Secretary are  neither  there
         nor represented and yet the adjudicator carries on with  his  task.
         He frequently has several cases listed in front of him on the  same
         day. For one reason or another not every hearing will be effective.
         Adjudicators can not be expected to  be  alive  to  every  possible
         nuance of a case before the oral hearing, if there is one,  starts.
         Adjudicators in general will reserve their determinations for later
         delivery. They will ponder what has been said and what has not been
         said, both before and at the hearing. They will look  carefully  at
         the documents that have been produced. Points will sometimes assume
         a greater importance than they appeared to have before the  hearing
         began or in its earlier stages. Adjudicators  will  in  general  be
         cautious about intervening lest it be said that  they  have  leaped
         into the forensic arena and lest an appearance of bias is given."

    and in paragraph 5 that:

          "... Undoubtedly it is open to the tribunal  expressly  to  put  a
         particular inconsistency to a witness because it considers that the
         witness may not be alerted to the point or because it fears that it
         may have perceived something as inconsistent with an earlier answer
         which  in  truth  is  not  inconsistent.  Fairness  may   in   some
         circumstances require this to be done but  this  will  not  be  the
         usual case. Usually the tribunal,  particularly  if  the  party  is
         represented, will remain silent and see how the case unfolds."

22. Here, the burden was on the appellant and she was represented.  If  the
    appellant did not intend to contact her in-law on return she  could  be
    expected to say so and give a reason why, as  she  did  concerning  her
    husband and her own family. In the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case, it is not my view that fairness required the judge to raise  this
    issue with the appellant. The appellant's evidence on contact with  her
    husband's family was different from that concerning  contact  with  her
    husband and her own family and it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to find there would be some support from her in-laws on return.

23. The argument that the appellant would be viewed as "kurva"  or  tainted
    upon return is not supported by the evidence. As set out  in  paragraph
    23, the appellant will return as a  married  woman  with  a  legitimate
    child who has chosen not to continue her relationship with her husband,
    can expect some support from his family and has  not  been  trafficked.
    The appellant does not suggest that she fears being viewed as viewed as
    "kurva" in her witness statement.

24. It is therefore my conclusion that the judge's reasoning  in  paragraph
    23 is sound and supports the conclusion that the appellant will not  be
    vulnerable to trafficking on return and that  she  can  expect  support
    from her husband's family (and, presumably, the friend  with  whom  she
    lived for a year and a half). Where that  is  so  the  further  grounds
    challenging the approach to the country evidence on state support loses
    its force where the appellant will not be entirely dependent  on  state
    services on return. In any event, the judge took a legitimate  approach
    in considering the expert report alongside the CPIN  and  finding  that
    the evidence as a whole, notwithstanding the comments  of  the  expert,
    showed sufficient provision for there  to  be  no  real  risk  to  this
    appellant.

25. Ground 3 maintained that if either of the other two  grounds  was  made
    out, the First-tier Tribunal also erred in the  assessment  of  whether
    there were very significant obstacles to  integration  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi). It follows from my conclusion above on  the  second  ground
    that the challenge to the Article 8 ECHR assessment set out in ground 3
    does not have merit.

26. For these reasons I do not find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses an error on a point of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 15 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
