

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02509/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5th November 2019                 |On 8th November 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     G S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
                    solicitors (Bradmarsh Way)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  GS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. The purpose of a decision is to enable each party to  know  and
            understand the reasons why an appeal has been either successful
            or unsuccessful. The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
            Devlin in this appeal promulgated on 3rd May 2019 does  not  do
            this.


         2. In a 45 page, closely typed, lengthy,  rambling  decision  that
            does not appear to have been proof read, the  judge  refers  to
            matters which have no relevance to the decision he has to make,
            for  example  the  lack   of   explanation   why   professional
            translators made a mistake in translation of a  document  which
            they then corrected; raises the lack of signing of a GP medical
            report as an issue despite the fact that it is stamped  by  the
            surgery but fails to state whether he accepts  the  content  or
            not.

         3. The judge refers to some  of  the  appellant's  evidence  being
            plausible or implausible  or  not  inherently  implausible  but
            fails to make an actual finding on that evidence.  Plausibility
            is not a finding of credibility or lack of credibility  but  an
            expression of an opinion that a matter  may  be  credible.  The
            judge states that such matters affect the weight to be given to
            the evidence without stating how or why that  is  the  case  or
            what he has done with that  evidence  in  his  assessment.  The
            judge identifies a series of five discrepancies,  refers  to  a
            lack of "clear and unequivocal  evidence"  in  support  of  two
            claims made about  the  Gorran  Party  and  the  withdrawal  of
            cheques, refers to a lack of "independent  evidence"  regarding
            money paid, refers to an unexplained failure to  obtain  copies
            of court documents. He states that none of the account  can  be
            discarded   as   inherently   implausible,   yet   refers    to
            considerations that  affect  the  weight  attributable  to  the
            claim.  The judge  then  refers  to  "negative  pull",  "strong
            negative pull" and "significant positive pull" but even reading
            the decision several times it is not possible to identify which
            elements fall within  which  category  or  why  the  judge  has
            determined that overall the appellant's account is  disbelieved
            "even to the lower standard".


         4. The grounds of appeal relied  upon  included  an  extract  from
            Counsel's record of proceedings  which  does  not  seem  to  be
            contradicted by the judge's record and was not challenged by Mr
            Tan. Questions were not put to the appellant  on  matters  that
            the judge stated the appellant  had  been  vague;  explanations
            were given for some matters that the judge said no  explanation
            had  been  given.  It  may  be  that  the  judge  rejected  the
            explanation  offered  but  if  so,  reasons  should  have  been
            provided.


         5. The judge has not explained on  what  basis  he  considers  the
            appellant could have obtained "clear and unequivocal  evidence"
            or why "independent evidence" is required in a corruption  case
            or could in any event have  been  obtained  without  risk.  The
            judge  has  singularly  failed  to  consider  the   appellant's
            evidence  holistically,  writing  a  decision  that  gives   an
            appearance of addressing particular paragraphs in  the  reasons
            for refusal  letter  rather  than  addressing  the  appellant's
            evidence of his account in the context of  his  claim  and  the
            country he has come from.

         6. This  decision  cannot  stand.  There  are  no  clear  reasoned
            findings by the judge of the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
            claim.

         7. I set aside the decision to be remade.

         8. It is not possible to retain any findings made  by  the  First-
            tier Tribunal judge - there are  virtually  none  that  can  be
            identified with any accuracy.

         9. I am satisfied that the facts are disputed  or  unclear  and  I
            conclude that the decision should be remitted to the First-tier
            judge to determine the appeal de novo.



    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing, no findings preserved.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I make an order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 7th November 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
