
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02294/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 28 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:           Ms Mair, Counsel
For the respondent:          Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer


                                  DECISION

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Algeria.   In  an  'error  of  law'
         decision dated 14  February  2019,  I  found  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') erred in law and decided that the  decision  would
         be re-made by me in the  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')  at  an  adjourned
         hearing.

      2. I make it clear from the beginning  that  it  was  agreed  by  both
         parties that the  appellant  should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
         witness, and I do so.  The FTT accepted the appellant's claim to be
         a victim of domestic violence.  The appellant has given a  chilling
         account of sustained and very serious physical and emotional  abuse
         over an extended period, that is now accepted.

Background to asylum claim

      3. As I clarified in my 'error of law' decision,  the  respondent  did
         not cross-appeal against the FTT's positive factual  findings.   It
         is convenient to repeat  my  summary  of  these  findings  in  this
         decision.

          a) The appellant worked as a police officer  in  Algeria  in  her
             home area in Tipaza (some 70-80km from Algiers).

          b) She has a child ('A'), born  to  her  marriage  with  her  ex-
             husband ('H').  They were married  in  2009  but  divorced  in
             2012.  During the course of their marriage the  appellant  was
             the victim of sustained and serious domestic violence  on  the
             part of H.  The appellant continued  to  live  in  H's  family
             compound after the divorce.

          c) H was convicted of drugs offences  in  2016  in  Algeria,  and
             after an appeal was sentenced to five years imprisonment.  The
             appellant believes that H and his brothers have been  involved
             in the supply of illicit drugs in Algeria for a long time.

          d) H and his family members are suspicious about the  appellant's
             involvement in H's arrest and conviction.  The appellant has a
             well-founded fear of serious harm in her home area for reasons
             relating to this.

          e) The appellant deserted her post as a police officer  when  she
             left Algeria on 21 December 2016 in  order  to  claim  asylum.
             This has resulted in the police dismissing her for desertion.

      4. The FTT explicitly rejected the following: the  appellant  did  not
         know about H's drug dealing;  she  witnessed  her  husband  dealing
         drugs with her police colleagues;  the  appellant  exaggerated  the
         involvement of the police and failed to show H's  connections  with
         the police.

      5. Having set out its factual findings, the FTT described the  central
         issue as whether the appellant can internally  relocate  away  from
         her home area.   The  FTT  referred  to  a  country  expert  report
         prepared by Professor Joffe dated 30 August 2018 ('the first  Joffe
         report')  and  concluded  that  the  appellant  could  safely   and
         reasonably internally relocate.  The FTT therefore  concluded  that
         whilst the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in  her
         home area, she can internally relocate because H's  family  do  not
         have connections to the police  and  H's  conviction  demonstrates,
         contrary to the appellant's claims, that the police are willing  to
         take appropriate action against him and are not scared  of  him  or
         his connections.  In so doing, the FTT  noted  that  the  appellant
         would  have  family  support  from  her  sister   and   there   was
         insufficient evidence to support the claim that  H's  family  would
         find out about such contact and trace the appellant.

      6. In my 'error of law' decision, I concluded that the  FTT  erred  in
         law in two key respects.   First,  the  FTT  failed  to  treat  the
         appellant as a vulnerable witness.  The FTT failed to weigh this as
         a relevant factor when making the pivotal assessment of whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the appellant to internally relocate.

      7. Second, the FTT made no clear findings regarding the  threat  posed
         by the appellant's brother ('B').  The FTT found that the appellant
         would have the benefit of the family support,  generally  necessary
         for divorced women in Algeria, but failed to take into  account  or
         make findings on the appellant's evidence that she could not depend
         upon her sister ('S') because to do so would expose her to the risk
         of harm on the part of B.

Issues in dispute / hearing

      8. At the beginning of the  're-making'  hearing  the  representatives
         clarified that the overarching issue in dispute is whether  or  not
         the appellant can safely or reasonably be expected to  relocate  to
         Algiers, in the light of the FTT's finding that she is at risk from
         H's family members in her home area.

      9.  The  representatives  also  agreed  that  the  findings  of   fact
         summarised at [3(a) to (e)] above are preserved but that  I  should
         re-visit the risk posed by B and / or his likely  attitude,  before
         making my own assessment on internal relocation.

Evidence

     10. The appellant confirmed the truth of two statements dated  3  March
         2018 and 1 March 2019.  The appellant was  then  cross-examined  by
         Mrs  Pettersen,  who  focussed  on  issues  relevant  to   internal
         relocation.

     11. The appellant also  relied  upon  country  background  evidence  on
         Algeria and two country expert reports from Professor Joffe  -  the
         supplementary report is dated  3  March  2019  ('the  second  Joffe
         report').  The respondent relied  upon  a  CPIN  on  Algeria  dated
         August 2017.

     12. Mrs Pettersen invited me to find that the  appellant  could  safely
         and reasonably internally relocate.  Ms Mair relied upon a  helpful
         skeleton   argument.    After   hearing   submissions   from   both
         representatives, I reserved my decision, which I now  provide  with
         reasons.





Findings

     13. My findings have been reached having considered all the evidence in
         the round and having applied the lower standard of  proof  to  both
         past events and future risk.

Risk in home area

     14. The FTT accepted that the appellant is  at  risk  from  H's  family
         members in her home area but omitted to make any  findings  on  the
         appellant's claim that she is at risk from her own brother, B,  who
         has had longstanding links to H's family.

     15. The appellant's relationship with her brother has been strained for
         a lengthy period.  I accept her evidence that he has  used  illicit
         drugs, and has been abusive toward her She has not  spoken  to  him
         since 2001.  B maintained his  friendship  with  H  throughout  the
         abusive marriage.  B has been threatening toward the  appellant  on
         behalf of H's family in the past.  The appellant  has  consistently
         articulated that her fears extend beyond H's family and to her  own
         brother - see questions 75-81 and 99-104 of  the  asylum  interview
         and [5] and [18]  of  her  statement  dated  5  March  2018.   This
         evidence is consistent and credible.

     16. I am satisfied that the appellant faces a real risk of serious harm
         from B as well as H's family in her home area.

Safety of internal relocation

     17. Mrs Pettersen did not dispute  the  cogency  of  Professor  Joffe's
         evidence in so far as it is based on his expertise, as  opposed  to
         the appellant's own assertions.  There are  inconsistencies  within
         that evidence but  when  considered  alongside  the  other  country
         background evidence, I am prepared to accept  those  aspects  which
         find some independent  support  in  the  other  country  background
         evidence.

     18. I do not accept that it is reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant
         will be detained upon arrival  as  asserted  in  the  second  Joffe
         report at [5] to [11].   This  is  because  there  is  insufficient
         cogent evidence that the authorities will treat her adversely:

         (a)      She departed Algeria by normal channels;

         (b)      Her own evidence before the FTT (as summarised at [25]  of
             the FTT's decision) is that  the  authorities  have  taken  no
             further action beyond  dismissal,  having  accepted  that  she
             deserted her post as a police officer;

         (c)      She did not breach any Algerian law by  taking  her  child
             abroad as she  retained  custody  and  guardianship.   In  any
             event, H was in  prison  and  could  not  feasibly  insist  on
             visitation rights.

     19. The appellant will find it difficult to make a new life for herself
         and  her  child  in  a  city  like  Algiers.    The  appellant  has
         consistently maintained that even after her divorce from H she  had
         no choice but to  live  within  his  family's  compound.   She  has
         credibly explained that she was unable to live on her  own  in  her
         home area because she could not afford to do so, even on the salary
         of a police officer, and in any event was unable to do  so  because
         of the discrimination related to her status as  a  single  divorced
         woman with a child.  In other words, life continued to be difficult
         for her, even when she had paid employment and accommodation in her
         home area.  I accept Professor Joffe's evidence that divorced women
         with children face difficult circumstances in  Algeria  because  of
         the  shame  and  reduced  opportunities  associated  with  being  a
         divorced woman, and this is made worse, if they are unable to  rely
         upon their family.  The difficulties are felt vis  a  vis  housing,
         forming a new relationship, unwanted sexual  attention  and  abuse.
         Professor Joffe's evidence in this regard is consistent with  other
         country  background  evidence,  including   a   report   from   the
         Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, albeit that date backs  to
         August 2015.

     20. These difficulties are such  that  in  the  absence  of  any  other
         contact, it is reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  will  feel
         compelled to turn to her family in her home area for emotional  and
         financial support.  The appellant has maintained phone contact with
         her sister, S, since leaving her home area.  S lives in the  family
         home with her elderly parents and B.  Although this  contact  takes
         place clandestinely and when B is not around, sooner or  later,  it
         is reasonably likely that B will discover that the appellant is  in
         Algeria and will track her down or give information to  H's  family
         for them to track her down.  It is to be noted from the appellant's
         answer to question 99 of the asylum interview that  B  has  already
         discovered sensitive  information  regarding  the  appellant  as  a
         result of S maintaining  contact  with  her  over  the  phone.   In
         addition to this, there is cogent evidence that the  appellant  may
         have to return to her home area to obtain or replace  her  national
         biometric identity card - see the first Joffe  report  at  [70]  to
         [71].

     21. Although there is corruption in the police, I do not accept that  B
         and H's family have sufficiently firm connections with  the  police
         to enable the appellant to be located with ease.  However, when all
         the  relevant  considerations  are  viewed   cumulatively   it   is
         reasonably likely that B and / or  H's  family  would  be  able  to
         locate the appellant even if she relocates to a large city such  as
         Algiers.  In so finding, I take the following into account:

          i) It will be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  terminate  all
             contact with her family and her home area for the reasons  set
             out above;

         ii) The appellant will have to register with the police and  would
             therefore be traceable - see the first Joffe report at [64];

        iii) H has been convicted of serious drugs offences. H's family and
             B have been involved in  drugs  for  a  long  period.   It  is
             reasonably likely they have contacts with criminal groups  who
             could assist in penetrating police systems  -  see  the  first
             Joffe report at [62];

         iv) B and H's family have demonstrated a degree  of  determination
             to carry out very serious threats against the appellant.   H's
             brothers told the appellant that they were  going  to  destroy
             her life and slit her and  her  daughter's  throats  (see  the
             answer to question 89 of  the  asylum  interview).   I  accept
             Professor  Joffe's  evidence  that   'honour-based'   violence
             remains prevalent but concealed in Algeria.  This is a case in
             which perceptions of 'honour' are entangled in revenge,  as  a
             consequence of H's conviction, as well as continued links to H
             through their child.  The approach adopted by B and H's family
             in the past are a good indicator of how they may  act  in  the
             future, if they become aware that the appellant  has  returned
             to Algeria.

          v) The appellant will be more  exposed  and  easier  to  find  by
             reason of being a single woman with a child -  see  the  first
             Joffe report at [72(iv)].

         vi) Algiers may be a large city of some 2.5 million but  it  is  a
             relatively short distance (70km)  from  the  appellant's  home
             area.

     22. The FTT accepted (at [29] and [33] of its decision) the appellant's
         evidence that she received threats since  H's  conviction,  because
         his family blamed her for this.  This is likely to be viewed by the
         police as an internal family dispute and  for  that  reason  it  is
         reasonably likely that as in the home  area  (see  the  answers  to
         questions 91 to 92 of the asylum interview), the  police  will  not
         provide sufficient protection in any other part of Algeria, in  the
         particular circumstances of this case - see the first Joffe  report
         at [72].

     23. I therefore find it reasonably likely that  B,  H  and  H's  family
         continue to blame the appellant for H's conviction and imprisonment
         and they are motivated to carry out their threats against her.   It
         is reasonably likely that sooner or later they will track her  down
         in Algiers or any other large city in Algeria, and she will not  be
         able to obtain sufficient protection from the police.

Reasonableness of internal relocation

     24. In the event that my assessment that the  appellant  faces  a  real
         risk of serious harm even if she relocates away from her home area,
         I  have  gone  on  to  address  the  reasonableness   of   internal
         relocation.

     25.  When  the  appellant's   particular   circumstances   are   viewed
         holistically (see SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49), I am satisfied
         that internal relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh.   Each  of  the
         relevant  factors  is  addressed  discretely  below  but  they  are
         interlinked.

     26. First, the appellant will be a single woman with a child to support
         without  any  direct  family  or  other  support.   I  accept   the
         appellant's evidence that she would not be able to obtain  anything
         other than very minimal financial  support  from  S  or  any  other
         family member.  S cares for her elderly parents.  Emotional support
         would be very limited as a result  of  reasonable  fears  that  the
         appellant's whereabouts would then sooner or later become known  to
         B and through him, H's family.

     27. Second, the appellant is vulnerable and anxious as a result of many
         years of being abused and subjugated by H and  B.   Her  resilience
         and confidence have been adversely impacted.

     28. Third, the appellant's employment prospects are low.  Although  the
         appellant has held lengthy and stable employment in the past,  this
         has been restricted to the police service.  In  addition  to  this,
         because she has deserted her post and has no  contacts  outside  of
         her home area, she faces the additional problem of being unable  to
         obtain a suitable reference.  It is very  difficult  for  women  to
         obtain  employment  without  specific  qualifications   or   family
         support.  She faces the  additional  stigma  of  being  a  divorced
         woman.  She is therefore reasonably  likely  to  be  unemployed  in
         Algiers with a child to  support.   She  will  have  to  face  very
         difficult economic circumstances and will find it very difficult to
         obtain  accommodation.   Shelters  are  very  limited,  and  it  is
         difficult to see why this appellant would be prioritised, when  she
         prima facie has family members to turn to for support.

     29. When all the circumstances are considered in the  round  I  do  not
         accept that this appellant will be able  to  secure  employment  in
         Algiers and this will have the consequence of her not being able to
         afford adequate accommodation in the medium  term,  even  with  the
         assistance she will derive from any  resettlement  grant.   She  is
         reasonably likely to face destitution - living on  the  street  and
         having no food security - whilst  at  the  same  time  living  with
         constant stigma as a consequence of being a divorced woman  without
         family support, as well as anxiety as a result  of  her  past  ill-
         treatment and her fears that she will be found by H's  family.   In
         these circumstances, her living conditions will be unduly harsh.

Convention reason

     30. The appellant faces a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Algeria
         for reasons relating to her being a woman, and this  constitutes  a
         'particular social group' in Algeria.  I do  not  need  to  address
         this in more detail because Mrs Pettersen maintained  the  position
         in the respondent's decision letter at [33] that  is  the  relevant
         Convention Reason.

Para ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules

     31. Given  my  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claim  for
         international protection, it is unnecessary for me to  address  the
         alternative submission under the Immigration Rules.   Ms  Mair  did
         not make any discrete oral submissions in relation to this issue.



Decision

     32. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum
         grounds and find that her removal would  breach  the  Qualification
         Directive and Article 3 of the ECHR.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 26 June 2019
