
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02588/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 6 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  LM (DRC)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, Counsel instructed by
     BHT Immigration Legal Service
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NJ Bennett sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  17
    December 2016) dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse  her  protection  claim.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction in the appellant's favour,  and  I
    consider that it is appropriate that this direction is  maintained  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant is  a  national  of
    The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and was born on [  ]  1998.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom by air on 1  August  2013.   She  claimed
    asylum on 6 September 2013.  His asylum claim was refused  on  5  March
    2015, but she was granted discretionary leave to remain until  18  July
    2015 as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking minor.  The  appellant  applied
    for further leave to remain on 16 July 2015, and  her  application  was
    refused on 26 October 2015.

 3. The appellant's claim was that she came from Kiwanja in Northern  Kivu.
    She lived there with her two parents, two sisters and a  brother  until
    her father was killed.  Her father owned a mine and had  some  business
    partners, whom she had never met.  Her father was in charge of about 50
    men who worked in the mine.

 4. In 2012 she was raped by two soldiers on her way home from  church  one
    evening.  Her parents treated  her  with  antibiotics.   About  a  year
    later, in July 2013, armed soldiers came to the family  home  at  night
    and forced their way into the house.  They hit her  father,  raped  her
    mother and were about to rape her when her father tried to  stop  them.
    Her father was shot dead at this point.  The soldiers then tied up  the
    rest of the family and took them away.  Her mother and her sisters were
    made to get into one car, and she and her brother were made to get into
    another car.  She and her brother were driven to a building  where  the
    car stopped.  They were taken inside the building.  She was put in  one
    room with four other girls.  Her brother was put in another  room  with
    boys.  There was a guard outside the room.  There  was  a  large  stone
    lying against some planks of wood leaning against one wall of the room.
     After a while the girls managed to  remove  the  stone  and  the  wood
    revealing a small hole in the wall through  which  she  and  the  other
    girls escaped.

 5. They ended up at a camp.  A man came up to her and started  talking  to
    her.  It emerged that the man knew her father.  After she told him  her
    story, he said that it would not be safe for her to stay  in  the  camp
    and he took her to a house.  He left her at the  house  with  an  older
    woman for a few days and then returned with a  passport  for  her.   He
    then took her to the airport and flew with her to England.  After  they
    arrived in England, he took her by taxi to Brighton and left her there.

 6. The appellant asserted that she had a well-founded fear of  persecution
    on return to DRC, on the account of being of  Nande  ethnicity  and  on
    account of being a member of a particular social group, namely a member
    of a mining family.

 7. In the reasons for refusal letter of October 2015, the respondent  said
    that she had not given any  evidence  that  she  faced  persecution  on
    return to DRC on the basis of her ethnicity.  Her account of the events
    which she said had led to  her  to  leaving  DRC  had  previously  been
    considered in the refusal letter of 5 March 2015, and the  account  had
    been rejected due to her inability to provide details  to  substantiate
    her claim.  In particular, she had given a vague account of the  attack
    on her family.  When asked  if  she  had  had  problems  prior  to  the
    incident, she replied that  she  did  not  know.  With  regard  to  the
    assessment  of  future  fear,  the  respondent  acknowledged  that  the
    conflict  in  the  Eastern  part  of  the   country   had   intensified
    significantly in 2012.  The conflict let to the displacement  of  large
    numbers of people and  significant  human  rights  and  violations  and
    abuses, including recruitment and use of  children  by  the  M23  Armed
    Group.  Rebel Militia Groups (RMGs), some of which  were  supported  by
    foreign governments, had committed violent  abuses  against  civilians,
    particularly  in  North  Kivu,  South  Kivu,  Katanga   and   Orientale
    provinces.

 8. The respondent acknowledged that the background  information  indicated
    that women  in  the  region  could  suffer  harsh  treatment.   Between
    December 2010 and November 2011, the United Nations reported a total of
    625 cases of sexual violence perpetrated by the parties to the conflict
    in North Kivu, South Kivu and Orientale provinces.  Of these, 602  were
    against women and girls, and 23 against men and boys.

 9. The respondent said it was clear  from  the  background  evidence  that
    women (in particular women who did not  have  the  support  of  a  male
    relative) faced hardship in DRC.  But she had a father and brothers who
    resided in the DRC and they would assist her upon her return.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Bennett for a de novo hearing,
    as the decision of the previous First -tier Tribunal Judge had been set
    aside by the Upper Tribunal.  Both parties  were  legally  represented.
    Mr Neale of Counsel appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   In  his
    extensive skeleton argument prepared for the  appeal,  he  acknowledged
    that the appellant did not come within the risk  categories  identified
    in BM & Others (Returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00293 (IAC) or in MM (UDPS members - risk  on  return)  Democratic
    Republic of Congo CG [2007]  UKAIT  0023.   He  acknowledged  that  the
    former case established that failed asylum-seekers were not at risk  on
    return to DRC for that reason alone.  He submitted  that  neither  case
    specifically addressed the risk  to  lone  women  or  to  the  civilian
    population in North Kivu.  He submitted that  the  appellant  would  be
    returned to her former home area as  a  woman  whose  father  had  been
    murdered, and who was not in contact with her remaining family and  who
    did not know their whereabouts.  Accordingly, she  would  face  a  real
    risk of persecution in North Kivu on account of  her  membership  of  a
    particular social group, namely the Nande tribe and/or women  in  North
    Kivu; or she faced a real risk of serious harm under Article 15B of the
    Qualification Directive; or she faced a serious and  individual  threat
    to her life from indiscriminate  violence  under  Article  15C  of  the
    Qualification Directive, as a lone young woman.

11. He cited the expert report of Dr Harry Verhoeven dated 16  March  2015,
    in which Dr Verhoeven stated that, whether Nande,  Hutu  or  Tutsi,  an
    adolescent on her own in North Kivu, or even an adult woman  surrounded
    by her family, had to live on a daily basis with  "a  severe  risk"  of
    sexual  violence  occurring  and  suffering  instances  of  harassment,
    extortion and beating, if not worse.  People who had  been  victims  of
    rape, and who had survived and/or escaped, were  often  targeted  again
    when the penetrators got a chance to do  so.   If  the  armed  men  who
    attacked her in 2012 were still around, they might  even  consider  her
    return to be a provocation.

12. In  his  subsequent  decision,  the  Judge  set  out  his  findings  at
    paragraphs [42] onwards.  At paragraphs [42}-[45}, the Judge  addressed
    the  appellant's  vulnerability  and  the  report   of   the   Clinical
    Psychologist, Dr Lissa Morrish, dated 13  July  2015.   From  paragraph
    [47],  the  Judge  addressed  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr  Verhoeven,
    observing that there were a number of key aspects of  the  claim  about
    which the country expert did not comment, or about which  his  comments
    did not assist the appellant and which raised,  in  his  view,  serious
    credibility questions. The Judge expanded on this at paragraphs [48] to
    [54].

13. At paragraph [55],  the  Judge  said  that  he  could  not  ignore  the
    appellant's failure to contact the Red Cross for help in contacting her
    family.  He said that this might be explained by the  desire  to  avoid
    thoughts about her family, but it was also consistent with her  knowing
    that her family was at home and that the truth would not help her.

14. At paragraph [56], he concluded that that it was not reasonably  likely
    that the appellant's father owned a mine which employed 50  people,  or
    that her family was attacked in July 2013 as alleged or at all, or that
    she had escaped from captivity or that she was brought to the UK by one
    of her father's friends.

15. At paragraph [57], he  nonetheless  accepted  that  it  was  reasonably
    likely that the  appellant  came  from  North  Kivu,  in  view  of  the
    knowledge which she displayed about the province.  At  paragraph  [58],
    the Judge said that it was reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  was
    raped about a year before she left the DRC, when  she  was  going  home
    from church on her own in July 2012.  At paragraphs [59] and [60],  the
    Judge gave extensive reasons for rejecting Dr Verhoeven's opinion  that
    there was a real risk of the appellant being raped on return to DRC  as
    a consequence of the various risk  factors  which  he  had  identified,
    including her membership of the Nande ethnic group.

16. At paragraphs [61]-[67], the Judge gave extensive reasons for rejecting
    statements to the effect that sexual  violence  was  rampant  in  North
    Kivu, or that female residents in North Kivu had to live with a  severe
    risk of sexual violence, or that the available statistics  demonstrated
    that the threshold set by Article 15C of  the  Qualification  Directive
    was met.

17. At paragraph [68], he said that, having reached the above  conclusions,
    he was not satisfied that the appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration into society in the DRC.  She was born there
    and was familiar with the way of life there.  She would return  to  her
    family.  She would have to contend with the continuing conflict and the
    risks associated with the conflict, but the evidence  showed  that  she
    and her family were able to live there safely.  She had  said,  in  her
    SEF  statement,  that  they  had  had  a  comfortable  life.   She  had
    explained, at the very end of her interview, that  she  went  to  local
    shops on her own and she had said  that  she  was  raped  on  the  only
    occasion when she went further away from home, and that  this  happened
    as  it  was  getting  dark.   She  would  obviously  have  to  live   a
    considerably more restricted life in the DRC than she needed to live in
    the UK, but he did not accept that this amounted  to  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration because she was  familiar  with  such  a
    lifestyle.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

18. Mr Neale pleaded the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Ground 1
    was that the Judge had failed to take into account  material  evidence.
    The Judge had not considered the possibility  that  the  appellant  was
    being truthful about what she had been told about  her  father's  work,
    but that the information about her father's work which was given to her
    was incomplete, inaccurate or misunderstood by her.   Accordingly,  the
    Judge was wrong to make an adverse  credibility  finding  based  on  Dr
    Verhoeven's suggestion that it was more likely that her  father  was  a
    mid-level operative rather than being "the boss".

19. Ground 2 was that the Judge had adopted an  inappropriate  approach  to
    the psychological report.

20. Ground 3 was  that  the  Judge  erred  in  making  findings  about  the
    plausibility of the actions of the friend of the appellant's father.

21. Ground 4 was that the Judge had not given sufficient  reasons  for  his
    findings on Article 15C of the Qualification Directive.

22. Ground 5 was that the Judge had been guilty of procedural unfairness in
    not accepting the appellant's claim to come from the Nande tribe.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

23. The First-tier Tribunal gave detailed reasons  for  refusing  to  grant
    permission to appeal.  Following a renewed application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted
    permission to appeal on 4 July 2017, but did not give any  reasons  for
    doing so beyond stating that all the grounds were "arguable".

The Rule 24 Response

24. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  a  Rule  24  response
    opposing the appeal.  In summary, the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    had directed himself appropriately.  Credibility was a matter  for  the
    Tribunal and not the expert, and it was open to the Judge to find  that
    while the appellant may well have a mental health issue, it was  caused
    by reasons other than  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim:  S  -v-
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1153.   The
    Judge had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings,  supported  by
    reference to the background and expert evidence submitted on behalf  of
    the appellant.  The Judge had had regard to  the  expert  evidence  and
    background material in assessing the appellant's claim,  and  had  made
    findings which were open to him on the evidence.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

25. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Neale applied to admit further evidence in support of Ground 4.
     The Judge had drawn  adverse  inferences  at  paragraph  [66]  of  his
    decision because although he had been  provided  with  a  news  article
    detailing the outcome of a study of sexual violence in the  DRC  (which
    had been published in the American Journal of Public  Health),  he  had
    not been provided with a copy of the published paper itself.   The fact
    that this paper was not  provided  to  Judge  Bennett  was  "simply  an
    oversight".  A copy of the paper had now been obtained and the Tribunal
    was invited to exercise its discretion to admit the  paper  as  further
    evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules.

26. Mr Tufan queried whether the new  evidence  was  material.   I  queried
    whether the new evidence fell within the scope of MM (Unfairness:  E&R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), in which the Tribunal held that an error
    of law may be found  to  have  occurred  in  circumstances  where  some
    material  evidence,  through  no  fault  of  the  Tribunal,   was   not
    considered, resulting in unfairness.  However,  in  the  light  of  the
    stance taken by Mr Tufan, I reserved my ruling on the question,  and  I
    gave Mr Neale  permission  to  develop  his  case  under  Ground  4  by
    reference to the new evidence.

Discussion

Ground 1

27. At the outset of his findings, the Judge  reminded  himself  about  the
    Presidential Guidelines relating to children and vulnerable people.  He
    took into account that the appellant was about 14 1/2  years  old  when
    she said she was raped, and that she was about 15 1/2  years  old  when
    she said that the incidents had occurred which  led  to  her  departure
    from the DRC.  He said that allowance had to be made for this because a
    person of that age could not  fairly  be  expected  to  have  the  same
    knowledge and understanding of events as an adult would have.  He  also
    acknowledged that the two key events asserted by her  would  have  been
    highly traumatic events, and this may have made it  difficult  for  the
    appellant to give details of what happened, such as how long the  armed
    men were in the house before they took her away, how long  the  journey
    from the house took, how long it took the girls to open the hole in the
    wall, and how long it took to reach the camp.  He  also  accepted  that
    she had undergone an extensive  cross-examination  and  that  no  major
    inconsistencies had emerged in her evidence.

28. The Judge found that the first serious credibility question  raised  by
    Dr  Verhoeven's  evidence  was  her  claim  that  her  father  owned  a
    significant mining operation, but at the same time her family  did  not
    employ any security guards or even any  domestic  workers.   The  Judge
    found, at  paragraph  [49],  that  this  was  the  difficulty  for  the
    appellant because Dr Verhoeven  had  said  that,  given  the  dangerous
    security environment, almost everybody who could afford it  in  Kiwanja
    tried to enlist men with guns for protection and that a person  playing
    an important professional role in the mines would almost  certainly  be
    able and compelled to do so.

29. At paragraph [50], the Judge held that the case now  advanced  re-wrote
    the appellant's case in an area where she had  been  specific  and  had
    given details.  She may not have visited the mine, but  she  had  given
    details which should be within the knowledge and understanding of  even
    a 15-year-old girl.  She also knew to say that  she  did  not  know  an
    answer.  The Judge observed that the expert's  evidence  gave  rise  to
    another difficulty,  which  was  the  more  that  her  father's  social
    standing was reduced, the more difficult it  was  to  accept  that  her
    father would have known a person who had  the  knowledge,  ability  and
    willingness to arrange to bring the appellant to the United Kingdom.

30. At paragraph [51], the Judge said that much the same can be said of  Mr
    Neale's submission that the appellant may  have  been  referring  to  a
    small-scale mining operation in the Kivu region.  He could  not  accept
    that a mine which  employed  50  people,  and  which  belonged  to  the
    operator, could be so classified.

31. The Judge's approach to this aspect of the appellant's claim  does  not
    disclose any  error  of  law.   The  evidence  of  the  country  expert
    undermined the credibility of the appellant's account.  The  fact  that
    the appellant was a teenager at the time of the  alleged  incident  did
    not change the fact that her account  ran  counter  to  country  expert
    information as to the availability of armed protection for  someone  in
    the appellant's father's claimed position.  It was open to the Judge to
    attach significant weight to the fact  that  the  appellant  had  given
    specific information that her father was the boss of the mine; that  he
    was in charge of about 50 men, and that the mine was on his  land;  and
    that the mine belonged to him.  The Judge was not required  to  proceed
    on  the  premise  that  the  appellant  had  grossly   exaggerated   or
    misrepresented her father's  role  in  the  mine,  as  a  result  of  a
    misunderstanding on her part or as the result of being  misinformed  of
    the true position by members of her family.

Ground 2

32.  The  guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  JL  (Medical  reports   -
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) includes the following:

       The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that the account given
       by the appellant was to be believed, the  less  likely  it  is  that
       significant weight will be attached to it (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA
       Civ 306 at [23].

       Even where medical experts rely heavily on the account given by  the
       person concerned, that does not mean that their reports lack or lose
       their status as independent evidence, although it  may  reduce  very
       considerably the weight that can be attached to them.

33. The Judge addressed Dr  Morrish's  report  at  paragraph  [43]  of  his
    decision.  He noted her finding that the appellant did not suffer  from
    PTSD, depression  or  an  anxiety  disorder,  but  that  the  appellant
    reported suffering from many of these symptoms after  the  events  that
    she described.

34. She said that in her clinical judgment the appellant had given  a  true
    account and that the appellant  was  unlikely  to  have  been  able  to
    fabricate her account "with such clinical accuracy".  She  went  on  to
    say that it was vital to take account of the grief that  the  appellant
    continued to experience.  She observed that the appellant in  interview
    was noticeably and significantly  distressed  when  talking  about  the
    murder of her father and the loss of the rest of her  family  upon  her
    departure from the DRC.  It was her opinion that the appellant had been
    profoundly and chronically emotionally affected by the  attack  on  her
    family, which not only resulted in the murder of her father,  but  also
    the loss of her entire family as she had had not contact  with  any  of
    them since that night.  This would account for the extreme sadness  she
    displayed in  the  session,  and  which  the  appellant  said  she  was
    experiencing  at  regular  intervals  currently.   The  lack  of  PTSD,
    depression  and  anxiety  could  not  distract  from   the   clinically
    significant "grief-related, psychological reaction" that the  appellant
    was currently experiencing.

35. The Judge held that there were  serious  limitations  to  Dr  Morrish's
    assessment because her report was not,  and  did  no  claim  to  be,  a
    holistic assessment of the claim.  She had taken any steps to test  the
    overall credibility of the claim when she  interviewed  the  appellant,
    nor had she made any critical analysis of the claim before she  reached
    her conclusion that the appellant's account was reliable.  She did  not
    appear to have considered whether only part of the claim was  truthful;
    and, if so, whether this would account for the appellant's presentation
    and symptoms.  This was important because, on the appellant's  account,
    there were two separate incidents, both of which would have been highly
    traumatic. Dr Morrish did not say whether separation on its  own  would
    be  sufficient  to  explain  the   appellant's   "extreme   bereavement
    reaction".  The Judge also found that Dr Morrish had given insufficient
    detail of the subject matter of the appellant's primary symptoms,  such
    as the content of the flashbacks  or  the  intrusive  memories  and  so
    forth, or precisely what questions  had  led  to  displays  of  emotion
    during the interview to show that these related to all the  aspects  of
    the claim.

36. I consider that the Judge has given adequate reasons for  holding  that
    Dr Morrish's report had serious limitations, and that it was of limited
    probative  value  in  supporting  the  appellant's   account   of   the
    circumstances in which she came to leave the DRC.

37. With regard to the reported past symptoms of PTSD, these were  just  as
    attributable to the rape incident in 2012, which the Judge accepted had
    taken place, as they were to the subsequent alleged "stressor" event in
    2013.  Thus Dr Morrish's finding that  the  symptoms  reported  by  the
    appellant were "clinically accurate" did not in itself make it any more
    or less likely that the second stressor  event  had  occurred.   As  is
    apparent from Dr Morrish's conclusion at paragraph 5.1, in her  opinion
    the appellant was no less traumatised by being raped in 2012  than  she
    was by the alleged attack on her family in 2013.  So, the fact that she
    was a reliable historian from a clinical perspective  as  to  the  PTSD
    symptoms which she reported after  her  rape  in  2012  was  reasonably
    treated by the Judge as not fortifying the credibility of her claim  to
    have experienced similar PTSD symptoms  following  the  alleged  second
    stressor event in 2013.

Ground 3

38. The second difficulty which the Judge found with the appellant's  claim
    was her ability to escape without being detected.  There is no error of
    law challenge to this adverse credibility finding.

39. In paragraph [53], the Judge said that the third  difficulty  with  the
    claim  was  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  accept  the  remarkable
    coincidence of the appellant arriving at a camp (probably  a  camp  for
    internally  displaced  people  -  according  to   Dr   Verhoeven)   and
    encountering her father's friend.  It was also a remarkable coincidence
    that her father's friend happened to be in the same tent as her, and an
    even more remarkable coincidence that her father's friend  was  willing
    and able to bring her to the United Kingdom.  This would have  involved
    significant expense for him.  The Judge observed that there were  other
    ways in which he could have helped her at significantly less  risk  and
    expense. Accordingly, the Judge held (at paragraph [54])  that  it  was
    very difficult to accept that, having invested a considerable amount of
    time, effort and money in bringing the appellant to  the  UK,  the  man
    would have left her with no means of communicating with her, whether to
    find out how she was coping or to tell her any news which  might  reach
    him about her family.

40. Mr Neale submits that the Judge's reasoning is erroneous in law  as  it
    is procedurally unfair.  He submits that the friend of the  appellant's
    father might have had any number  of  reasons  for  his  actions  which
    simply lie outside the child's knowledge, and so it must be an error of
    law to make adverse credibility findings of this kind on the  basis  of
    bare implausibility.

41. I consider that there is no merit in this submission.  It was  open  to
    the Judge to find this aspect of the appellant's account incredible for
    the reasons which he gave.  The fact that the  appellant  was  a  child
    when she first presented her asylum claim called  for  a  more  liberal
    application of the benefit of  the  doubt.   But  her  status  did  not
    require the Judge to suspend disbelief.

Ground 4

42. It is pleaded that the  Judge's  reasoning  on  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directorate was inadequate; that he  failed  properly  to
    apply paragraph 339K of the Rules; and that  he  placed  an  undue  and
    excessive emphasis on the  piecemeal  statistical  evidence  available,
    rather than considering the question of risk in the round; and he  gave
    inadequate reasons for rejecting the view of the  UNHRC  (expressed  in
    September 2014) that, despite the military defeat  of  23  in  November
    2013 and the signing of the peace agreement between the government  and
    M23 in December 2013, the situation in the Kivus remained volatile, and
    so States were urged not to forcibly return to DRC persons  originating
    from inter alia the Kivus.

43. At paragraph [61], the Judge held that UNHCR's  recommendation  against
    enforced returns to the Kivus  was  not  binding  on  him.   His  self-
    direction was in accordance  with  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in NM & Others (Lone women, Ashraf) Somalia  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00076 at paragraphs [108] following.

44. At paragraph [63], the Judge referred to Dr Verhoeven's  opinion  that,
    even as an adult woman surrounded by her family,  the  appellant  would
    live on a daily basis in North  Kivu  with  a  severe  risk  of  sexual
    violence occurring.  The Judge said that he did not fine  the  expert's
    "unsourced evidence" compelling, as it was not backed  by  any  factual
    analysis.  It was open to the  Judge  to  reject  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Verhoeven on this topic for the reasons which he gave.

45. The Judge went on to address the background evidence on the  prevalence
    of sexual violence in the DRC.  He held, at paragraph  [65],  that  the
    available statistics should be viewed with considerable caution because
    they would include statistics of marital rape, and of  sexual  violence
    which could  not  be  attributed  to  a  situation  of  internal  armed
    conflict, and which therefore could not be taken into account  for  the
    determination of whether The Appellant qualified for  protection  under
    Article 15(c). This is not disputed by Mr Neale.

46. The Judge went on to address, at paragraph  [66],  the  review  of  the
    study published in the American Journal of Public Health.  He  observed
    that the weight to be attached to it was considerably  reduced  because
    the study had not been provided  to  him,  with  the  result  that  the
    methodology  used  by  its  author  and  actual  conclusions  were  not
    available to him.  The review indicated that the study was based  on  a
    sample of about 3,400, which in his view was a very small  sample  when
    compared  to  the  population  of  the  DRC.  As  the  review  did  not
    distinguish between rape attributable to the conflict and  other  types
    of rape, it was impossible to determine how far the headline figure  of
    four rapes every five minutes was accurate, and how far it was  applied
    to rape attributable to the conflict.  He did not therefore accept that
    the figure is reasonably likely to be definitive of the  prevalence  of
    rape attributable to the conflict or that the study  showed  much  more
    that there might be very significant under-reporting.

47. Mr Neale relied on the new evidence to advance  an  argument  that  the
    Judge misdirected himself in paragraph 66.  Firstly,  he  relies  on  a
    sample-sized calculator exercise conducted on 24 August 2017,  to  show
    that the Judge was wrong to find that the study was  based  on  a  very
    small sample when compared to  the  population  of  the  DRC,  and  was
    thereby unreliable.  Moreover, the explanation  which  accompanies  the
    calculation states that the larger the sample size, the more  sure  you
    can be that their answers truly reflect the population.  It is  further
    stated that the confidence interval  calculations  assume  you  have  a
    genuine random sample of the relevant population.  If  your  sample  is
    not  truly  random,  you  cannot  rely  on  the  intervals.   Mr  Neale
    acknowledged in oral argument that the study was not based on a genuine
    random sample of the relevant population.  So, I am not persuaded  that
    the Judge materially erred in his analysis.

48. Secondly, Mr Neale relies on  the  actual  contents  of  the  published
    policy to show that the Judge was mistaken about the nature  and  scope
    of the study, and about its probative value.

49. Aside from the observation about sample size, Mr Neale does not dispute
    that the Judge's other observations in  paragraph  [66]  were  entirely
    valid on the evidence that was before him.  I consider that  the  Judge
    did not make a mistake, even with the benefit of hindsight.  The  Judge
    did not  make  mistaken  assertions  about  what  the  published  study
    contained.  The Judge simply, and correctly, observed that he  did  not
    have the published study before him.

50. Moreover, I do not consider that the failure to produce  the  published
    paper for the hearing was an oversight.  As competent Counsel, Mr Neale
    was well aware that choosing to rely on a review of the  study,  rather
    than the published study itself, was inherently less satisfactory  from
    a forensic perspective, and that the review was going  to  be  of  much
    less probative value  than  the  published  paper.   So  there  was  no
    procedural unfairness as envisaged by the Tribunal in MM.

51. Moreover, the published paper relates to statistics gathered  in  2007,
    which is not apparent from the review. So the published paper would not
    have materially advanced the appellant's case with regard to  the  risk
    of sexual violence in North Kivu at the date of the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

52. Although the Judge accepted that the appellant had been raped in  2012,
    it was open to the Judge to find that there was not a real risk of such
    persecutory ill-treatment being repeated on the appellant's  return  to
    North Kivu, for the reasons which he gave.

Ground 5

53. Ground 5 relates to the Judge's finding, at paragraph [60], that it was
    reasonably likely that the appellant came from the Nande tribe; but  if
    he was wrong about that, he was not satisfied that membership  of  this
    clan put her at real  risk  of  ill-treatment,  because  there  was  no
    evidence that it had done so in the past.

54. Mr Neale submits that it was unfair for the Judge to find  against  the
    appellant on the issue of her membership of the Nande tribe  when  this
    had not specifically been put in issue by  the  respondent,  albeit  he
    accepts that the respondent did not concede that she was  a  member  of
    the Nande ethnic group.

55. I consider that it was open to the Judge not to accept this  aspect  of
    the appellant's claim, for the reasons which he gave.  The  burden  was
    on the appellant to prove all relevant aspects of  her  claim,  to  the
    lower standard of proof.  In evaluating this aspect of her  claim,  the
    Judge took into account the expert evidence of Dr Verhoeven and he gave
    adequate reasons for concluding that the claim was not made out.






Notice of Decision

I dismiss this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

