
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02906/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2020                   |On 2 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     JS
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Halim, of counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, who was born and was  brought
    up in Killinochchi.  He is of Tamil origin. It  is  his  case  that  in
    2001, when he was 12 years old, his mother and sister were killed in  a
    bomb blast caused by the Sri Lankan authorities,  which  destroyed  the
    Appellant's home. His father was working abroad at  the  time  and  his
    brothers were away. He had no one to assist him and he was taken in  by
    the LTTE, who took him to a camp where he received some basic  military
    training.

2.   When his father  came  back,  he  and  the  Appellant's  elder  brother
    visited him but the Appellant was not permitted to leave the camp.  The
    Appellant had to undertake work around the camp  and  was  also  taught
    Sinhalese. He was then told that he was going to  be  sent  to  collect
    intelligence on behalf of the LTTE. He was placed as a servant  in  the
    home of [KB], an army officer, near Colombo. When he was  permitted  to
    have some  time  off,  he  would  pass  any  information  that  he  had
    discovered to his LTTE handlers.

3.   The fact that the Appellant was acting as a spy was  disclosed  by  the
    army officer's cook, when he was interrogated over a  separate  matter,
    in  August  2004.  The  Appellant  was  detained  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities in a military camp, where he was tortured on a very regular
    basis. In November 2005 the LTTE arranged for him  to  be  assisted  to
    escape from the camp and he then went into hiding with a family.

4.   An agent then assisted the Appellant to obtain a  student  visa,  which
    was valid from 21 September 2006 until 30 June 2009, and he arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 30 September 2006. From then  until  March  2011,
    the Appellant lived with and worked for a Sri Lankan  family  in  their
    home. He was not able to stay  with  them  after  they  were  allocated
    social housing and became homeless. He also began to abuse  alcohol  at
    that time.

5.    On 24 November 2011 the  Appellant  was  convicted  on  one  count  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm  and  one  count  of  theft  and
    sentenced to 9 months in prison. On 5 June 2013  he  was  convicted  of
    destroying or damaging property and  being  drunk  and  disorderly  and
    given a conditional discharge. On 28 July  2014  he  was  convicted  of
    using threatening, abusive or insulting words and sentenced to 16 weeks
    in prison, suspended for 12 months. Then on 13 July 2015 the  Appellant
    was convicted on one count of assault occasioning  actual  bodily  harm
    and one count of breach of a suspended  sentence  and  sentenced  to  a
    total of 18 months imprisonment.

6.   On 27 July 2015 the Appellant was served with  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order and on 9 March 2016  his  subsequent  protection  and
    human rights claims were refused  and  the  Respondent  maintained  her
    decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

7.   The Appellant appealed and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  dismissed
    his appeal in a determination promulgated on 6 March  2017.  The  Upper
    Tribunal subsequently refused the Appellant permission to appeal  on  9
    November 2017 and the Appellant challenged  this  decision  and  on  17
    December 2018 Lord Justice Henderson granted him  permission  to  apply
    for a judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's  decision.   On  2  April
    2019 the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the  Upper  Tribunal's  previous
    decision and remitted his appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-
    tier Tribunal Chana then dismissed his appeal once more in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 September 2019.

8.   The Appellant appealed and her decision was set aside by consent  at  a
    hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 18 December 2019.

RESUMED HEARING

9.   In his decision, dated 17 December 2019, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
    recorded that the Respondent had indicated that there was no  objection
    to the Appellant raising as a new  matter  his  relationship  with  his
    partner but had stated that this had to be confirmed in writing.  In an
    email, dated 24 December 2019, the Respondent confirmed that she had no
    objection to the Appellant raising his relationship with his partner as
    a new matter.

10.  Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul has also directed that  any  new  material
    upon which either party wished to rely had to be  served  at  least  10
    working days before the hearing. No such material has  been  filed  and
    served. However, counsel has helpfully  put  the  documents  previously
    emailed to the Home Office on 31 July 2019 into a ring  binder  and  he
    also handed in a skeleton argument,  dated  2  February  2020,  at  the
    hearing.  In addition, he handed up a Country Evidence Bundle, which  I
    admitted as it was of use to the Upper Tribunal  and  was  material  of
    which both the Upper Tribunal and the Respondent would have  previously
    been aware.

11.  The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness and that subjecting him  to  cross  examination  was
    unlikely to add much to the Respondent's case.  However,  she  made  it
    clear that she would be relying on the refusal letter,  dated  9  March
    2016. She also submitted that, even taking the Appellant's case at  its
    highest, he had not established that he would be at risk on  return  to
    Sri Lanka. Therefore, the Appellant's witness statement, dated 31  July
    2019, was formally put to him and he adopted it. He was not  asked  any
    further questions.

12.  The Appellant's partner, M.D., was then called and adopted her  witness
    statement, dated 11 December 2018.  When cross-examined, she said  that
    the Appellant had told her that he was not in touch with anyone in  Sri
    Lanka and that he had only ever told her about the torture which he had
    experienced in Sri Lanka, as a child.

13.  Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for  the  Appellant
    then made oral submissions and I have taken  these  into  account  then
    reaching my decision below.

DECISION

THE APPELLANT'S VULNERABILITY

14.  In paragraph 30 of AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President  of
    Tribunals noted that:

     "To assist parties and tribunals a Practice Direction  'First-tier  and
    Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and  Sensitive  Witnesses',  was
    issued by the Senior President, Sir Robert Carnwath, with the agreement
    of  the  Lord  Chancellor  on  30  October  2008.  In  addition,  joint
    Presidential Guidance Note  No  2  of  2010  was  issued  by  the  then
    President of UTIAC, Blake J and the acting President of the FtT  (IAC),
    Judge Arfon-Jones.  The directions and guidance contained in  them  are
    to be followed and for  the  convenience  of  practitioners,  they  are
    annexed to this judgment.  Failure to follow them will most likely be a
    material error of law..."

15.  He continued in paragraph 31 to explain that:

     "The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide detailed  guidance  on
    the approach to be adopted by  the  tribunal  to  an  incapacitated  or
    vulnerable person.  I agree with the Lord Chancellor's submission  that
    there are five key features:

        a.  the  early  identification  of  issues  of   vulnerability   is
           encouraged, if at all possible, before any  substantive  hearing
           through the use of a CMRH or pre-hearing  review  (Guidance  [4]
           and [5]);
        b. a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will  only  need  to
           attend as a witness to give oral  evidence  where  the  tribunal
           determines that "the evidence is necessary to  enable  the  fair
           hearing of the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by
           doing so" (PD [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
        c. where an incapacitated  or  vulnerable  person  does  give  oral
           evidence, detailed provision is  to  be  made  to  ensure  their
           welfare is protected before and during the hearing (PD  [6]  and
           [7] and Guidance [10]);
        d. it is necessary to give special  consideration  to  all  of  the
           personal circumstances of an incapacitated or vulnerable  person
           in assessing their evidence (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
        e. relevant additional sources of guidance are  identified  in  the
           Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance  Annex  A
           [22] to [27]).

16.  Paragraph 32 also states that:

     "In addition, the Guidance at [4] and [5] makes it clear  that  one  of
    the purposes of the early identification of issues of vulnerability  is
    to minimise exposure to harm of vulnerable individuals.   The  Guidance
    at  [5.1]  warns  representatives  that  they  may  fail  to  recognise
    vulnerability and they might consider it appropriate to suggest that an
    appropriate adult attends with the vulnerable witness to  give  him  or
    her assistance.  That said, the primary responsibility for  identifying
    vulnerabilities must rest with the appellant's representatives who  are
    better placed than the Secretary of  State's  representatives  to  have
    access  to  private  medical  and  personal  information.   Appellant's
    representatives should draw the tribunal's  attention  to  the  PD  and
    Guidance and should make submissions about the  appropriate  directions
    and measures to be considered e.g. whether  an  appellant  should  give
    oral evidence or the special measures that are required to protect  his
    welfare or make effective his access to justice.  The SRA practice note
    of 2 July 2015 entitled 'Meeting the needs of vulnerable clients'  sets
    out how solicitors should  identify  and  communicate  with  vulnerable
    clients.  It also sets out the professional  duty  on  a  solicitor  to
    satisfy him/herself that the  client  either  does  or  does  not  have
    capacity.    I shall come back to the guidance to be  followed  in  the
    most difficult cases where a guardian, intermediary or facilitator  may
    be required.

17.  In the current appeal, counsel for  the  Appellant  invited  the  Upper
    Tribunal to make a 'vulnerability direction' and to apply the  guidance
    in AM.  When doing so he relied on passages from the  medical  evidence
    in the Appellant's Bundle. The Appellant was  firstly  examined  by  D.
    Naomi Hartree and in her report, dated 3 February 2016,  she  concluded
    that the Appellant  had  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  significant
    depression, anxiety with panic attacks and that he had current symptoms
    suggestive of psychosis including auditory  hallucinations  and  visual
    flashbacks and paranoia.

18.  The Appellant was also examined by Dr Frank Arnold  on  3  April  2018,
    whilst he was detained in HMP Wormwood Scrubs. In his report, dated  20
    April 2018, Dr Arnold concluded that the Appellant was  suffering  from
    post-traumatic stress disorder. In paragraph 41 he also noted that  the
    Appellant reported having intrusive memories  of,  and  flashbacks  of,
    burying his mother and sister and being  tortured  and  hearing  voices
    telling him to kill himself.

19.  Finally, Dr Rachel C. Thomas, a Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist  and
    Consultant Adult Psychotherapist, had assessed the Appellant on 28 July
    2018. At paragraph 154 of her report, dated 15 October 2018, she  found
    that the Appellant was "a considerably traumatised man,  who  presented
    in this consultation in a manner entirely consistent with an individual
    suffering from severe symptoms of  a  Major  Depressive  Disorder  with
    additional moderate-severe symptoms of PTSD".

20.  At paragraph 106, she had also found that:

     "His dual diagnosis with PTSD also renders  him  poorly  orientated  to
    time and place with recurrent flashback phenomena. I consider that both
    these factors will render him a poor historian, especially in  relation
    to traumatic experience which, due to post-traumatic avoidance, he will
    rather choose to  avoid  and  dissociate  than  recall  accurately.  In
    summary, I consider that the credibility issues highlighted by the SSHD
    are highly likely to be due to the  presence  of  psychiatric  disorder
    rather than to adverse credibility as has been deemed to be the case to
    date".

21.  In the light of this psychiatric evidence which was collected over  two
    to three years, I find to the requisite low standard of proof that  the
    Appellant is suffering from a number of over-lapping severe and chronic
    disorders, which will have impacted on his ability to provide a  cogent
    and consistent account of past events. There is no indication that  any
    of these  conditions  have  been  successfully  treated  and  resolved.
    Therefore, his ability to give cogent and consistent oral  evidence  at
    the hearing is clearly compromised and any attempt to do  so  would  be
    likely to exacerbate his symptoms and cause him additional  trauma.  As
    noted above, the Home Office Presenting Officer did  not  dispute  that
    this was the case or seek to cross examine the Appellant.

22.  I am aware that the Appellant was able to give his  solicitors  a  very
    detailed account of his time in the LTTE, his escape from detention and
    his past life in the United Kingdom. I do not take an adverse point  in
    relation to the additional detail contained in this statement, as it is
    clear from the record of his substantive asylum interview that it  took
    place on 22 October 2015 in HMP Pentonville between 14.30 and 16.05 and
    without the presence of any  legal  representative.  In  addition,  the
    account which the Appellant gave in this interview was not inconsistent
    with the witness statement on which he now relies, but did not  provide
    anywhere near the level of detail later provided. It is also clear from
    paragraph 93 of the record of the interview,  that  the  Appellant  had
    written down further details which he wanted to  tell  the  interviewer
    but that the Prison Service insisted that the interview was brought  to
    an end before this could happen. The Appellant does not appear to  have
    been given an opportunity to provide this evidence at a later date.

23.  At paragraph 33 of AM  Sir  Ernest  Ryder  also  found  that  where  an
    appellant's credibility is in issue "... there is particular  force  in
    the Guidance at [13] to [15]:

           "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability  may
           differ depending on the matter under  appeal,  the  burden  and
           standard of proof and whether the individual is a witness or  an
           appellant.

           14.  Consider the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
           degrees of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared  to
           those [who] are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence  from
           others associated with the appellant and the background evidence
           before you.  Where there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral
           evidence, consider the extent to which the age, vulnerability or
           sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy or
           lack of clarity.

           15.   The  decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
           concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or
           sensitive, the effect the  Tribunal  considered  the  identified
           vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it  and  this
           whether the Tribunal was satisfied  whether  the  appellant  had
           established his or her case to the relevant standard  of  proof.
            In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to  objective
           indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind."


 24. In the refusal letter  the  Respondent  stated  that  the  Appellant's
    "claim to have been involved in espionage activities...[was] considered
    to be without merit or foundation". However, when reaching this finding
    the Respondent did not take into account the fact  that  the  Appellant
    was a child when he had been acting as a spy and this will  necessarily
    have  impacted  on  his  understanding  of  events.  In  addition,  the
    Appellant was later diagnosed with a  severe  mental  disorders,  which
    both Dr. Hartree and Dr. Thomas concluded had a  clear  impact  on  his
    cognitive abilities. Therefore,  throughout  my  consideration  of  the
    merits of the Appellant's appeal I have taken  into  account  the  fact
    that he is a vulnerable witness whose mental health has compromised his
    ability to meet the case made against him and explain what  appears  to
    others to be implausible.

LIABLITY TO DEPORTATION

25.  When the Appellant was sentenced to a total of 18  months  imprisonment
    on 13 July 2015, he became liable to automatic deportation pursuant  to
    section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007,  as  a  person  who  was  not  a
    British citizen and who had been convicted of an offence in the  United
    Kingdom and had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least
    12 months.

26.  Section 32(5) of the Act states that "the Secretary of State must  make
    a deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal"  and  sub-section
    32(6) also states that  "the  Secretary  of  State  may  not  revoke  a
    deportation order made in accordance with subsection 32(5) unless-

     (a) he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies".

27.  The Appellant relies on section 33(2) of the Act  which  outlines  that
    Exception 1 occurs "where removal of the foreign criminal in  pursuance
    of the deportation order could breach-

     (a) a person's Convention rights, or
     (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention".

THE APPELLANT'S ENTITLEMENT TO REFUGEE STATUS

28.  The Appellant continues to submit that he has a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Sri Lanka on the basis of political opinion  and  relies
    on past persecution, the fact that he previously acted as a spy for the
    LTTE, that he was helped to escape from detention and the fact that  he
    supports the TGTE.. The Respondent does not accept that  the  Appellant
    acted as a spy for the LTTE or that he  would  have  been  sufficiently
    proficient in Sinhalese to do so.  Furthermore, she did not accept that
    the Appellant had ever been detained, tortured and ill-treated  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities. At the time of the  Respondent's  decision  the
    Appellant had not provided her with any expert medical  evidence  about
    his scarring or his psychological conditions.

29.  She also did not find that the Appellant would be at risk on return  as
    he had not ever been detained by the Sri Lankan authorities,  had  been
    able to apply for entry clearance as a student and had left  Sri  Lanka
    using his own passport. In  addition,  she  did  not  accept  that  any
    diaspora activities the Appellant had been  involved  with  would  have
    attracted the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.

30.  There have been two previous appeal hearings in  the  Appellant's  case
    but the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant was  set  aside  by
    the Upper Tribunal in a decision promulgated on  2  April  2019.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul also set aside First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana's
    decision and explicitly stated that none of her findings of  fact  were
    to be preserved.

PAST PERSECUTION

31.  The Appellant has  submitted  a  very  significant  amount  of  medical
    evidence in relation to his claim to have been extensively tortured  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities in or around 2004- 2005.

32.  Dr. Hartree assessed the Appellant for five hours  on  5  January  2016
    and used the Istanbul Protocol to assess the possible causation of  the
    multiple scars on the Appellant's body. She also prefaced her  detailed
    findings with a general and useful explanation of how scars and lesions
    are formed. She found that the majority of the scars on his head, face,
    upper body and the back of his arms and torso  were  highly  consistent
    with the ill-treatment in detention in Sri Lanka, as reported to her by
    the Appellant.  Other scars  were  found  to  be  consistent  with  his
    account. She also noted that the  good  condition  of  the  Appellant's
    remaining teeth and the  position  of  his  missing  teeth  was  highly
    consistent with two of his canine teeth, one on each side, having  been
    removed by pliers, as asserted. She also found that scars on  his  hand
    were consistent with a cut caused by glass, which had been stitched and
    then the sutures being deliberately pulled during an interrogation.

33.  In paragraph 7.56  of  her  report,  Dr.  Hartree  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's overall scarring pattern was  highly  consistent  with  his
    account of torture. In particular, she  noted  that  he  had  a  "large
    quantity of scarring: 43 numbered lesions, many of which are groups  of
    multiple scars, meaning he has well over  100  individual  scars".  She
    also noted that "the scarring is distributed extensively over his body,
    and includes scarring in sites not commonly injured accidentally,  such
    as the top of the head, the left eye socket, the base and back  of  the
    neck, tops of the shoulders, front/inner aspects of the upper arms, the
    forearm near the fold of the elbow, and  non-protruding  areas  of  the
    back".

34.  She accepted that scars on his left forearm were typical of  a  history
    of self-harm but that overall the scarring pattern was  not  suggestive
    of infliction by another person at  his  request  for  the  purpose  of
    faking torture. She also accepted that some of  his  scars  could  have
    been as a result of his being  homeless  and  involved  in  fights  and
    assaults and she specified which these  were.   However,  in  paragraph
    7.6.1 she concluded that he also had scarring which was  suggestive  of
    deliberate ill-treatment rather than street  assaults  and  she  listed
    these.

35.  At paragraph 8.12 of her report she  also  found  that  the  manner  in
    which the Appellant gave his history and his psychiatric  symptoms  did
    not appear exaggerated or faked and that he had  to  be  encouraged  to
    talk about his experience of torture and  trauma  it  has  caused.  She
    discussed that inconsistencies which had arisen in his account  to  the
    Respondent and various clinicians and concluded at paragraph 8.20 that:

     "Overall, my assessment is not able to exclude  the  possibility  of  a
    feigned or exaggerated history or symptoms.  However,  I  am  concerned
    that [the Appellant's] scarring and his  psychiatric  history,  medical
    records and psychological presentation to me, combine to raise clinical
    suspicion  of  severe  interpersonal  trauma  such  as  torture,   with
    proportionately severe mental illness, and that  his  overall  clinical
    psychological picture is highly compatible with  past  torture.  In  my
    opinion further psychiatric or psychological assessment is required, by
    a clinician experienced in working with survivors of  torture  or  ill-
    treatment".

36.  Dr. Arnold also examined in the Appellant on 3 April 2018 and  provided
    some useful body maps. His findings mirrored those of Dr.  Hartree.  In
    addition, he found that the Appellant's testes were  abnormally  tender
    and that the sole of his feet were also tender. He concluded  that  all
    of his clinical findings accorded with the history of  abuse  given  by
    the Appellant and none were in conflict  with  it.  When  doing  so  he
    applied the Istanbul Protocol. He also found  it  clinically  plausible
    that the Appellant's  PTSD  may  have  been  exacerbated  by  his  ill-
    treatment.

37.  I was also greatly assisted by Dr. Thomas' report.,  dated  15  October
    2018. In paragraph 105 of her report she stated:

     "I am aware that the SSHD has considered  [the  Appellant]  not  to  be
    psychologically credible due to various inconsistencies in his evidence
    given within Home Office interviews. However, as noted above, it is  my
    view that these can be  entirely  explained  by  his  severe  cognitive
    impairment (in concentration and memory) as described above".

38.  She added at paragraph 110 "the fact of [the  Appellant]  not  claiming
    asylum immediately  on  arrival  in  the  UK  can  also  be  correlated
    psychologically  with  his  reported  extreme  fear  of  all  authority
    personnel, including in the UK. [He] reported in this interview that he
    had no way of knowing, on arrival in this  country,  that  the  British
    police and immigration authorities were  safe  and  would  not  arrest,
    torture and/or deport him in the way he had been reportedly  abused  in
    his native country".

39.  She concluded:

     "155. I consider the principal cause of [the  Appellant's]  psychiatric
    disorder to be the alleged traumatic experiences of  incarceration  and
    torture, which he reports enduring in Sri Lanka, against the background
    of the deaths of his close family members and which I  consider  to  be
    psychologically credible".

40.  Taking all of this evidence into account  and  applying  the  requisite
    low standard of proof of a serious possibility or a  reasonable  degree
    of likelihood I find that the Appellant was tortured  and  ill-treated,
    as claimed, after being detained by the Sri Lankan authorities.

THE CREDIBILITY OF THE ACCOUNT OF THE EVENTS LEADING UP TO  THE  APPELLANT'S
DETENTION

41.  For the reasons given above when concluding that the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable appellant, his mental health means that the  Appellant  will
    have found it very difficult to give a consistent and cogent account of
    all of the events which lead to him claiming  asylum.  It  is  in  this
    context that the role  of  an  expert  witness  becomes  a  useful  and
    relevant tool.

42.  When considering whether the Appellant was detained as claimed  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities on account of his membership of  and  activities
    on behalf of the LTTE, I have been assisted by the report  provided  by
    Dr. Algar-Faria. I have taken into account his academic qualifications,
    the time he has spent in Sri Lanka, his own military background and his
    relevant publications and have concluded that he is well  qualified  to
    prepare his expert report. I have also noted that his report  addressed
    the key issues in a very clear and concise manner and that his opinions
    were heavily footnoted to relevant and well-respected sources.

43.  His report outlines  his  instructions  and  clearly  states  that  any
    decision about the credibility of the Appellant's account  is  for  the
    court to make. In the substance of his report, he confirms that the Sri
    Lankan authorities were bombing the LTTE controlled Vanni  area,  which
    included Kilinochchi in and around 2000, which supports the Appellant's
    account of his mother and sister being killed. He also  confirmed  that
    the LTTE did recruit a number of child soldiers, sometimes as young  as
    nine. He also quoted from a Human Rights Watch report which noted  that
    at this time recruits underwent stringent basic training and were  then
    allocated to different units or tasks; one of  which  was  intelligence
    gathering. In addition, he referred to an OHCHR report  in  2015  which
    confirmed that  child  soldiers  were  known  to  have  been  used  for
    espionage work and a news report of another boy being used to spy on an
    army officer in 2002.

44.  Interestingly, he also provided a context for the visits the  Appellant
    said that he had witnessed during his time in the army officer's house.
    The expert referred to an  article  entitled  Fueling  the  Sri  Lankan
    conflict: Arms transfers to Sri Lanka in a  book  entitled  Arms  Trade
    with Sri Lanka -  global  business,  local  costs.  In  particular,  it
    stated:

     "what little equipment was supplied could be  considered  or  at  least
    presented as quite defensive - an [offshore patrol vessel] and  several
    air surveillance radars. However, India still seems to have felt uneasy
    about these transfers. Very little publicity was given to them".

45.  The chapter also noted:

     "India reacted to Sri Lankan plans to buy JY-11 air  search  radars  by
    complaining that these would 'intrude' in  Indian  airspace  since  the
    radars would cover part of Southern India, which was until then out  of
    range for Chinese and Pakistani radar eyes. It was probably feared that
    the radars would come with some Chinese operators and that  information
    would be used also by China. Subsequently, India offered its own  Indra
    air search radar to Sri Lanka".

46.  The expert also noted in paragraph 5.5.4. of his report that "the  LTTE
    was thoroughly reliant on their maritime fleet 'in supplying explosives
    arms, ammunition, and other war-related material to the LTTE theatre of
    conflict. In my opinion, it is therefore plausible that the LTTE  would
    have been interested in information collected by [the  Appellant]  such
    as information about the sale of a radar system between India  and  Sri
    Lanka".

47.  The  expert  also  confirmed  in  paragraph  5.6.2,  that  there  is  a
    difference in the dialect spoken by Sri Lankan Tamils  and  Indian  (or
    Upcountry) Tamils but he added that it would be relatively easy for the
    Appellant to modify his manner of speaking as the dialects were more or
    less  mutually  intelligible  and  the  differences  were  grammatical,
    relating to the formation of plurals and the conjugation of verbs.

48.  In her refusal letter, the Respondent had relied  upon  the  fact  that
    there was a ceasefire in place in Sri Lanka between 2002 and  2006  and
    that, therefore, the Sri Lankan government would not have  been  buying
    military supplies at that time and the LTTE would not have been  spying
    on them.  However, in paragraph 5.5.1. of his report, the expert refers
    to reports of Sri Lanka buying equipment from India in the early to mid
    2000s. In paragraph 5.7.1. he also refers to a news  report  about  the
    use of a spy in 2002 and stated that it was "plausible  that  the  LTTE
    continued to  gather  evidence  on  the  Sri  Lankan  army  during  the
    ceasefire period".

49.  Taking this evidence into account  in  its  entirety  I  find  that  it
    rebuts the findings made by the Respondent in her  refusal  letter  and
    that on the requisite low standard of proof that the Appellant did  act
    as a spy for the LTTE, as claimed.

50.  In  her  refusal  letter,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant would have been able to escape from  detention.  However,  in
    paragraph 5.9.2. of his report, the expert stated that "it  was  common
    at the time of [the Appellant's] detention for detained individuals  to
    be offered an option to  'escape'  in  return  for  a  bribe  from  the
    detainee themselves or an associate of the detainee". He based this  on
    extracts from the Human Rights Watch report We Will Teach You a Lesson.
    He also added at paragraph 5.9.3. that the Appellant's  claim  to  have
    been shot at whilst he was 'escaping'  was  also  consistent  with  the
    report and he commented that "a detainee's erstwhile captors would  not
    want to be perceived to have assisted someone in escaping, particularly
    if that detainee was a suspected LTTE member". I  also  note  that  the
    account the Appellant gave of his escape in answer to  question  65  in
    his substantive asylum report was clear and that he  has  not  deviated
    from this account since.

51.  Taking this  and  the  totality  of  the  evidence  into  account,  and
    applying the requisite low standard of proof, I find that the Appellant
    did escape from detention as claimed.

52.  The Respondent also took into account the fact that the  Appellant  had
    left Sri Lanka with a student visa and using his own  passport.  It  is
    his account that the LTTE managed to facilitate his  departure.  Again,
    his account has remained consistent. I also note that he was a child at
    the time and it was reasonable for him to rely on adults to assist  him
    and that is especially the case in the light of my findings in relation
    to the evidence relating to the torture and trauma he  had  experienced
    whilst in detention, which are likely to  have  made  him  particularly
    vulnerable at that time.  In addition, as stated above, I have accepted
    his account of other events in Sri Lanka on the requisite low  standard
    of proof and I find, applying the same standard of proof, that there is
    no basis upon which to doubt his account about his departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.

53.  When reaching my credibility findings above, I have taken into  account
    the delay by the Appellant before he applied for asylum. However, it is
    clear from the detailed medical evidence above and the opinions of  the
    three doctors that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and that one of the elements of this disorder  is  that
    the individual will seek to avoid any situations which will necessitate
    him re-living his past trauma, such as explaining his past in an asylum
    application. I find that this is a reasonable explanation for his delay
    in the context of my  findings  above  about  the  credibility  of  his
    accounts and the physical evidence of him being tortured.

54.  Furthermore, the  test  for  entitlement  to  international  protection
    under the Refugee Convention is a prospective one  and  I  must  decide
    whether he will be at risk of persecution and ill-treatment if  removed
    to Sri Lanka in the context of the findings I have made above about his
    past ill-treatment and torture.

55.  I have reminded myself that GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) remains current  country  guidance
    and that in that case the Upper Tribunal found that:

    "(1) This determination replaces all existing country guidance  on  Sri
   Lanka.

    (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed  since
    the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka  itself  is  a
    spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since the end of
    the civil war.

    (3) The government's present objective is to identify  Tamil  activists
    in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and to destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment  6(1)  to  the  Sri
    Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which  prohibits  the  'violation   of
    territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on  preventing  both
    (a) the  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil  separatist
    organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

    (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security  services  there
    remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring  international
    protection.

    (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a  person
    at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the government  now
    controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to  a
    named address after passing through the airport.

    (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only those whose
    names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the  airport.   Any
    risk for those in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
    interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in  their  home
    area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police  within
    a few days.

     (7)   The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:

    (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
       integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,  or  are
       perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  post-conflict
       Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities
       within Sri Lanka.
    (b)  Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human  rights
       activists, who, in either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri  Lankan
       government, in particular  its  human  rights  record,  or  who  are
       associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.
    (c)  Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
       Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan   security
       forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war
       crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war  crimes  during  the
       conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
       who have already identified themselves by giving such evidence would
       be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only  they  are
       at real risk of  adverse  attention  or  persecution  on  return  as
       potential or actual war crimes witnesses.
    (d)  A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
       accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against  whom
       there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.  Individuals whose
       name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped  at  the  airport  and
       handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance
       of such order or warrant.

    (8) The Sri Lankan authorities'  approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri Lankan  Tamils
    travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone  in  the
    Northern Province had some level of involvement with  the  LTTE  during
    the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
    history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the
    Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

    (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
    list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not  reasonably
    likely to be detained at the airport  but  will  be  monitored  by  the
    security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does  not
    indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict, the
    individual in question is not, in  general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
    detained by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
    each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such  an
    individual.

RISK ON RETURN

56.  As found above, the Appellant was an active member of the LTTE when  he
    was a child, acted as a spy for them, was  detained  and  tortured  and
    then escaped.

57.  In paragraph 5.9.4. of his expert report, Dr. Algar-Faria  referred  to
    a March 2014 report by the Bar Human Rights Committee  of  England  and
    the International Truth  &  Justice  Project,  Sri  Lanka  entitled  An
    Unfinished War: Torture and Sexual Violence in  Sri  Lanka  2009  which
    explained that  those  who  accepted  a  bribe  from  a  detainee  were
    "responsible for ensuring the  reason  for  the  suspect's  release  is
    recorded. A person recorded as having escaped or being missing would be
    of significant adverse interest to the authorities".

58.  This finding was echoed in paragraph 10 of RS (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1796,  where  Lord
    Justice Floyd noted that:

     "Paragraph 25.32 of the March 2012 Country of Origin Information  (COI)
    Report for Sri Lanka issued  by  the  UKBA  contains  extracts  from  a
    Foreign & Commonwealth Office  (FCA)  Report  on  the  FCO  information
    gathering visit to Colombo in  August  2009.  The  extracts  relate  to
    whether specific factors would affect the way in which an individual is
    treated at the airport. One of the extracts reads:

         "If an individual has jumped bail/escaped from custody. The  senior
         intelligence official said that the person  would  be  produced  at
         Court. The Superintendent, Criminal Investigations Department (CID)
         agreed. The representative from Centre for Policy Alternatives said
         that the individual would definitely be stopped".


59.  Lord Justice Floyd also added at paragraph  26,  when  considering  the
    particular and similar circumstances of the  appellant  in  that  case,
    that "...The authorities obviously have an interest in an LTTE  member,
    who they have kept in detention for 18  months,  and  are  unlikely  to
    cease to have that interest if the detainee escapes". Taking  this  and
    the totality of the evidence into account and  applying  the  requisite
    low standard of proof, I find that there will be an official record  of
    the Appellant's 'escape" which could lead  to  him  being  detained  on
    arrival in Sri Lanka.

60.  In the alternative, I have noted  that  in  paragraph  5.10.2.  of  his
    report, the expert found that there was a risk that  [the  Appellant's]
    name could appear on the 'stop' list but found that it was difficult to
    state this with any certainty.    But  he  did  conclude  in  paragraph
    5.10.7 of his report that returnees  who  do  not  match  the  profiles
    listed in GJ are still being detained. He based this conclusion in part
    on the OHCHR report  Visit  to  Sri  Lanka  -  Report  of  the  Special
    Rapporteur  on  the  promotion  and  protection  of  human  rights  and
    fundamental freedoms whilst countering terrorism, 14 December 2018.  In
    this report the Special Rapporteur found that:

     "Entire communities have been stigmatised and targeted  for  harassment
    and arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,  and  any  person  suspected  of
    association, however indirect, with the LTTE remains at immediate  risk
    of detention and torture".

61.  In paragraph 5.11.18.1 of his report the expert also  referred  to  the
    Human Rights Watch Report, referred to above, which stated that:

    "Since the end of the  armed  conflict,  other  Tamils  living  abroad,
    returned to Sri Lanka only to be arrested  immediately  or  soon  after
    arrival, and they too have been subjected to torture,  including  rape,
    while in custody. A number  of  these  were  questioned  about  alleged
    activities abroad, including  peaceful  criticism  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    government".


62.  Taking all of this into account I also find that the  risk  facing  the
    Appellant would be heightened by the fact that there is likely to be  a
    record of his escaping from detention and the fact that when he did  so
    he was a suspected member of the LTTE. The Respondent also accepted  in
    her refusal letter that the Appellant may have  attended  one  or  more
    demonstrations  in  London  which  had  been  organised  by  TGTE.  The
    Appellant  has  not  been  able  to  produce  any  photographs  of  his
    attendance, as he does not like his  photograph  being  taken.  But  in
    their witness statements his friends, TS and KJ,  confirmed  that  they
    had met the Appellant at a number of TGTE meetings in London. Given the
    surveillance carried out by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  of  diaspora
    activities, it may be that his presence at these meetings has also been
    recorded. Furthermore, as noted by the expert in paragraph  5.11.20  of
    his report, the TGTE is a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka  and  it
    is a crime to be associated with it anywhere in the world.

63.  In addition, if the Appellant were to be stopped and questioned in  Sri
    Lanka,  his  reaction  in  any  such  interview   and   any   perceived
    unwillingness to answer questions, is likely to give  rise  to  further
    suspicion When reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account what
    was said by Dr Rachel Thomas at paragraph 2016 of her report, which  is
    also quoted above:

     "His dual diagnosis with PTSD also renders  him  poorly  orientated  to
    time and place with recurrent flashback phenomena. I consider that both
    these factors will render him a poor historian, especially in  relation
    to traumatic experience which, due to post-traumatic avoidance, he will
    rather choose to avoid and dissociate than recall accurately".

64.  Taking this and the totality of the evidence into account and  applying
    the requisite standard of proof I  find  that  the  Appellant  will  be
    detained by the Sri Lankan authorities if removed there.  In  paragraph
    (4) of GJ the Upper Tribunal found that "if a person is detained by the
    Sri Lankan security services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment
    or harm requiring international protection".

SUFFICIENCY OF PROTECTION


65.  The Appellant has a history of  past  persecution  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, as found above, and fears further persecution by  them  if
    removed to Sri Lanka. Therefore, I find on the requisite  low  standard
    of proof that there would be  no  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    Appellant if he were to be removed to Sri Lanka.

INTERNAL FLIGHT

66.  I have taken  into  account  the  finding  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    paragraph (5) of its headnote in GJ and note that "internal  relocation
    is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person at real  risk  from  the
    Sri Lankan authorities, since the government now controls the whole  of
    Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to a  named  address  after
    passing through the airport". Therefore, I find on  the  requisite  law
    standard of proof that there would be no internal flight option for the
    Appellant within Sri Lanka.

HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM

67.  For the reasons given above I also find that removing the Appellant  to
    Sri Lanka would give rise to a breach of  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights on account of the serious risk that he would
    be ill-treated by the authorities in detention.

68.  Given that I have found that his removal would breach his rights  under
    the Refugee Convention and Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights due to this treatment,  I  have  not  needed  to  consider
    whether his removal would give rise to a serious  risk  to  his  mental
    health or breach his Article 8 rights.

69.  However, I accept  on  the  basis  of  the  medical  evidence  and,  in
    particular, paragraphs 119 to 128 of Dr  Rachel  Thomas's  report  that
    there is a serious risk  that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    tolerate the trauma of being returned to Sri Lanka  where  he  believes
    that he will be tortured once more.   She  concludes  that  his  return
    would precipitate a psychiatric crisis and render him  at  considerable
    risk of suicide and also render him so psychiatrically unwell  that  he
    would not be able to access psychiatric treatment.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.

(2)  The Appellant's appeal is also allowed under Article 3 of the ECHR  for
    the same reasons.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 24 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


