
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02261/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant to rule|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|                              |
|Rules 2008                                   |On 02 February 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     BAK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal on 19 March 2020, and the Presidential Guidance Note no  1
         2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic, as amended  on  19
         November 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Freer (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 3
         November 2020, dismissed his appeal in respect of a decision by the
         respondent dated 25 February 2020 refusing his protection and human
         rights  claim.  The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Iraq  and  his
         protection claim depended,  in  part,  on  his  alleged  sur  place
         political activities, including  posts  he  made  on  Facebook.  At
         paragraph 68 of his decision the judge found that the appellant had
         failed to produce any "compelling evidence  that  he  is  connected
         with or in control of the Facebook page that bears a name identical
         with his name."

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal Keane in a decision dated 21 December  2020
         but sent on 23 December 2020.

      4. In granting permission Judge Keane stated:

             "The  appellant  applies  in-time  for  permission  to  appeal
             against the decision of the judge promulgated  on  3  November
             2020 in which  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,
             humanitarian protection and human rights (Articles  3  and  8)
             grounds. Very largely, the grounds amounted to no more than  a
             disagreement with the findings of the judge, an attempt to re-
             argue the appeal and they did not disclose an  arguable  error
             or errors of law but for which the outcome of the appeal might
             have been different. However, in stating at  paragraph  68  of
             his decision that the appellant had not  provided  "compelling
             evidence" that he was connected with or in control of Facebook
             pages, the judge was arguably applying a standard of proof  in
             excess of the lower standard. Also  at  paragraph  68  of  his
             decision the judge concluded that there was no evidence  which
             established  that  the  Facebook  profile  belonged   to   the
             appellate. At ground 5  of  the  grounds  the  author  stated,
             "firstly, the respondent in  the  RFRL,  cross-examination  or
             closing submissions did  not  raise  this  point...".  At  any
             hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant  by  his
             representatives should  be  to  establish  [sic]  the  factual
             premise which underlay the submission, namely that  the  issue
             that there was no evidence to show that the  Facebook  profile
             belonging  to  the  appellant  had  not  been  raised  by  the
             respondent and had merely been taken up by the  judge  in  his
             decision. While it was not incumbent upon  the  judge  to  put
             each and every concern to the appellant at the hearing it  was
             incumbent upon the judge to act  fairly  and  with  procedural
             propriety. In circumstances, where an important facet  of  the
             appellant's  claim  had  not  been  the  subject  of  dispute,
             notwithstanding   many   opportunities   which   availed   the
             respondent to annunciate  such  a  dispute,  it  was  arguably
             incumbent upon the judge, acting fairly and with propriety, to
             draw the appellant's attention to such  concern  so  that  the
             appellant might attempt to meet it. This is the judge arguably
             did not do. The application for permission is granted."

      5. On 7 January 2021 the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  directions  to  the
         parties authored by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  expressing  his
         preliminary view that, as noted by Judge Keane, the judge  did  err
         in not putting his concerns  about  whether  or  not  the  Facebook
         profile in question belonged to the appellant, given this  had  not
         been in dispute before and had not been raised by  the  respondent.
         It was also Judge Rintoul's preliminary view that the  judge  erred
         in relation to the grounds of appeal at [8] and [12]  (relating  to
         speculative findings unsupported by  the  evidence)  and  ground  9
         (relating to the judge's assessment of internal relocation).  Judge
         Rintoul stated:


             "Accordingly, it is my preliminary view that the decision  did
             involve the making of an error of law, should  be  set  aside,
             and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
             again de novo."


      6. Judge  Rintoul  issued  a  set  of  directions  that  included  the
         following:


             "The parties must indicate in the  responses  whether  or  not
             they agree with my preliminary views [...] and as  to  whether
             they agree with the proposed course of action.  This  must  be
             done by the appellant within 14 days after this notice is sent
             out and within 21 days by the respondent."


      7. By an email response received by the Tribunal on 11 January 2021 Mr
         E Tufan, Senior Home office Presenting Officer, indicated that  the
         respondent was content and in agreement with Judge Rintoul's view.


      8. By an email response received by the Tribunal on 11 January 2021 Mr
         F Ahmad of Hanson Law (the appellant's solicitors), indicated  that
         the appellant was content and in  agreement  with  Judge  Rintoul's
         view.

      9. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision and the  written  responses  from
         the parties, and having satisfied itself  that  both  parties  have
         been given a fair opportunity of fully advancing their  cases,  and
         having regard to the judgment in JCWI  v  President  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), the Upper Tribunal considers  it
         appropriate, in  light  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic,  to  determine
         questions (i) and (ii) without a hearing pursuant to rule 34 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  to  allow  the
         appeal on the basis indicated  by  Judges  Keane  and  Rintoul  and
         agreed by the parties.


     10. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 a case may be remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

      1. Both parties agree that  the  judge's  decision  is  undermined  by
         material legal errors, including errors relating to the appellant's
         credibility. The judge's  findings  on  credibility  are  therefore
         unsafe. As indicated by Judge Rintoul, and agreed by  the  parties,
         the appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  so  that  a
         new fact-finding exercise can be undertaken. It  will  be  for  the
         First-tier Tribunal to  determine  the  most  appropriate  mode  of
         hearing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Freer.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed
Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
                     Date: 20 January 2021
