
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02258/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2020                           |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                          rabon hamad demin mustafa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Frew & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Iraq,  appeals,  with  permission  granted
    following the quashing by the Court of Session of an  earlier  refusal,
    against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  P  A  Grant-
    Hutchinson) dismissing his appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal of his application for protection.  I have the advantage  of  a
    commendably clear and concise  skeleton  argument  by  Mr  Winter.   He
    indicates that there are two issues for decision,  one  procedural  and
    one substantive.  The procedural question  is  whether  the  matter  is
    before the Tribunal at all.   He  very  properly  raises  the  question
    whether there is a difficulty because the application for permission to
    appeal submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  out  of  time.   The
    Secretary of State's skeleton argument (drafted not by Mr Clarke but by
    his colleague Mr Jarvis) also takes this point.

 2. In my judgement there is nothing in it.  Although the  application  for
    permission to the First-tier Tribunal  was  indeed  out  of  time,  and
    although the First-tier Tribunal did not extend time, the decision that
    it made was not a decision refusing to  admit  the  application  but  a
    decision refusing permission.  The subsequent procedural steps are  not
    affected by any issue as to time; and the grant of permission to appeal
    to this Tribunal does not reserve  any  such  issue  for  decision.   I
    therefore proceed to the substance of the appeal.

 3. The appellant claims that he left Iraq after threats were made  to  his
    life for having an illicit relationship with a girl.   Her  family  did
    not approve of the relationship and the appellant's case was that  they
    had access to powerful support.  Her uncle, a major-  general,  visited
    the appellant's home with other soldiers  and  threatened  him.   There
    were two documents which the appellant said were sent to his home:  one
    was said to be dated 4 September 2018 and to require him  to  attend  a
    police station; the other was dated 10 September 2018 and was  said  to
    indicate that he should be handed over to the police by the head of his
    neighbourhood council.  Those documents were not produced at  the  time
    of the claim: when interviewed on 7 March, the appellant said  that  no
    actual arrest warrant document was given to his parents.  But  the  two
    documents, with what he  claimed  to  be  translations  of  them,  were
    produced by the appellant's solicitors in the inventory of  productions
    dated 14 March 2019.  Mr Winter's position is that they  demonstrate  a
    prospect  of  state-sanctioned  action  against   the   appellant   and
    accordingly provide powerful support for his claim.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered these documents, together with
    the other evidence before him.  His comment  in  his  decision  was  as
    follows:

         "The Summons lodged by the Appellant is an  unusual  document.   It
         does not say why the Appellant is being "summoned".   It  does  not
         say if he is in fact being summoned in relation  to  any  offences.
         If it is in relation to the Appellant's alleged version of events I
         feel it highly unusual that [her] family would wish to involve  the
         authorities and to make the matter public.   This  is  particularly
         true is they are indeed powerful enough to take their own revenge."

    The judge considered that the appellant was not telling the truth about
    his history.  There were  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  between
    what he had said at his asylum interview and what he said  in  evidence
    before the judge, and these were on serious and central  matters  which
    were alleged to have taken place quite recently.  The judge thus  found
    that the appellant had not made his case, and dismissed the appeal.

 5. Mr Winter's case is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in  its
    approach to the two documents.  His submissions are summarised  in  his
    skeleton argument as follows:

         "7.  The FTT erred in law, at paragraph  14,  in  relation  to  the
             summons by failing to recognise and thus misapplying the  law:
             that the respondent had a duty to verify documents;  the  Home
             Office breached that duty by failing to carry out verification
             checks on the summons or by at least by  giving  consideration
             to easily available routes  to  check  authenticity;  and  the
             consequence of which is that the document is not open to being
             impugned by the Home Office (pages 17-18  of  the  appellant's
             first inventory; PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2015] 1WLR 1322 at paragraphs 11-12 and 29-31
             per Ryder LJ; AR [2017] CSIH 52 at paragraphs 31  and  35  per
             Lord Malcolm).

         8.   The appellant's position is that there was, and is, a duty  on
             the Home Office.  It was, and is, one document.  It would  not
             have been disproportionate for checks to  be  carried  out  on
             that one document   The  author  of  the  grounds  knows,  for
             example, that the Home Office have  carried  out  verification
             checks on Pakistani FIRs on a discrete basis (AR,  supra)  and
             conceded a petition for  judicial  review  which  concerned  a
             failure to carry out verification on an  arrest  warrant  from
             Vietnam  (Khan  Trung  Tran  P1195/18).   Adverse  credibility
             findings  are  not  determinative  of  the  respondent   being
             absolved from the duty and where in  any  event,  the  adverse
             credibility findings are undermined by the  failure  to  carry
             out verification (AR, supra;  PJ,  supra).   Additionally  the
             adverse credibility findings are not as extensive as  one  may
             find in other cases.  The summons was, and is, central to  the
             claim.  It was not said  that  the  document  was  not  easily
             verifiable or where there is nothing to indicate that the Home
             Office had given consideration to easily available  routes  to
             check authenticity eg through  Embassy  contacts  in  Iraq  or
             through  the  document  verification  unit  or   through   the
             neighbourhood document which was submitted (AR, supra).

         9.   Such an error is material where had  the  FTT  recognised  the
             fact that  the  Home  Office  were  not  able  to  impugn  the
             document, the FTT would have to approach matters on the  basis
             that the Home Office were not challenging that document ie  it
             was an unchallenged document insofar as  the  Home  Office  is
             concerned.  That  in  turn  may  affect  how  the  credibility
             challenged is framed where the Home Office approached  matters
             on the basis that document could not be challenged.  It cannot
             be said that the FTT would reach the  same  decision  on  that
             basis.  Although the FTT would still be able to make  its  own
             mind up about the document, the reasons given by  the  current
             FTT were based on the Home Office's submissions.  Further even
             if the FTT was able to makes its own mind up on  the  document
             that would be on the basis that there were  easily  verifiable
             routes by which the document could be checked  and  where  the
             Home Office had not chosen not to do so and where there  would
             have to be a re-assessment of how credibility is assessed."

 6. The law relating to a duty on  the  Home  Office  to  verify  documents
    produced to it by an asylum claimant has been the subject of appeals in
    a number of recent cases, mostly from Scotland.  It had  been  arranged
    for two cases to be heard  by  the  same  senior  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the same day.  One was  this  appeal;  the  other  was  the
    application for permission to appeal in QC v SSHD.  In both  cases  the
    appellant or applicant was represented by Mr Winter, and the respondent
    was represented by Mr Clarke.  Unfortunately, although QC was heard  by
    the President and the Vice President,  another  urgent  demand  on  the
    President's time as a High Court Judge prevented him from  taking  part
    in the hearing of this appeal.  Given, however,  that  on  the  general
    issue the same representatives had had a full opportunity to make their
    submissions in QC, Mr Clarke and Mr Winter  agreed  that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the statement of the relevant law emerging from  QC  to
    appear in the present decision as part  of  this  decision  also.   The
    relevant passages of the Tribunal's decision in QC are as follows:

         "E.  VERIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS


         13.  The leading Tribunal  authority  on  the  proper  approach  to
             documents of the kind with which we  are  concerned  is  Ahmed
             (Documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan* [2002] UKIAT 00439
             (hereafter "Tanveer Ahmed").  In that case, a senior panel  of
             the Immigration Appeal Tribunal gave authoritative guidance on
             the approach to such documents.  It is instructive  to  return
             to the actual terms of  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed,  approved  as  it  has  been  on  numerous   subsequent
             occasions in the higher courts.

         14.  At paragraph 31, the Tribunal said:-






                  "31. It is trite immigration and asylum law that  we  must
                      not judge what is or is not likely to happen in other
                      countries by reference to our perception of  what  is
                      normal within  the  United  Kingdom.   The  principle
                      applies as much to documents as to any other form  of
                      evidence.   We  know  from  experience  and   country
                      information that there are countries where it is easy
                      and often relatively inexpensive to  obtain  "forged"
                      documents.  Some of them are false in that  they  are
                      not made by whoever purports to be the author and the
                      information  they  contain  is  wholly  or  partially
                      untrue.  Some are "genuine" to the extent  that  they
                      emanate from a proper source, in the proper form,  on
                      the proper paper, with  the  proper  seals,  but  the
                      information  they  contain  is  wholly  or  partially
                      untrue.   Examples  are  birth,  death  and  marriage
                      certificates from certain  countries,  which  can  be
                      obtained from the proper  source  for  a  "fee",  but
                      contain information  which  is  wholly  or  partially
                      untrue.  The permutations of truth, untruth, validity
                      and "genuineness" are enormous.  At its  simplest  we
                      need to differentiate between form and content;  that
                      is whether a  document  is  properly  issued  by  the
                      purported author and whether the contents  are  true.
                      They are  separate  questions.   It  is  a  dangerous
                      oversimplification merely to ask whether  a  document
                      is "forged" or even "not genuine".  It  is  necessary
                      to shake off any preconception that official  looking
                      documents  are  genuine,  based  on   experience   of
                      documents in the United Kingdom, and to approach them
                      with an open mind".





         15.  In light of the more recent decisions of the Court  of  Appeal
             and the Court of Session, to which we  shall  turn,  what  the
             Tribunal said in paragraph 31 is instructive.  What appears to
             be an official document, emanating from some authority abroad,
             may not, in truth, emanate from that authority.  But, even  if
             it does, what the document says (for example, about the person
             seeking international protection) may not be reliable.  Unlike
             the position in the United Kingdom where,  happily,  instances
             of corrupt officialdom are relatively  rare,  it  is  possible
             that the foreign official who produced the document  may  have
             been suborned.  This explains the Tribunal's exhortation  that
             one should approach such documents "with an open mind".





         16.  At paragraphs 34 to 36, the Tribunal in  Ahmed  addressed  the
             issue of the  respondent's  obligations  in  respect  of  such
             documents:-

                  "34. It is sometimes argued  before  Adjudicators  or  the
                      Tribunal that if  the  Home  Office  alleges  that  a
                      document relied on by an  individual  claimant  is  a
                      forgery and the Home Office fails to  establish  this
                      on the balance  of  probabilities,  or  even  to  the
                      higher  criminal  standard,   then   the   individual
                      claimant has established the validity  and  truth  of
                      the document and its contents.   There  is  no  legal
                      justification  for  such  an   argument,   which   is
                      manifestly incorrect, given that whether the document
                      is a forgery is not the question at issue.  The  only
                      question is whether the document is  one  upon  which
                      reliance should properly be placed.


                  35.   In  almost  all  cases  it  would  be  an  error  to
                      concentrate on whether a document is a  forgery.   In
                      most cases where forgery is alleged it will be of  no
                      great importance whether this is or is not  made  out
                      to the required higher civil standard.  In all  cases
                      where there is  a  material  document  it  should  be
                      assessed in the  same  way  as  any  other  piece  of
                      evidence.   A  document  should  not  be  viewed   in
                      isolation.  The decision maker  should  look  at  the
                      evidence as a whole or in the  round  (which  is  the
                      same thing).

                  36.  There is no obligation on the  Home  Office  to  make
                      detailed  enquiries  about  documents   produced   by
                      individual claimants.  Doubtless there are  cost  and
                      logistical difficulties in the light of the number of
                      documents submitted by many asylum claimants.  In the
                      absence of a particular reason on  the  facts  of  an
                      individual case a decision by the Home Office not  to
                      make inquiries, produce in-country evidence  relating
                      to  a  particular  document  or  scientific  evidence
                      should not give rise to any presumption in favour  of
                      an individual claimant or against the Home Office."





         17.  The leading  Court  of  Appeal  case  on  the  nature  of  the
             respondent's "verification" obligations is PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             1011.  The facts of this  case  are  important  for  a  proper
             understanding of what the court held.   As  appears  from  the
             headnote in [2015] 1 WLR 1322, PJ contended that he would face
             serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka because of perception of
             the authorities there as to his political opinion.  In support
             of his asylum application, PJ submitted  certified  copies  of
             court documents which had been obtained on his behalf by a Sri
             Lankan lawyer.  These included a police report, which revealed
             that PJ was  to  be  arrested  on  arrival  in  Sri  Lanka  in
             connection with a bombing; and also a warrant for his  arrest.
             The respondent refused PJ's claim,  finding  that,  given  the
             ease with which it was possible to obtain forged documents  in
             Sri Lanka, the respondent could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
             documents were genuine.  PJ's  solicitors  then  instructed  a
             second Sri Lankan lawyer who, through his junior,  obtained  a
             complete certified copy of the documents, which matched  those
             produced by the first lawyer.

         18.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed PJ's appeal, concluding that
             no weight  could  be  placed  on  the  documents.   The  Upper
             Tribunal  dismissed  PJ's  further   appeal.    PJ   appealed,
             contending  that  where  court  documents  were  obtained  and
             provided by foreign lawyers, they were to be  presumed  to  be
             genuine unless the respondent proved otherwise; and  that  the
             respondent  bore  the  responsibility  of  investigating   the
             reliability of such documents unless such an investigation was
             not feasible.

         19.  One of the tasks undertaken by the Court of Appeal in  PJ  was
             to consider Tanveer Ahmed in the light of the decision of  the
             European Court of Human Rights in Singh v Belgium (Application
             No. 33210/11), given on 2 October 2012.  In Singh,  Sikhs  who
             had fled Afghanistan claimed refugee status in Belgium.  Their
             claim was rejected because they  had  failed  to  prove  their
             Afghan nationality.  On appeal, they provided  new  documents,
             comprising emails between their lawyer and a representative of
             the Belgium Committee  for  the  Support  of  Refugees.   This
             committee was a partner of the High Commission of  the  United
             Nations for Refugees ("UNHCR").   A  UNHCR  representative  in
             India had furnished, by way  of  attachments  to  the  emails,
             "attestations" which indicated that the petitioners  had  been
             recorded as refugees under the UNHCR mandate and that  one  of
             them had requested naturalisation in  India.   Notwithstanding
             this documentation, it was held on appeal that the petitioners
             had failed to prove their  Afghan  nationality  and  that  the
             documents were of no convincing value, since they  were  of  a
             type that was easy to falsify and the petitioners  had  failed
             to produce the original copies of the documents.

         20.  The ECtHR held that, since the possible consequences  for  the
             petitioners were significant, there was an obligation  on  the
             state to show that it had been as rigorous as possible and had
             carried out a careful "examination" (in fact, a  "review")  of
             the grounds of appeal.  Since the documents were at the  heart
             of the request for protection, rejecting them without checking
             their authenticity fell short  of  the  careful  and  rigorous
             investigation that was expected  of  national  authorities  in
             order  to  protect  individuals  from  treatment  contrary  to
             Article 3 of the ECHR, when a simple process of enquiry  would
             have  resolved  conclusively  whether   the   documents   were
             authentic and reliable.

         21.  In MJ v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  Imm
             AR 799,  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  whether  Singh  was
             compatible with Tanveer Ahmed.  The panel  concluded  that  it
             was:-

                  "50. It is relevant, however, to consider (the decision in
                      Ahmed's case) in the context  of  what  was  said  in
                      Singh v Belgium.  On consideration we  do  not  think
                      that what was said in Singh's  case  is  inconsistent
                      with the quotation we have set out above from para 35
                      of Ahmed's case.   Ahmed's  case  does  not  entirely
                      preclude the existence of an obligation on  the  Home
                      Office to make enquiries.  It envisages,  as  can  be
                      seen, the existence of particular cases where it  may
                      be appropriate for inquiries to be made.  Clearly  on
                      its facts Singh's case can properly  be  regarded  as
                      such a particular case.  The  documentation  in  that
                      case was clearly of a nature where verification would
                      be  easy,  and  the  documentation   came   from   an
                      unimpeachable source.  We do not think that (counsel)
                      has entirely correctly characterised what was said in
                      Singh's case in suggesting that  in  any  case  where
                      evidence was verifiable there was  an  obligation  on
                      the decision maker to seek to verify.  What  is  said
                      at paragraph 104 is rather in terms of a  case  where
                      documents  are  at  the  heart  of  the  request  for
                      protection where it would have  been  easy  to  check
                      their authenticity as in that case  with  the  UNHCR.
                      ... We do not think that what  is  said  in  Singh  v
                      Belgium  in  any  sense  justifies  or  requires  any
                      departure from the guidance in Ahmed's case which  is
                      binding  on  us  and  which  we  consider  to  remain
                      entirely sound."

         22.  We can now return to PJ. Giving the  judgment  of  the  court,
             Fulford LJ held:-

                  "29. In my judgment, there is  no  basis  in  domestic  or
                      European Court of Human Rights jurisprudence for  the
                      general approach that Mr Martin submitted ought to be
                      adopted  whenever  local  lawyers   obtain   relevant
                      documents  from  a  domestic  court,  and  thereafter
                      transmit them  directly  to  lawyers  in  the  United
                      Kingdom.  The involvement of lawyers does not  create
                      the rebuttable presumption that  the  documents  they
                      produce in this situation are reliable.  Instead, the
                      jurisprudence referred to above  does  no  more  than
                      indicate that the circumstances of  particular  cases
                      may   exceptionally   necessitate   an   element   of
                      investigation by the national authorities,  in  order
                      to provide effective protection against  mistreatment
                      under article  3  Convention.   It  is  important  to
                      stress, however, that this step will  frequently  not
                      be   feasible   or   it   may   be   unjustified   or
                      disproportionate.  In Ahmed's case [2002] Imm AR  318
                      the  court  highlighted  the  cost   and   logistical
                      difficulties  that  may  be  involved,  for  instance
                      because of the number of documents submitted by  some
                      asylum  claimants.   The  inquiries   may   put   the
                      applicant  or  his  family  at  risk,  they  may   be
                      impossible to undertake  because  of  the  prevailing
                      local situation or they may place the United  Kingdom
                      authorities  in  the  difficult  position  of  making
                      covert local enquiries without the permission of  the
                      relevant   authorities.   Furthermore,   given    the
                      uncertainties  that   frequently   remain   following
                      attempts to establish the reliability  of  documents,
                      if the  outcome  of  any  enquiry  is  likely  to  be
                      inconclusive this is a highly  relevant  factor.   As
                      the court in Ahmed's case  observed, documents should
                      not be viewed in isolation and the evidence needs  to
                      be considered in its entirety.


                  30.  Therefore, simply  because  a  relevant  document  is
                      potentially capable of being verified does  not  mean
                      that the national authorities have an  obligation  to
                      take this step.  Instead, it may be necessary to make
                      an inquiry in order to verify  the  authenticity  and
                      reliability of a document - depending always  on  the
                      particular facts of the case -  when  it  is  at  the
                      centre of the request  for  protection,  and  when  a
                      simple process of inquiry will  conclusively  resolve
                      its authenticity and reliability: see Singh v Belgium
                      given 2 October 2012, paras 101  -  105.   I  do  not
                      consider that there is  any  material  difference  in
                      approach between the decisions in  Ahmed's  case  and
                      Singh v Belgium, in  that  in  the  latter  case  the
                      Strasbourg  court  simply  addressed   one   of   the
                      exceptional  situations  when  national   authorities
                      should undertake a process of verification.


                  31.  In my view, the consequence of a  decision  that  the
                      national  authorities  are   in   breach   of   their
                      obligations  to  undertake  a   proper   process   of
                      verification is that the Secretary of State is unable
                      thereafter  to  mount  an  argument  challenging  the
                      authenticity of the  relevant  documents  unless  and
                      until the breach is rectified by  a  proper  inquiry.
                      It follows that if a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
                      State is overturned on appeal on this basis, absent a
                      suitable investigation it will not  open  to  her  to
                      suggest that the document or documents are forged  or
                      otherwise are not authentic.


                  32.  Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised  that
                      the courts are not required to order the Secretary of
                      State to investigate particular areas of evidence  or
                      otherwise to direct her inquiries.   Instead,  on  an
                      appeal from a decision of the Secretary of  State  it
                      is for the court  to  decide  whether  there  was  an
                      obligation on her to undertake particular  inquiries,
                      and if the court concludes this requirement  existed,
                      it  will  resolve  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
                      sustainably  discharged  her  obligation:  see  NA  v
                      Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
                      UKUT 205 (IAC).  If court finds  there  was  such  an
                      obligation and that it was not  discharged,  it  must
                      assess the consequences for the case."

         23.  Several matters arising from paragraphs 29 to 32 of PJ need to
             be  emphasised.   First,  the  fact  that  lawyers  have  been
             involved does not mean the documents they produce are for that
             reason reliable.  Secondly, the sort of exercise  required  by
             the ECtHR in Singh v Belgium  will  only  arise  exceptionally
             (treating that word as an indicator of frequency, rather  than
             as a legal test).  Thirdly, Tanveer Ahmed was clearly regarded
             by Fulford LJ as being compatible with Singh v Belgium, as the
             Upper Tribunal had found in MJ.   In  particular,  Fulford  LJ
             stressed the point made in Tanveer Ahmed, that issues of  cost
             and logistical  difficulty,  owing  to  the  sheer  number  of
             documents submitted in  asylum  claims,  will  be  a  relevant
             consideration  in  determining  whether,  in  the   particular
             circumstances, an obligation on the  respondent  arises.   The
             point made in Tanveer  Ahmed  that  documents  should  not  be
             viewed in isolation,  but  considered  in  their  entirety  in
             connection with the rest of the evidence, was also approved.




         24.  As we can see from  paragraph  30,  in  order  to  engage  the
             obligation, the document in question needs to be at the centre
             of the request for protection.  Even then, there should  be  a
             simple process of inquiry that will conclusively resolve  both
             authenticity and reliability.  Given the status  of  the  body
             that had produced the documents  in  Singh  v  Belgium,  there
             could be little doubt that, if authentic, what  the  documents
             said could also be  assumed  to  be  reliable.   But,  as  the
             Tribunal  pointed  out  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  in  other   cases
             involving  foreign  documentation,  the  discovery  that   the
             document emanates from a  genuine  official  source  may  have
             little  or  nothing  to  say  about  the  reliability  of  its
             contents.




         25.  This is relevant to an understanding of paragraph  31  of  PJ,
             where Fulford LJ addressed the consequence of  the  respondent
             not undertaking a proper process of  verification,  where  the
             obligation is found to exist.  Fulford LJ held that, in such a
             scenario, the respondent would be "unable thereafter to  mount
             an argument  challenging  the  authenticity  of  the  relevant
             documents unless and until the breach is rectified by a proper
             enquiry".  It would, in  other  words,  not  be  open  to  the
             respondent "to suggest that  the  document  or  documents  are
             forged or otherwise are not authentic".  It is apparent  that,
             in paragraph 31, Fulford LJ was deliberately  restricting  his
             description  of  the  effects  of  failing  to  discharge  the
             obligation, so as to preclude the respondent from  challenging
             the  authenticity,  as  opposed  to  the  reliability,  of   a
             document.




         26.  Paragraph 32 makes it evident that courts and tribunals cannot
             require the respondent  to  investigate  particular  areas  of
             evidence.  It will be for the  court  or  tribunal  to  decide
             whether  the  obligation  to  undertake  particular  enquiries
             arises, with the consequences for the respondent that  Fulford
             LJ had described.




         27.   The  final  sentence  of  paragraph  32  is   of   particular
             significance.  If a tribunal  concludes  that  the  respondent
             has, exceptionally, become subject to an obligation to verify,
             but has not done so, the consequence for her will be that  she
             is unable to contend that the document is not  authentic.   It
             will, nevertheless, be for the judicial fact-finder to decide,
             in all the circumstances of the case, and by reference to  the
             totality of the evidence, whether the document  is  "reliable"
             as to both its provenance and contents.  If the judicial fact-
             finder is so satisfied, this  may,  of  course,  prove  to  be
             determinative of the claim to international  protection.   But
             such a result will not necessarily follow.  It all depends  on
             the nature of the case being advanced  and  the  fact-finder's
             conclusions on the entirety of the evidence.




         28.  It is instructive to see how  the  court  in  PJ  reached  its
             conclusion to allow the appeal and remit  the  matter  to  the
             Upper Tribunal.  At paragraph 41, Fulford LJ  found  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge had  doubted  the  validity  of  the
             documents disclosed by the lawyers "on a  significantly  false
             basis".  The fact that two independent lawyers had  turned  up
             the same material from the Magistrates' Court  clearly  struck
             Fulford LJ as very significant.  Once it had been  established
             that the documents originated from  a  Sri  Lankan  court,  "a
             sufficient justification was required for the conclusion  that
             the  claimant  does  not   have   a   well-founded   fear   of
             persecution".  It was, furthermore, "difficult  to  understand
             how the claimant  could  have  falsified  a  letter  from  the
             Magistrate  of  the  relevant  court  to  the  Controller   of
             Immigration and  Emigration  ordering  the  claimant's  arrest
             which he then placed in the court record so it could later  be
             retrieved by two separate lawyers".  Fulford LJ held that,  at
             the very least, this evidence required "detailed analysis  and
             explanation".




         29.   At  the  end  of  the  day,  therefore,  the  issue  of   the
             respondent's duty in reality played little or no part  in  the
             court's reasoning in PJ.  Both the First-tier Tribunal and the
             Upper  Tribunal  had,  in  effect,  failed  to  give   legally
             sufficient reasons for concluding that PJ was not at real risk
             on return to Sri Lanka, in the light of all the evidence.




         30.  In AR v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
             CSIH 52, the Inner House was concerned with an appeal from the
             Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  to  dismiss  AR's  appeal
             against the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  had  dismissed  his
             appeal against the respondent's decision that AR  was  not  at
             real risk in Pakistan as a gay man.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
             had before it a copy First Information Report, which  narrated
             that the father of the individual with whom  AR  was  said  to
             have committed an act of sodomy had reported the matter to the
             police.  The Tribunal also had a newspaper article of 31 March
             2003, in which the father was  reported  as  saying  that  his
             son's friend had taken the son from his  house  and  sodomised
             him against his will.  Although it is unclear, it appears that
             a second "official" document before the judge was a record  of
             the police notifying local police stations of the  appellant's
             escape from custody.




         31.  At paragraph 30, the Inner  House  (per  Lord  Malcolm)  noted
             that:-




                   "the evidence consists of the petitioner's account, which
                  in its essential elements is  supported  by  a  number  of
                  documents, two of them of  an  official  nature,  and  all
                  easily verifiable.  To our eyes at least,  they  have  the
                  hallmarks of valid documents, albeit no doubt there is  at
                  least a possibility that they were  fabricated,  although,
                  if they were, why would there be internal  inconsistencies
                  on points of detail?".




         32.  Beginning at paragraph 33, Lord Malcolm has this to say:-




                  "33. The appeal in this court  focussed  on  two  matters,
                      namely (a) the treatment of the documents and (b) the
                      evidence of the supporting witness.  So  far  as  the
                      documents are concerned, we have mentioned  that,  on
                      their face, they appear to be  valid  and  authentic,
                      for example, where applicable, being duly stamped and
                      signed.  They are supportive of the essentials of the
                      petitioner's account of the events which led  him  to
                      leave his family and homeland.  Judge Macleman  ruled
                      that the authorities  were  under  no  obligation  to
                      verify the documents.  Be that as it may, in our view
                      it does not address  the  logically  prior  question,
                      namely, did the First-tier Tribunal have and  explain
                      a sound basis for their rejection?  If the answer  to
                      that question is no - the test set  out  in  PJ  (Sri
                      Lanka) does not arise.




                  34.  The submission is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
                      did not set out any good reasons for  dismissing  the
                      documents  as  unreliable.   We   agree   with   that
                      submission.   We  have  studied  the  terms  of   the
                      decision, but can find  no  proper  support  for  the
                      terms of paragraph 34.  For  example,  what  was  the
                      reason  for  placing  the  FIR  in   the   unreliable
                      category?  While no doubt there is "a high  incidence
                      of false 'official' documents", there  must  also  be
                      some genuine documents.  One cannot  simply  rely  on
                      doubts as to the veracity of the account given by the
                      claimant as a reason for rejecting the documents when
                      on their face, they support his  asylum  claim.   The
                      "holistic" approach endorsed by Judge Macleman  would
                      require the overall assessment to be made  after  all
                      of the evidence has been considered and assessed.  In
                      other words, and by way of example, one might  ask  -
                      do the documents support the claim?  If yes, is there
                      any reason arising from the documents  themselves  to
                      reject their authenticity?   If  no,  how  does  this
                      affect, if it does affect, doubts that have arisen as
                      to the claimant's account?  In  our  view,  if  those
                      doubts are used as a priori reason to  undermine  and
                      reject the documents, there is an obvious  risk  that
                      supportive evidence is being  wrongly  excluded  from
                      the overall assessment.




                  35.  We remind ourselves of the need to examine the  facts
                      with  care  (sometimes  referred   to   as   "anxious
                      scrutiny"),  and  of  the  low  standard   of   proof
                      applicable in cases of this nature.  We are persuaded
                      that  these  factors  have  been  given  insufficient
                      weight and attention in the  more  recent  decisions.
                      We recognise  that  there  may  be  cases  where  the
                      concerns over the veracity of  a  claimant's  account
                      may be so clear-cut that the decision-maker is driven
                      to rejection of supporting documents, even though  on
                      their face they appear  to  be  authentic;  but  even
                      then, given what is at stake, we  would  expect  some
                      consideration to be given to easily available  routes
                      to check authenticity.  There  is  no  question  that
                      these documents are at the centre of  a  request  for
                      international protection.  The decision-maker  should
                      stand back and view all of the evidence in the  round
                      before deciding which evidence to accept and which to
                      reject, and on the proper disposal of the appeal."




         33.  As with PJ, it is necessary to consider this  passage  of  the
             opinion of the Inner House in detail.  An immediately  notable
             feature of AR is that, at paragraph 30, the Inner  House  made
             its own assessment of the "official" documents,  holding  that
             these had "the hallmarks of  valid  documents"  and  that,  at
             paragraph 33 "they appear  to  be  valid  and  authentic,  for
             example, where applicable, being duly stamped and signed".




         34.  It is evident that the Inner House did not find that  the  FIR
             and the other document apparently emanating from the  Pakistan
             police  required  to  be  verified  by  the  respondent.    In
             paragraph 33, Lord Malcolm did not dissent from the finding of
             the Upper Tribunal Judge that  the  respondent  was,  in  this
             case, under no obligation to verify the documents.  The  basis
             upon which the Inner House reached its conclusion was that the
             Upper  Tribunal  had  not  addressed  "the   logically   prior
             question, namely, did the First-tier Tribunal have and explain
             a sound basis for their rejection?"  The  First-tier  Tribunal
             had erred by relying on doubts regarding the veracity  of  the
             account given by the claimant as a reason  for  rejecting  the
             documents when, on their face, they supported his claim.   The
             fact that the Inner House had formed its own  view  about  the
             validity and authenticity of the documents affected the nature
             of the requirement  imposed  on  the  judge  to  give  legally
             adequate reasons for his overall conclusion that the appellant
             was not entitled to international protection.




         35.  At paragraph 35, the Inner House nevertheless recognised  that
             there may be cases where the concerns over the veracity of  an
             account "may be so clear-cut that the decision-maker is driven
             to rejection of supporting documents,  even  though  on  their
             face they appear to be authentic".  Although paragraph 35 goes
             on to say that, even then, one would expect some consideration
             to be given to easily available routes to check  authenticity,
             it is apparent that that the Inner House  was  not  expressing
             any disagreement with the limitations identified by Fulford LJ
             in PJ on the respondent's obligations in this area.




         36.  We have already observed how the Tribunal Tanveer Ahmed was at
             pains to avoid falling into the trap of  assuming  that,  just
             because an official-looking document emanating from abroad may
             have been issued by the authority whose name  appears  on  the
             document, the contents of the document must be reliable.  This
             is of particular relevance in the case of FIRs, the purpose of
             which is to record an accusation made by an  individual  about
             another person or persons. Even if the compiler of the FIR has
             not been suborned, it can readily be seen that  the  fact  the
             accusation has been made is in no sense probative of the  fact
             that the relevant authority believes the accusation, let alone
             of its veracity.




         37.  It is, we consider, possible to  summarise  the  law  on  this
             issue as follows.  The IAT's decision in Tanveer Ahmed remains
             good law.  The overarching question  for  the  judicial  fact-
             finder will  be  whether  the  document  in  question  can  be
             regarded as reliable.  An obligation on the respondent to take
             steps to verify the authenticity of the  document  will  arise
             only exceptionally (in the sense of  rarely).   This  will  be
             where the document is central to  the  claim;  can  easily  be
             authenticated;   and   where   (as   in   Singh   v   Belgium)
             authentication is unlikely to leave any "live" issue as to the
             reliability of its  contents.   It  is  for  the  Tribunal  to
             decide, in all the circumstances  of  the  case,  whether  the
             obligation  arises.   If  it  does,  the   respondent   cannot
             challenge the authenticity of the document in the proceedings;
             but that does  not  necessarily  mean  the  respondent  cannot
             question the reliability of what the document  says.   In  all
             cases, it remains the task  of  the  judicial  fact-finder  to
             assess the document's relevance to the claim in the light  of,
             and by reference to, the rest of the evidence."


 7. Applying the law as there set out to the facts  of  this  case,  it  is
    clear that there is simply nothing in the grounds: this is not  a  case
    where there is any proper ground for suggesting that the  Secretary  of
    State had a duty to verify the summons.  First, it is  not  central  to
    the case.  It is not central to  the  case,  because  on  its  face  it
    demonstrates no relevance to the facts claimed by  the  appellant;  and
    there is no suggestion in it that the appellant is at risk of any  sort
    of ill-treatment if it transpires that the police have no proper reason
    to be interested in him.   Secondly,  the  document  cannot  be  easily
    authenticated.  It is not like the documents in PJ, which purported  to
    emanate from an  international  organisation.   Investigations  at  the
    source of this document could not be  easily  made  without  disclosing
    information about the appellant to the very  authority  from  which  he
    claims a  risk  of  persecution.   The  anecdotal  reference  to  other
    documents in other cases is of no assistance.

 8. Thirdly, even if the document were shown to be authentic, in the  sense
    that it genuinely derive from the  authority  whose  superscription  it
    bears, that would not of itself close any issue as to  the  reliability
    of its content, or, indeed, provide any expansion of the reason why the
    document was issued.

 9. The truth of the matter is that although this document, if genuine  and
    reliable, is not inconsistent with the claim the  appellant  makes,  it
    does not, even on its face, advance that claim at all.   There  was  no
    duty of verification; and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  amply
    entitled to deal with it in the way he did, and did not make any  error
    of law in doing so.

10. For the foregoing reasons this appeal is dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 27 January 2021

