

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02853/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 October 2017                    |On 26 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [F S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He was  born  on  [  ]  1993.   He
    appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant him asylum dated  10
    March 2016.  In a decision promulgated on 12 September 2016, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge (FTTJ) dismissed the appeal because he  found  that
    the appellant was not credible and was not at risk on return.

 2. Leave to appeal was refused on 14 October 2016 by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  He found the grounds amounted to nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings which the FTTJ was entitled to make  on  the
    evidence and for which he gave  sustainable  reasons  for  the  adverse
    credibility findings.

 3. When the grounds were resubmitted, an Upper Tribunal Judge  found  that
    it was arguable the judge's  decision  was  inadequately  reasoned  and
    unduly speculative.  Further, it was  arguable  the  challenge  to  the
    decision went beyond mere disagreement.

Submissions on Error of Law

 4. Mr Gayle claimed the grounds identified  numerous  material  errors  of
    law, some of which  were  perverse.   Most  egregious  was  the  FTTJ's
    failure to reconcile what was described as the  wealth  of  documentary
    evidence, corroborative of the appellant's claim to be  a  blogger  and
    political activist, with the finding that there would be no risk to him
    on return to Iran.  Mr Melvin relied upon the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted that the  FTTJ  made  adequate  findings  of  fact  and  gave
    detailed reasons for the findings as set out at  [28]  -  [39]  of  the
    decision.  The FTTJ was entitled to make such findings which  were  not
    perverse or irrational.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 5. The judge identified correctly that this case "...... absolutely  turns
    on the alleged sur place activities of the appellant in  the  UK",  but
    before he  considered  those  sur  place  activities  he  reviewed  the
    appellant's claim with regard to previous political activities in Iran.



 6. The FTTJ at [29] described the appellant's account of his activities as
    a teenager as "flimsy  and  lacking  in  substance",  but  he  did  not
    adequately engage with the evidence in order to carry out his analysis.



 7. The FTTJ at [29] described the appellant's account as "very vague"  but
    he did not adequately engage with the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and
    the appellant's statement in response to explain his findings.

 8. The FTTJ said at [29] that the appellant's evidence was  that  he  came
    from  a  political  family   who   had   been   engaged   in   previous
    demonstrations.  His parents were government employees  who  had  never
    been previously detained.  The judge speculated that "......at the very
    most, his parents probably expressed a discontent rather than  actually
    exposing themselves to all the risks to them and their son,  in  direct
    confrontation  with  the  state."   In  arriving  at  that  speculative
    conclusion, the FTTJ did not explain  which  material  he  was  relying
    upon.

 9. It was the appellant's claim that he started to conduct a blog in April
    2015.  It was made anonymously until October  2015,  shortly  after  he
    submitted his asylum application.

10. The FTTJ said at [30], that most of  the  material  blogged  was  of  a
    generic nature provided by other sources, however, he failed to explain
    why it was that he considered such generic material would not place the
    appellant at risk. Nor did the FTTJ in making his findings engage  with
    the material set out in detail in the appellant's bundle in particular,
    blog and Twitter posts at P7 - P32, and P41 - P87.

11. As regards the FTTJ's  adverse  credibility  findings  with  regard  to
    events in Iran, he found the appellant's claim  "remarkable",  "utterly
    unbelievable" and  "hard  to  imagine".  The  FTTJ  clearly  found  the
    appellant's claim wholly without merit. The FTTJ found incredible  that
    the appellant should return to Iran  in  July  2015  to  orchestrate  a
    demonstration on 10 October 2015 having  previously  returned  to  this
    country on 22 September 2015.  The FTTJ  said  there  was  no  evidence
    which had been provided as to what  happened  at  the  protest  but  he
    overlooked that there was reference to the detention  of  civil  rights
    activists at P91 of the appellant's bundle which he did not  take  into
    account.

12. The FTT Judge appears to have misunderstood the sequence of  events  at
    [34] when he said that if the appellant had been under  observation  or
    was in any way implicated, he would have been identified in  July  2015
    on return and his home address  raided  prior  to  October  2015.   The
    appellant's claim was based upon being identified only in October  2015
    on the arrest of his friends, the authorities attending at his home and
    his identity being revealed which was also when he  revealed  his  true
    identity on-line.  As of July 2015, it was the appellant's  claim  that
    he was unknown to the authorities.

13. The FTTJ referred to Danian [1999] EWCA  Civ  3000  at  [26]-[27].  The
    issue (although the FTTJ did not say so) was whether the appellant  was
    at risk on return, notwithstanding what the judge considered  were  his
    opportunistic, bad faith activities here to bolster his claim. The FTTJ
    said  that  the  conclusions  in  Danian  "...was  that  a  person  who
    deliberately engages in activities to draw attention  to  himself  does
    not necessarily exclude himself from protection, but that the essential
    test as had to be considered is whether or not the overall claim lacked
    credibility." Brooke LJ in Danian, put it slightly differently:

         "For all these reasons I do not accept  the  Tribunal's  conclusion
         that a refugee sur place who has acted in bad faith  falls  outwith
         the Geneva Convention and can  be  deported  to  his  home  country
         notwithstanding that he has a  genuine  and  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason and there is a real  risk  that
         such persecution may  take  place.   Although  his  credibility  is
         likely to be low and his claim must be rigorously  scrutinised,  he
         is still entitled to the protection of  the  Convention,  and  this
         country  is  not  entitled  to  disregard  the  provisions  of  the
         Convention by which it is bound, if it should turn out that he does
         indeed qualify for protection against refoulement at the  time  his
         application is considered."

14. Whilst the FTTJ was of the view that the case turned on the appellant's
    alleged sur place activities  (see  [5]  above),  he  first  considered
    events in Iran. When the FTTJ found such events in Iran incredible,  he
    next turned to the blogging activities which at [38] he referred to  as
    an embellishment to bolster the appellant's claim.  The FTTJ  crucially
    failed to consider that as per Danian, there was a possibility that the
    appellant might be at risk on  return  as  a  result  of  his  blogging
    activities even if the events in Iran were not credible.

15. Although the FTTJ was referred to BA (Demonstrations in Britain -  risk
    on return) Iran CG [2011] where he said it was  observed  that  careful
    consideration had to be given to  the  level  of  involvement  and  the
    likelihood  of  the  individual  coming  to  the   attention   of   the
    authorities, the FTTJ carried out no such  analysis.   As  regards  the
    appellant's blogging, AB and  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) was of significance, but  whereas
    this case was included within the appellant's bundle and drawn  to  his
    attention, the FTTJ failed to include  it  as  part  of  his  analysis.
    Whilst it is not CG, the summary is worth recording here:

         "466.    It is very  difficult  to  establish  any  kind  of  clear
             picture about the risks consequent on blogging  activities  in
             Iran.  Very few people seem to  be  returned  unwillingly  and
             this makes it very difficult to predict  with  any  degree  of
             confidence what fate, if any, awaits them.  Some monitoring of
             activities outside Iran is possible and it occurs.  It is  not
             possible to determine what circumstances, if any,  enhance  or
             dilute the risk although a high  degree  of  activity  is  not
             necessary to attract persecution.

         467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom for  a  prolonged
             period does not lead to persecution.  However it may  lead  to
             scrutiny and there is clear  evidence  that  some  people  are
             asked about their internet activity and particularly for their
             Facebook password.  The act of  returning  someone  creates  a
             'pinch point' so that a person is brought into direct  contact
             with the authorities in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and
             inclination to interrogate them.  We think it likely that they
             will be asked about their internet activity and likely if they
             have any internet activity for that to be exposed and if it is
             less than flattering of the government to lead to at the  very
             least a real risk of persecution.

         468. Social and other internet based media is used  widely  through
             Iran  by  a  very  high  percentage  of  the  population   and
             activities such as blogging may be perceived as criticisms  of
             the state which is very aware of the power  of  the  internet.
             The Iranian authorities in their various guises both  regulate
             and police the internet,  closing  down  or  marking  internet
             sites although this does not appear to be linked  directly  to
             persecution.

         469. The capability to monitor outside Iran is not  very  different
             from the capability  to  monitor  inside  Iran.   The  Iranian
             authorities clearly have the capacity to  restrict  access  to
             social internet based media.  Overall it is very difficult  to
             make any sensible findings  about  anything  that  converts  a
             technical possibility of something  being  discovered  into  a
             real risk of it being discovered.

         470. The main concern is the pinch point of return.  A  person  who
             was returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of  time
             on an ordinary  passport  having  left  Iran  illegally  would
             almost certainly not attract any particular attention  at  all
             and for the small number of people who would be  returning  on
             an ordinary passport having left lawfully we do not think that
             there would be any risk to them at all.

             However, as  might  more  frequently  be  the  case,  where  a
             person's  leave  to  remain  had  lapsed  and  who  might   be
             travelling on a special  passport,  there  would  be  enhanced
             interest.  The more active they had been the more  likely  the
             authority's interest could lead to persecution.

             The mere fact that a person, if extremely discrete, blogged in
             the United Kingdom, would not mean they would necessarily come
             to the attention of the  authorities  in  Iran.   However,  if
             there was a  lapse  of  discretion  they  could  face  hostile
             interrogation on return which might expose them to risk.   The
             more active a person had been on the internet the greater  the
             risk.  It is not relevant if a person had used the internet in
             an opportunistic way.  The authorities are not concerned  with
             a person's motivation.  However in cases in  which  they  have
             taken an interest claiming asylum is viewed negatively.   This
             may not of itself be sufficient to lead to persecution but  it
             may enhance the risk."

16. As I understand it, once the appellant's identity was attached  to  the
    blog, all previous anonymised blogs would also be revealed.   What  was
    necessary on the part of the FTTJ  was  an  analysis  of  the  blogging
    history both anonymised and under  the  appellant's  own  name.  It  is
    irrelevant that the FTTJ found that most  of  the  material  was  of  a
    generic nature provided by other sources.  What was required  from  the
    FTTJ and was overlooked, was an analysis of the blogging  by  reference
    to AB, its nature and the implications for the appellant at any  "pinch
    point" on return.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law which I  have
identified above.  The appeal will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal  de
novo by a judge other than the FTTJ.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

