
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02033/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 REKAWT [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr D Jones instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon who in a determination promulgated  on
        17 September 2019 allowed Mr [O]'s appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and
        dismissed the appeal on humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.



Background


     2. Mr [O] is a citizen of Iraq born on  19  January  1989.  He  is  of
        Kurdish ethnicity and a Sunni Muslim.
     3. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny. The Judge correctly noted there was an earlier
        determination and  that  applying  the  Devaseelan  principles  the
        earlier decision formed  the  starting  point  for  the  subsequent
        assessment.  Submissions  made  by  the  respective  advocates  are
        recorded. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [33].  Mr  [O]'s
        identity, nationality and date of birth were not in dispute and the
        Judge records that the Presenting Officer confirmed it was accepted
        that Mr [O] originated from Kirkuk.
     4.  The  Judge  clearly  considered  the  current  applicable  country
        guidance case law relating to Iraq. At [41] the Judge  specifically
        refers to AAH [2018] UKUT 212 and concludes that having  considered
        all the evidence he did not find that Mr [O] will be able to access
        a replacement CSID card in a reasonable time.
     5. The Judge notes at [47] that Kirkuk remains a  contested  area  and
        that Mr [O] will be at risk there and that in the absence of a CSID
        card and without a reasonable prospect of obtaining  one  within  a
        reasonable time Mr [O] will not be able to travel to Kirkuk.
     6. The Judge clearly considered return to Baghdad  and  relocation  to
        the KRI before concluding that in light of Mr [O]'s profile he  had
        demonstrated a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  sufficient  to
        warrant his asylum appeal being allowed.
     7. The Judge found Mr [O] was not entitled to a grant of  Humanitarian
        Protection as the appeal was allowed on asylum grounds  but  it  is
        clear that if the appeal had been refused  on  asylum  grounds  the
        Judge would, for the reasons given,  have  allowed  the  appeal  on
        Humanitarian Protection grounds.
     8. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  asserting  the
        Judge failed to provide a satisfactory explanation for why  matters
        had materially changed to permit  the  Judge  to  depart  from  the
        decision  of  the  earlier  tribunal  which  dismissed   Mr   [O]'s
        protection claim. The grounds assert insufficient reasons have been
        given for findings concerning Mr [O]'s overall credibility and that
        the Judge erred in allowing the asylum appeal  in  the  absence  of
        such findings.  The  author  the  grounds  asserts  with  no  fresh
        findings on Mr [O]'s credibility  the  Judge's  later  findings  in
        relation to his claim not to possess a CSID and to have lost  touch
        with his family were thrown  into  question  rendering  the  entire
        decision unsafe.



Error of law


     9. The Judge noted at [12] that Mr [O] was  deported  to  Iraq  on  13
        August 2017 before an Administrative Court granted his  application
        for permission to bring a judicial  review  claim  on  5  September
        2017. The Administrative Court ordered the Secretary  of  State  to
        secure Mr [O]'s return to the United Kingdom which was affected  on
        7 October 2017 as a result of which Mr [O] was issued  a  grant  of
        entry clearance as a visitor outside the  Immigration  Rules  valid
        until 12 October 2017.
    10. At [26] the Judge writes:

             "26.     Prior to the commencement  of  the  evidence  at  the
                  hearing I established with the Appellant's  Representative
                  the basis upon which the Appellant's claim was being made.
                  Mr Jones on behalf of the  Appellant  confirmed  that  the
                  basis of the Appellants claim was that the  Appellant  was
                  at risk due to his particular  personal  profile  and  the
                  situation in Iraq."

    11. As noted by Mr Jones in his Rule 24 Response, the reference by  the
        Judge to Mr [O]'s 'particular profile 'is language that  replicates
        that used by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter in  which
        the author of the letter observes that the claim is  based  upon  a
        fear of mistreatment because of his particular profile. It  is  not
        made out the Judge was not aware of the  evidence  regarding  those
        aspects that constitute Mr [O]'s profile which are said to found  a
        protection claim and create a real risk on  return;  which  include
        his ethnicity is a Kurd, his faith, being undocumented, having been
        outside Iraq for 8  years  with  no  links  by  way  of  family  or
        community in Baghdad, and the prevailing country conditions  within
        Iraq and Baghdad.
    12. There is merit in Mr Jones' submission that the Secretary of  State
        took no issue with the fact Mr [O]  presented  those  aspects  that
        constitute his personal characteristics or their capacity to  found
        a Convention ground in the refusal letter or before the Judge.  The
        reason for the same is that there is merit in the  submission  that
        independently or in combination those issues can found a Convention
        reason based on either race, religion or particular social group.
    13. Whilst the Secretary of State disagrees with the  Judge's  findings
        and may consider the same generous, this is a decision in which the
        Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in support  of  the
        findings made by reference to both the evidence presented,  country
        guidance case law, and relevant facts.
    14. Mr McVeety was asked how he intended to argue that the decision was
        outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the
        evidence. Despite his best efforts he failed to make out  the  case
        in a manner sufficient to establish legal  error  material  to  the
        decision.
    15. As noted above even if the Refugee Convention claim was  set  aside
        no material error would have been identified on the  basis  on  the
        findings made by the Judge Mr [O] would be entitled to  succeed  on
        Humanitarian Protection grounds in any event.
    16. The Judge was entitled to  find  as  he  did  in  relation  to  the
        credibility aspects especially in light of the fact that it was not
        found that Mr [O] was wholly incredible in the earlier decision,  a
        fact acknowledged by the  Judge  at  [37]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge.
    17. It is not made out the Judge has erred in law in a manner  material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the
        Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.
    18. Whilst it is known the forthcoming country guidance  case  relating
        to Iraq is imminent that is not relevant to assessing  whether  the
        Judge erred in law on the  basis  of  the  evidence  and  case  law
        applicable at the date of the handing down of the decision. It will
        be a matter for the Secretary of  State  to  consider  whether  the
        forthcoming country guidance case makes any difference to Mr  [O]'s
        position sufficient to warrant a fresh decision.


Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 December 2019

