
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02890/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 4th May 2021                  |On the 17th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    M P G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, Counsel, instructed by Averroes
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal.  His date of birth  is  8  October
    1996.

 2. A panel comprising Mrs Justice Moulder sitting  as  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge and Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Eldridge) to dismiss the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State refusing  his  claim  on
    protection grounds and humanitarian protection grounds.    By the  time
    of  his  appeal  the  Appellant  no  longer  relied  upon  the  Refugee
    Convention.    The  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the UK at the  age  of  18.   He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, since when he has continued  to  live  with
    his parents and older disabled sister, RG. Since 2015  the  Appellant's
    partner, PB, a British citizen, has resided with the family.

 4. The record of the Appellant's criminality is not entirely consistent in
    the documents before me.  A  PNC  printout  discloses  the  Appellant's
    criminality. The first offence was committed on 1 December 2015 and the
    last offence on 20 September 2018.  There is one offence of burglary of
    a non-dwelling. There are 11 convictions for theft  (shoplifting),  one
    conviction for  attempted  theft  (shoplifting),  two  convictions  for
    failing to comply with the requirements of a community  order  and  one
    conviction  for  committing  a  further  offence  during  a   suspended
    sentence.  The Appellant was cautioned  for  possession  of  heroin  in
    2017.

 5. On 29 January 2019 (the date of the last conviction) he  was  convicted
    at Basingstoke Magistrates' Court of an offence of theft  to  which  he
    pleaded guilty.  He was committed  to  prison  for  four  weeks  and  a
    suspended sentence order was activated giving him an overall length  of
    sentence of twenty  weeks'  imprisonment.   Following  the  Appellant's
    criminal activity, on 12 February 2018, the Secretary of State  decided
    to deport him. A deportation order was made pursuant to Section 5(1) of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  A have not seen a copy of  that  order.  The
    Respondent states that it was sent to the Appellant on 7 February 2019.
     There is no issue taken by the Appellant that a deportation order  was
    made and served on the Appellant.

The error of law decision

 6. The error of law decision reads as follows.

         "35. We are  satisfied  that  the  FtTJ  fell  into  error  in  his
             assessment of  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  a
             'persistent offender'.  As the summary  of  the  relevant  law
             sets out, the phrase set out is 'persistent offender' are  not
             'repeat  offender'  or  'serial  offender'  and   the   phrase
             'persistent  offender'  requires  some  continuation  of   the
             behaviour concerned, although it need  not  be  continuous  or
             even regular.

         36.  At [1]  in  Chege  the  Tribunal  stated  that  there  may  be
             circumstances in which it might be inappropriate  to  describe
             someone  with  a  past  history  of  criminality  as  being  a
             'persistent offender' even if  there  was  a  time  when  that
             description would have been an accurate one.

         37.  Furthermore, the Tribunal rejected the  Secretary  of  State's
             submission that a 'persistent offender' is a status  that  can
             never be lost once it is acquired although it  is  correct  to
             observe  that  the  Tribunal  at  [53]  did  accept  that   an
             individual may be regarded as  a  'persistent  offender'  even
             though he may not have offended for some time.

         38.  Whilst Mr Melvin has relied upon the factual circumstances  of
             Chege, we do not consider that those assist us.  In Chege  the
             Appellant had been convicted of a series of  offences  in  the
             period 1997 to 2013.  The offences  include  a  driving  while
             disqualified, handling stolen goods, failing to  surrender  to
             bail, possession of class A drugs, assault, and  public  order
             offences.  It was not argued on his behalf that the  Secretary
             of State had not been entitled  to  reach  the  decision  that
             Chege was a persistent offender at the time at which  she  had
             taken her decision.  However, it was submitted that  since  he
             had  committed  no  further  offences   since   release   from
             immigration detention in June 2013,  he  could  no  longer  be
             regarded as such an offender at the time of the  FTT  decision
             in his case in July 2015.  On  the  facts  of  the  case,  the
             appeal was dismissed.  Chege, it was held, was properly to  be
             regarded as a persistent offender.

         39.  Plainly each case depends on its own individual facts and  the
             overall picture and  pattern  of  offending  over  the  entire
             offending history to date.

         40.  We consider that the FtTJ did not apply the approach  set  out
             in Chege to the particular factual matrix of  this  Appellant.
             Whilst the FtTJ set  out  the  Appellant's  criminal  history,
             (although we are not satisfied that it was completely accurate
             as the Appellant had  not  been  convicted  of  possession  of
             heroin but had received a caution), the FtTJ fell  into  error
             by determining that the Appellant was  a  persistent  offender
             between December 2015 and January 2018 and 'this means that he
             fulfilled the criterion set  out  in  paragraph  A398(c)'  (at
             [28]).  In our judgment the FtTJ erred in law by  focusing  on
             the  position  as  it  stood  in  January  2018  and  not   by
             considering the Appellant's position as it  stood  as  at  the
             date of the hearing and that a 'persistent offender' is not  a
             permanent status.

         41.  The FtTJ when addressing this was  required  to  consider  the
             overall picture and pattern of the Appellant's offending as at
             the date  of  the  hearing.   The  evidence  before  the  FtTJ
             included  the  medical  reports  which  demonstrated  that  in
             January 2018  (we  think  whilst  on  remand)  that  his  drug
             addiction was documented (at [36 AB]).  At [40  AB]  his  drug
             use is reported as heroin and that he had arrived  in  custody
             as an addict.  It is unclear from the chronology that we  have
             been provided with by the parties,  but  it  appears  that  by
             April 2018 he had  served  his  short  custodial  sentence  of
             twenty weeks and was  then  detained  on  immigration  grounds
             until his release on bail in February 2019.

         42.  In April 2018, it is recorded that he had completed his  detox
             treatment (see [54 AB]).

         43.  There was also evidence of  the  Appellant  having  undertaken
             courses whilst  in  custody,  including  attending  the  SMART
             recovery on 17 and 20 April 2018 and in May  2018.   Following
             this he underwent drug testing on 13 June and 15  July,  both
             tests were negative for drugs.

         44.  The Appellant's evidence before the FtTJ was that his criminal
             offending which consisted of shoplifting was as  a  result  of
             his drug dependency.  We note  that  the  Respondent  did  not
             provide any details of the nature of the shoplifting including
             the items stolen or their value.  Beyond the  Appellant's  PNC
             there was no evidence adduced by the Respondent concerning the
             convictions nor any sentencing remarks.

         45.  We are satisfied that there is no reference to  that  evidence
             when considering the Appellant's  overall  circumstances  when
             reaching a conclusion as  to  whether  he  was  a  'persistent
             offender'.  Whilst Mr Melvin submits that the FtTJ at [27] did
             not take account of the fact that he had not committed further
             offences, this was based on the  FtTJ's  erroneous  assessment
             that it was because he had been in custody for fifteen months.
              However, the Appellant had been released in February 2019 and
             therefore at the date of  the  hearing  he  had  not  been  in
             custody for fifteen months  but  had  been  in  the  community
             without committing any offences since his release.  Whilst  we
             consider that this was a short period of five months, the FtTJ
             was required to consider as part of the  overall  picture  the
             Appellant's circumstances which included  the  nature  of  his
             offending, which was shoplifting, and that it was all  related
             to his addiction to drugs but also  that  there  was  evidence
             that demonstrated that he had successfully addressed the cause
             of his offending, not only the negative  drug  tests  but  the
             progress  made  from  his  initial  entry  into  custody,  his
             successful detoxification, his attendance at the SMART courses
             which refer to his 'positive engagement' in  addition  to  the
             negative drug tests.  There  was  also  no  reference  to  the
             OASys's Report which referred to the low risk of reoffending.

         46.  As the FtTJ focused his assessment on the position as  it  was
             in February 2018 without  assessing  the  Appellant's  overall
             circumstances as set out above and not assessing the Appellant
             as at the date of the hearing, we are satisfied that the  FtTJ
             fell into error and that had he not done  so,  that  this  was
             material to the decision reached.

         ...

         51.  We are satisfied that the FtTJ fell into error when making  an
             assessment as to the nature of the  Appellant's  family  life.
             The FtTJ observed at [31] that the  decision  letter  did  not
             address the issues of family life and that  the  case  of  the
             Appellant had been  advanced  on  'exceptional  circumstances'
             (see [16]).

         52.  At [21] the FtTJ referred to the law he considered  applicable
             to the Appellant  on  the  basis  that  he  was  a  persistent
             offender and that if he could not meet paragraphs 399 or  399A
             he   was   required   to    demonstrate    'very    compelling
             circumstances'.

         53.  The wide ranging evaluative  exercise  required  by  s.117C(6)
             necessarily includes an application  of  the  public  interest
             considerations  in  s.117B  and  a  balancing  of  the  public
             interest, including the seriousness of the offending (see  the
             clarification provided by  Lane  L  in  MS  (s.117C(6):  "very
             compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122.

         54.  That exercise also clearly  includes  an  application  of  the
             principles in the Strasbourg authorities.   As  NA  (Pakistan)
             holds,  the  s.117C(6)  exercise   is   required   to   ensure
             compatibility with the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the
             ECHR.  In addition, the judgment in NA  (Pakistan),  given  by
             Jackson LJ, reads:

                  '29. ... the phrase used in Section 117C(6), in para.  398
                      of the 2014 ... does not mean that a foreign criminal
                      facing deportation  is  altogether  disentitled  from
                      seeking to rely on matters falling within  the  scope
                      of the circumstances described in exceptions 1 and  2
                      when  seeking  to  contend  that   there   are   very
                      compelling  circumstances,  over  and   above   those
                      described in exceptions  1  and  2  ...  [A]  foreign
                      criminal is entitled to rely upon such  matters,  but
                      he would need to be able to point to features of  his
                      case of a kind mentioned in exceptions 1 and  2  (and
                      in paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 Rules), or features
                      falling outside the circumstances described in  those
                      exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his claim
                      based on Article 8 especially strong.

                  30.  In the circumstances of a serious offender who  could
                      point to circumstances in his own case which could be
                      said to correspond to the circumstances described  in
                      exceptions 1 and 2, but  where  he  could  only  just
                      succeed in such an argument, it would not be possible
                      to  describe  his   situation   as   involving   very
                      compelling  circumstances,  over  and   above   those
                      described in exceptions 1 and 2.  One might  describe
                      that  as  a  bare  case  of  the  kind  described  in
                      exceptions 1 or 2.  On the other hand,  if  he  could
                      point to factors identified in  the  descriptions  of
                      exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially  compelling  kind
                      in support of an Article 8 claim, going  well  beyond
                      what would be necessary to make out a  bare  case  of
                      the kind described in exceptions 1 and 2, they  could
                      in    principle    constitute    "very     compelling
                      circumstances, over  and  above  those  described  in
                      exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by  themselves  or
                      in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to  the
                      application of Article 8'.

         55.  On the case advanced before the FtTJ the Appellant relied upon
             the family life with his sister and  this  was  not  a  matter
             falling within either exception.

         56.  The FtTJ's assessment of the strength of family life  and  the
             consequences of the Appellant's deportation at paragraphs [36-
             38] in our view failed to address the evidence set out in  the
             ISW report relating to the vulnerability  of  the  Appellant's
             sister and her consequential care needs.

         57.  In his assessment the FtTJ accepted that there was family life
             between the Appellant, his parents but importantly between the
             Appellant and his sister.   There  was  no  dispute  from  the
             evidence that the Appellant's sister was  a  vulnerable  young
             woman with considerable and significant care needs and  relied
             upon the Appellant and his partner to meet them.   Whilst  she
             was an adult she had a mental capacity of a young  child  (the
             FtTJ made reference to her IQ being formally  assessed  at  42
             and that she had been assessed as functioning at aged 5  to  6
             years);  the  ISW  report  made  reference  to  her   learning
             difficulties.   In  addition,  she  was  awaiting   a   kidney
             transplant and was undertaking dialysis three times per  week.



         58.  The ISW report, which was unchallenged before  the  FtTJ,  was
             that her care needs were such that she had to attend  hospital
             three times a week and that  she  had  communication  problems
             which were met by the Appellant and  his  partner.   Once  per
             month she had an overnight stay in hospital for  the  purposes
             of dialysis which the Appellant assisted with  and  whilst  at
             home she was  required  to  be  cared  for  overnight  due  to
             problems with her breathing.  This had led to her admission to
             hospital on an emergency basis.  The  Appellant's  mother  and
             father were unable to meet her care needs  due  to  their  own
             circumstances and disabilities and their lack  of  ability  in
             communicating with medical professionals.  The  ISW  concluded
             that his sister was completely dependent  upon  the  Appellant
             and his partner who always lived at the family home  and  that
             the Appellant's sister herself did not have the insight as  to
             the  many  risks  present  if  she  did  not  have  assistance
             throughout the day and night (at [76 AB]).

         59.  The ISW concluded that in the light  of  her  care  needs  she
             required assistance throughout  the  day  or  night  and  that
             because of the cultural difficulties alongside her care  needs
             that it was not realistic that a  package  of  care  could  be
             commissioned to meet her needs (at [77 AB]).  At [78  AB]  the
             ISW concluded that the Appellant's removal or deportation  and
             his partner no longer living with  them  would  mean  that  it
             would be unlikely that her needs  could  be  met  without  her
             moving into a residential care home.

         60.  Whilst the FtTJ recognised that the  Appellant  had  played  a
             part in meeting her care needs, we are satisfied that  in  his
             assessment at paragraphs [37-38] he failed to take account  of
             the unchallenged evidence that if the Appellant  was  deported
             or removed from the United Kingdom it would be  unlikely  that
             her needs could be met without  her  moving  into  residential
             care home.  We do not accept the submission made by Mr  Melvin
             that during the period when the Appellant was in  custody  his
             sister's care needs were appropriately met and  therefore  his
             removal would not impact  on  the  Appellant's  sister.   That
             submission fails to take into account the evidence before  the
             FtTJ that in the absence of the Appellant, his  sister's  care
             needs were met by the Appellant's partner who lived  with  the
             family and that if the Appellant was deported or removed  that
             his partner would no longer be at the family home.

         61.  Whilst the FtTJ did make reference to  the  prospect  of  some
             type of state assistance at [38] that part  of  the  reasoning
             failed to address the evidence in the ISW report that in  view
             of her care needs (which  required  overnight  and  day  care)
             alongside the cultural difficulties identified,  that  it  was
             unlikely that a package of support would be able to  meet  the
             Appellant's sister's needs.

         62.  We are  satisfied  that  the  FtTJ  fell  into  error  in  his
             assessment of the nature and strength of family  life  between
             the Appellant and his sister who was a vulnerable person  with
             considerable care needs and  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  take
             account of material evidence relevant  to  the  assessment  of
             whether it would constitute 'very compelling circumstances'.

         63.  Mr Nathan sought to  amend  his  grounds  at  the  hearing  by
             relying on a new ground based on a  challenge  to  the  FtTJ's
             finding that it would not be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's
             partner  to  travel  and  live  in  Nepal.   In  view  of  our
             assessment of grounds 1 and 2 and that the FtTJ erred  in  law
             it is not necessary to reach a decision on that ground  as  we
             have reached the conclusion that the FtTJ  erred  in  law  and
             that the decision should be set aside."

 7. At  the  hearing  before  the  panel  the  representatives  made  brief
    submissions.   The panel identified that in order to  consider  whether
    the Appellant is a persistent offender, it was  necessary  to  consider
    the circumstances at the date of the hearing and they did not have  up-
    to-date evidence.  The panel also expressed  at  [65]  that  there  was
    other information that they required, which was lacking from the papers
    before them, namely information regarding the nature  of  the  offences
    beyond the references to shoplifting.

 8. The panel stated that the FtTJ referred to a deportation order made  in
    February 2019 and there was also reference to a decision of 7  February
    2019 annexed to a bundle marked "W".  The panel stated that it did  not
    appear that the decision was before the FtTJ.  It was  unclear  to  the
    panel whether the decision that they had and which is exhibited as  "W"
    is the decision of 7 February 2019.

 9. The error of law decision was promulgated on 6 March 2020  following  a
    hearing at Field House on 21 January 2020.  There have been a series of
    directions issued since then (on 6 March 2020, 17 April 2020 and 27 May
    2020) reflecting the information that  the  panel  considered  lacking.
    There have  been  responses  to  these  directions  from  the  parties,
    including a response from the Appellant dated 28 April 2020. In respect
    of  any  lack  of  understanding  about  the  nature  of  offences  the
    Appellant's representative submits that:-

         "It has always been stated without demur from the Respondent or the
         FTT Judge that the Appellant's offending was  directly  related  to
         the  need  to  fund  his  then  drug  addiction.   The  Appellant's
         representatives struggle to see  what  further  evidence  they  can
         adduce  in  this  respect   beyond   the   Appellant's   previously
         unchallenged witness statement".

10. It is stated that the Appellant will adduce a further witness statement
    which they envisage will confirm the unchallenged evidence  before  the
    FTT remains the same  and  which  was  summarised  in  the  Appellant's
    skeleton argument for the error of law hearing as follows:-

         "The Appellant is a Nepalese national who arrived in the UK aged 14
         and was granted ILR.  Now 23, since being in the UK  has  continued
         to live with his  parents,  elder  disabled  sister  [R],  and  his
         partner, [PB] a Thai national.  In his  late  teens  the  Appellant
         developed an addiction to heroin which took over his life.  He  was
         convicted  of  a  number  of  offences  over  a  two  year  period,
         culminating in imprisonment for twenty weeks in January 2019.  Even
         prior to his conviction,  while  on  remand,  the  Appellant  began
         drying out from his addiction, a successful process  documented  in
         his prison medical records and confirmed following his release from
         immigration detention in 2019 by two clean drug tests  obtained  by
         his solicitors prior to the hearing.

         The Appellant, his father and partner all gave oral evidence before
         the FTTJ.  Further documentary evidence, in  particular  an  expert
         report of an independent social worker,  Mr  Crisp,  explained  the
         physical difficulties faced by  the  Appellant's  mother,  and  the
         mental and physical difficulties  faced  by  his  sister  [R],  who
         though aged 31 is said to have the mental development of a  6  year
         old while also requiring kidney dialysis, three times a  week.   Mr
         Crisp documented that in the Appellant's absence (and his partner's
         if he were to be removed from the family) and  given  the  parents'
         physical and linguistic difficulties,

             'It is ... unlikely that her needs could be met without moving
             into a residential care home.  Having a  care  home  placement
             forced upon her would be unduly harsh upon her and the family,
             where caring for family members at home is  central  to  their
             cultural values.  It would also fall short  of  the  wellbeing
             and personal centred principles that run through adult  social
             care and the Care Act 2014'.

         Mr Crisp further observed that the  Appellant's  mother's  physical
         ailments likely also warranted eligibility under the Care Act 2014,
         but that the family had not availed themselves of such care".

11. The Appellant's case is that his situation remains the same and he  has
    continued to abstain from drug taking.

12. There is correspondence from the Secretary of  State  of  22  May  2020
    claiming that the disclosure required in  response  to  the  directions
    creates  a "fairly considerable burden" and that the Presenting Officer
    Mr Melvin was content for the  panel  to  have  determined  the  appeal
    without any further oral evidence at the error of law hearing.

13. There is on the file a letter from Chris Avery (Presenting Officer from
    the  Special  Appeals  Team,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    responding to the directions which were sent on 27  May.   The  salient
    part of the correspondence reads as follows :-

         "The issues of whether the Appellant is a persistent  offender  and
         Article 8 will require careful analysis of the evidence at the time
         of the resumed hearing.  The original First-tier hearing took place
         over ten months ago and the evidence will now be  considerably  out
         of date.  The view  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  it  is
         therefore unavoidable that further evidence will  be  required,  at
         the very least to update the evidence that  was  previously  before
         the First-tier Tribunal.   That  will  include  evidence  from  the
         Appellant on, for example, his  current  relationship  with  drugs,
         which seems to have been the driver behind his criminality.  It  is
         anticipated that the Secretary of State will wish to  cross-examine
         the Appellant on this, his current circumstances  and  the  current
         situation with regards to his sister and wider family."

The Resumed Hearing

14. The matter came before me for a resumed hearing on 4 May  2020.   There
    was still no copy of the signed deportation order which was the subject
    of a direction made by UTJ  Reeds.  It  was  not  produced  before  me.
    However, the failure to produce this has never been an issue raised  by
    the Appellant at any time. It can  reasonably  be  inferred  that  this
    decision was made and served on the Appellant.

15. There has been no further evidence  relied  on  by  the  Respondent  in
    accordance with the directions concerning the Appellant's  criminality.
    However, I accept that  there  will  not  be  any  sentencing  comments
    because the offences were dealt with in the Magistrates' Court, all but
    one being summary only offences. I will consider the sentences given as
    indicating the seriousness of the crimes committed. One of the offences
    is a theft/shoplifting from Tesco Supermarket.

16. There was no schedule of agreed facts. From the  documents  served,  it
    seems that the Respondent's position is that they want to cross-examine
    the witnesses concerning whether the situation has  changed  since  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Isherwood relied on the most
    recent written submissions prepared by Mr  Avery.   However,  she  also
    said that the Appellant and witnesses are not  credible  and  that  the
    expert evidence should not be relied on.   She indicated at  the  start
    of the hearing that the evidence of the ISW was challenged.  However, I
    brought to her attention the error of law decision. There had  been  no
    challenge to this evidence to date.  This had not been  raised  in  any
    document prepared by the Secretary of State in respect of  the  resumed
    hearing. There was nothing in the written submissions relied on by  the
    Secretary of State which would  seek  to  challenge  that  evidence  or
    undermine the positive findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Mr Nathan submitted that it was not open to the Secretary of  State  to
    raise this as an issue so late in the day.  I agreed with Mr Nathan.  A
    proper reading of the error of law decision did not envisage  that  the
    positive findings in respect of the Appellant ( namely that his parents
    and his sister receive a great deal of  assistance  from  him  and  his
    partner and that there would be no doubt  that  if  the  Appellant  was
    deported his partner would not stay, therefore sharing responsibilities
    would fall to the state) should not be preserved.  I indicated that the
    ISW's evidence reflected the position at the date of the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The thrust of the evidence from the  Appellant
    and witnesses is that the position has remained the same.  I  indicated
    that it was  open  to  Ms  Isherwood  to  cross-examine  the  Appellant
    concerning the present situation.

18. The salient parts of  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal have been set out by the panel in the error  of  law  decision
    and there is no necessity for me to set them out again.  I  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant, his partner and  the  Appellant's  father.
    The Appellant had prepared a more recent witness statement  the  thrust
    of which was that the position had remained the same as it  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

19. All the witnesses were cross-examined by Ms Isherwood.   The  Appellant
    stated that he had not obtained an up-to-date drugs test because he  is
    unable to do so in the light of the pandemic.  He remains living in the
    same area in  which  he  lived  in  when  he  was  committing  criminal
    offences.  He became drug free when he was in prison and  has  remained
    so. He has two sisters in the United Kingdom, apart from RG.  One lives
    with her daughter in Guildford, and she is employed as a  care  worker.
    The other lives in Farnborough, Hampshire.  The Appellant is  not  sure
    whether she is presently working in the light of the pandemic; however,
    her husband is from Hong Kong and there is a possibility that they  may
    relocate there.

20. The Appellant's partner was cross-examined. Her evidence  is  that  she
    was in a relationship with the Appellant when he was taking drugs.  She
    tried to help him. He was taking a large quantity of heroin.  He  tried
    hard to come off the drugs.  At that time, he was giving some  help  to
    his family. Neither of the Appellant's healthy sisters resides with the
    family.  They do not help.  It might be possible to obtain their  help,
    but they would have to be realistic and see when  they  are  available.
    She does not have any relatives here in the UK.

21. The Appellant's father adopted his witness statement as his evidence-in-
    chief and he was cross-examined in the main about his understanding  of
    the English language.

Submissions

22.  Ms  Isherwood  urged  me  to  approach  the  evidence  with   caution,
    particularly in the light of the discrepancies in respect  of  speaking
    and understanding the English language.  In respect of  the  persistent
    offender issue the Appellant committed the crimes and there is no clear
    evidence that he is drug free.  The evidence is  that  his  family  was
    unable to prevent him from committing crimes.  Ms Isherwood  relied  on
    Chege ("is a persistent offender")  [2016]  UKUT  00187  and  the  more
    recent case  of  Binbuga  v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  55,  specifically
    paragraph 40.  She asked me  to  consider  everything  together  before
    reaching a conclusion.

23. She relied on TD (Albania) v SSHD [2021] EWCA  Civ  619  in  which  the
    Court of Appeal decided that the judgment in HA (Iraq) v  Secretary  of
    State [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 does not lessen the unduly harsh  test.   It
    is still a high hurdle.  The evidence  shows  that  the  situation  has
    moved on since the ISW report and that reliance  on  the  Appellant  by
    family members is not as strong as it was.  He is  not  always  around.
    Whether the Appellant's partner would remain in the family home is  her
    choice.  There is no clear picture of the current circumstances and his
    partner understands a little bit of Nepalese (ISW at para 5.1.7 of  the
    expert report).  There is no up-to-date evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's  sister.   The  Appellant  does  not  meet  the  Rules  and
    deportation does not breach his rights under Article 8.

24. Mr Nathan urged me to allow the appeal.  He relied on paragraph  60  of
    the case of Chege.  The Appellant has not been able to  obtain  a  drug
    test, but he gave evidence.  It is clear that he is back on  track  and
    taking his responsibilities to care for his  parents  and  sister.   He
    urged me  to  postpone  promulgation  of  my  decision  to  enable  the
    Appellant to take a drug test after June 2021 if in doubt.

25. The Appellant's criminality is as a result of his drug  addiction.   He
    referred me to the evidence of the ISW and  submitted  that  there  are
    real difficulties quite far apart from  the  father's  command  of  the
    English language.  The Appellant's sister has the mental age  of  a  5-
    year-old.  She will end up in a home should the Appellant be  deported.
    The Appellant's parents are not  getting  any  younger  and  they  will
    become weaker and frailer as time goes  on.   It  is  unduly  harsh  to
    expect her to go into a home.  She has lived with her  family  all  her
    life.  She has sufficient capacity to know who  her  parents  are.   Mr
    Nathan submitted that the impact  of  deportation  on  the  Appellant's
    partner is unduly harsh.  If she stays or returns  to  Nepal  with  the
    Appellant, it is likely the child will have to at some stage go into  a
    home.  She does not have any Nepalese language skills.  The Appellant's
    most recent statement of 8 June 2020  says  that  nothing  has  changed
    since he made his first witness  statement  except  that  his  disabled
    sister's condition  has  deteriorated.   About  three  months  ago  she
    underwent a second dialysis related surgery at  a  local  hospital  and
    developed complications.  She was at that time hospitalised.

26. Mr Nathan relied on his skeleton argument of 8 June 2020.  The date  of
    the ISW report is 15 July 2019.  There is no up-to-date  evidence  from
    Mr Crisp, but his evidence was not  challenged  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Crisp's conclusions are contained at paragraph 6  of  his
    report and can be summarised.  His evidence  is  that  the  Appellant's
    sister, RG, has learning disabilities, autistic spectrum  disorder  and
    undergoes kidney dialysis.  She is waiting for a kidney transplant  and
    attends hospital three times a week.  She stays in  hospital  overnight
    once per month to have the dialysis tube replaced.  She  has  shortness
    of breath and often at night the family has to call  an  ambulance  for
    her.  She has what appears to be a  severe  learning  disability.   She
    relies on others to anticipate and provide all  her  care  needs.   She
    does not appear to have an insight into the many risks  that  would  be
    present if she did not have assistance throughout the  day  and  night.
    She relies upon others to ensure that her hospital visits are  attended
    and an emergency ambulance if she experiences shortness  of  breath  at
    night.  The Appellant's mother has undergone an operation on  her  back
    and her mobility is significantly reduced, she walks with a  stick  and
    finds it difficult to stand without assistance,  she  cannot  undertake
    daily living tasks, such as cooking and cleaning the house,  without  a
    great deal of difficulty and pain.

27. The Appellant's father does not have any specific health or care  needs
    however he described himself as an old man and said  that  increasingly
    he relies upon others to help him.  RG relies on others  to  anticipate
    all and meet all of  her  health  and  care  needs.   Those  needs  are
    currently largely met by the Appellant and his  partner.   Due  to  the
    extent of her care needs and the  cultural  considerations  it  is  not
    realistic that a package of care could  be  commissioned  to  meet  her
    needs.  The only realistic option is for the Appellant and his  partner
    to continue with their caring role.

28. RG's family can continue to meet her needs although this is  completely
    dependent on the Appellant and his partner remaining living there  with
    her.  The Appellant and his partner also assist his  parents  in  their
    day-to-day living, including translating for them  and  assisting  with
    household duties.

29. The Appellant's partner would no longer stay with the family should the
    Appellant be removed and therefore she  would  no  longer  be  able  to
    provide care for RH or continue to cook and clean for the  family.  The
    family  would  therefore  be  left  unable  to  care  for  RG.  In  the
    Appellant's absence his  parents  would  be  completely  isolated  from
    others.  They would  no  longer  be  able  to  communicate  with  their
    neighbours and the Appellant's mother would not be able to  communicate
    with health and social professionals without an interpreter which would
    be very difficult over the phone.

30. If the Appellant and his partner did not live in the family home, it is
    unlikely that RG's needs  would  be  met  without  her  moving  into  a
    residential care home.  Having such placement forced upon her would  be
    "unduly harsh upon her and her family" where caring for family  members
    at home is central to their cultural values.  RG  appears  to  be  well
    managed at home largely by the  Appellant  and  his  partner  with  the
    assistance of her parents.

31. Mr Nathan relies on Mr Crisp's evidence.  He conceded  that  there  was
    some understanding of English within the family, but  they  simply  did
    not have the physical  capability  to  take  care  of  the  Appellant's
    sister.

Findings and Reasons

32. The panel set out the law in respect of the  definition  of  persistent
    offender. It is not necessary for me to set it out  again;  however,  I
    have read it in the light of the more recent case  of  Binbuga  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 55.  Ms Isherwood asked me to have regard to  paragraph
    40.[1] However, this is an endorsement by the Court of  Appeal  of  the
    decision in Chege and sets out  paragraphs  from  that  Upper  Tribunal
    decision. I have applied the principles expounded therein to the  facts
    in this case.  I have considered the overall picture and not focused on
    the current position.  Each case turns on its own facts.  I  find  that
    the Appellant was a persistent offender. The underlying reason for  his
    criminal conduct was his addiction to illegal drugs. I find that  there
    has been an established period of rehabilitation.  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant no longer takes drugs. I accept his evidence on the issue.  I
    take into account that he has not produced an up-to-date drugs test.  I
    accept that he has not been able to do so because of the  pandemic.  He
    was cross-examined about this.  I  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  oral
    evidence which I find to be straight forward and credible.

33. The Respondent has not produced  any  further  evidence  regarding  the
    nature of the offences. They were, all but one,  summary-only  offences
    and they were all dealt with in the Magistrates'  Court  and  therefore
    there are no  sentencing  remarks.  Considering  the  sentences,  I  am
    satisfied that they are at not particularly serious offences.

34. From the PNC printout the first offence was  committed  on  1  December
    2015 and the last offence 20 September 2018.  There is one  offence  of
    burglary of a non-dwelling, eleven convictions for theft (shoplifting),
    one conviction for attempted theft (shoplifting), two  convictions  for
    failing to comply with the requirements of a community  order  and  one
    conviction for committing a further office during a suspended sentence.
     The Appellant was cautioned for possession  of  heroin  in  2017.  The
    Appellant was imprisoned in 2018.  He entered prison as a heroin addict
    (he tested positive for drugs on 30 January 2018); however, I  find  on
    the evidence including a negative drugs test when he left prison,  that
    he came out of prison drug free.  I am satisfied that he  has  remained
    drug free since then. I have reached that conclusion on the basis of  a
    negative drug test  post  his  release  from  prison,  the  Appellant's
    credible oral evidence, the OASYs assessment that he  presents  of  low
    risk of offending and the fact that he has not been  convicted  of  any
    further offences. The latter point is of significance in the context of
    a recovering addict.  I accept that a period of three years is  not  in
    itself a significant time to remain out of trouble. However, this  must
    be considered in context.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Appellant's
    criminality was fuelled by his drug addition.  While the  Appellant  is
    not taking drugs, he is unlikely to commit offences.  He  has  remained
    out of trouble for a longer period of time than  the  duration  of  his
    criminal conduct. He was during that time a  persistent  offender.  Had
    the hearing come before me at an earlier stage, I may have  found  that
    he remained a persistent offender; however, the overall picture at  the
    time of the hearing before me, is that this Appellant  is  not  someone
    who keeps on offending. The fact that criminality ceased in 2018 cannot
    be considered simply a pause in offending. There has in my view been an
    established period of rehabilitation.  While  Ms  Isherwood  said  that
    there was no clear evidence that the Appellant is crime free, I do  not
    accept this. While the Appellant's partner  was  at  the  time  of  his
    offending unable to prevent him taking drugs  (a  point  raised  by  Ms
    Isherwood), he has clearly managed to do  so  now  either  of  his  own
    accord and/or with the support of his family.

35. The Appellant is not a persistent offender.  Therefore,  he  is  not  a
    foreign criminal for the purposes of s.117D NIAA  2002  (and  paragraph
    398 of the IR).[2] On this basis it follows that his deportation  would
    breach his rights under Article 8 and his appeal should be allowed.

36. In any event, if he were a persistent offender, in this case,  I  would
    conclude that deportation would breach his rights under Article. 8. The
    Appellant does not rely on s.117C (4) of the 2002  Act  (Exception  1).
    [3] He relies on s.117C (5) (Exception 2). [4]  In  respect  of  family
    life, I accept that nothing has changed since the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The main point taken by Ms Isherwood was  that  I
    should exercise caution when assessing the credibility of the witnesses
    because of discrepancies in the  evidence  concerning  the  Appellant's
    father's English language ability.

37. I have to consider the impact of deportation on the Appellant's partner
    in the context of unduly harsh. They do not have children  here.  While
    she may not be able to speak Nepalese to any meaningful level, I am not
    satisfied that there is anything properly identified  in  the  evidence
    before me that would support a finding that the harshness  would  reach
    the unacceptable threshold.[5]  However, this is not  the  end  of  the
    story because  I  must  consider  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above in the context of s117C (6). [6]   I  have
    taken into account what the Court of Appeal said  in  NA  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA 662 [7] in the context of what Underhill  LJ  said  at
    paragraph 60 in HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176.
    [8] When considering very compelling circumstances, I take into account
    that if the Appellant  is  a  persistent  offender,  he  is  a  foreign
    criminal, and his deportation is in the public interest.  The Appellant
    is at low risk of reoffending and rehabilitated. This is, however,  one
    facet only of the public interest.

38. Ms Isherwood urged me not to accept the evidence of the ISW, Mr  Crisp.
    However, hitherto this had not been subject to challenge. I  could  see
    no good reason why that evidence should not be relied on  to  represent
    the position at the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.
    Moreover, there was no good reason to conclude that  the  position  had
    changed since then. RG does not have a health condition that is  likely
    to improve over time. There is no reason to believe that her  condition
    and her dependence on  the  Appellant  has  changed.   The  Appellant's
    parents are aging. I  find  that  the  impact  on,  RG,  following  the
    Appellant's deportation would be very serious indeed.  I  am  satisfied
    that there is Kuguthas dependency (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  31)
    between the Appellant and RG.  I accept  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner shoulder a considerable amount of responsibility for RG's  care
    and this is likely to increase as the Appellant's parents age.  I  must
    take into account the impact of deportation  on  those  with  whom  the
    Appellant shares family life  (Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  39).
    Furthermore, I accept that there is a level of dependency  between  the
    Appellant (and his partner) and his parents.

39. The cross- examination of the witnesses was  an  attempt  to  undermine
    their evidence about their understanding of English and  the  different
    languages they speak in order to establish that the Appellant's parents
    can speak English and thus are not dependent on him.  I have  no  doubt
    that there is some understanding of English and each other's respective
    languages, but I find  that  this  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  the
    Appellant's elderly parents to cope  easily  without  him.  I  am  also
    satisfied that the Appellant's  partner  may  be  able  to  speak  some
    Nepalese; however, I am satisfied that she and the Appellant's  parents
    (and RG) do not share a common language so as they can  communicate  to
    any significant extent and that this creates  difficulties.  I  am  not
    persuaded that it is of significance  in  any  event,  considering  the
    credible evidence, to which I attach weight, that she would not  remain
    in the home if the Appellant were deported. Thus, the language issue is
    not material.  Nothing in my view turns on the language ability of  any
    individual.

40. The ISW's opinion is that if the Appellant  is  deported,  it  will  be
    unlikely that his sister's care needs will be met  without  her  moving
    into residential care. I attach weight to  his  evidence.  The  salient
    parts of the evidence of  the  ISW  concerning  the  condition  of  the
    sister, her care needs and the impact of deportation is clearly set out
    by the panel in the error of law decision. It was not challenged at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. While Ms Isherwood attempted to
    challenge this evidence before me, there was simply no proper basis  to
    do so.   She said that the position had moved on; however, in my  view,
    there is no reason to believe that the needs of the Appellant's  sister
    or her dependency on  him  had  changed.    I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's elderly parents  would  not  be  able  to  care  for  their
    daughter  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  partner.  The
    consequences of deportation for her would be very severe and bleak.  In
    addition, there is a level of dependency between the Appellant and  his
    elderly parents, which needs to be put into the mix.  The  evidence  is
    that there are two other sisters who are  able  bodied  but  they  have
    their own families and do not form part of the family unit.

41.  The  likely  consequences  that  would  flow  from   the   Appellant's
    deportation concerning RG is, in my view, the primary  reason  why  the
    decision to deport him would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    his rights under Article 8. All in all,  considering  evidence  in  the
    round, I conclude that there are properly  identified  very  compelling
    circumstances. A fair balance lies in allowing this appeal.



Notice of Decision.

The appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 7 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
-----------------------
[1]  In Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 55, the Court of Appeal stated:


  40.    Since the FTT decision, guidance as to the meaning of a persistent
  offender has been provided in the UT decision in Chege v SSHD [2016]  Imm
  AR 833, as endorsed by this Court in SC (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2018]  1  WLR
  4474. In SC (Zimbabwe) the Court at [26]  specifically  agreed  with  the
  following paragraphs from the UT's decision in Chege which it said was  a
  sufficient statement of the construction of the phrase for the purpose of
  the appeal before the Court:
    "50. What, therefore, is the natural meaning of the phrase "persistent
    offender" in this specific statutory context? It can certainly be said,
    without unnecessarily straining the natural meaning of the word that an
    "offender" acquires that status by virtue of  committing  a  crime  and
    having once offended he does not lose that  status  even  if  he  never
    commits another crime. In other words,  once  an  offender,  always  an
    offender. The fact  that  Parliament  has  deliberately  legislated  to
    remove the concept of spent convictions  in  this  context  also  lends
    force to the view that "offender" means someone who has offended in the
    past however long ago that may have been.
    51. However, Parliament did not use the phrase  "repeat  offender"  or
    "serial offender".  It  used  the  phrase  "persistent  offender",  and
    persistence, by its very nature,  requires  some  continuation  of  the
    behaviour concerned,  although  it  need  not  be  continuous  or  even
    regular. There may be circumstances in which it would be  inappropriate
    to describe someone with a past  history  of  criminality  as  being  a
    "persistent offender" even if there was a time  when  that  description
    would have been an accurate one.
    52. Take, for example, the case of an individual who in his youth  had
    committed a series of offences between the ages of 14 and 17 which  led
    to a string of minor convictions, but in adulthood had led a  blameless
    existence for 20 years. Whilst it would be accurate to describe him  as
    an offender, the natural response to the question whether he is  now  a
    persistent offender would be no. It would still be no if at the end  of
    that long period of good behaviour he committed another minor  criminal
    offence, even one involving proof of intention or recklessness. That is
    why, both logically and as a matter  of  the  natural  meaning  of  the
    language, Mr  Malik's  proposition  that  "persistent  offender"  is  a
    permanent status cannot be correct.
    53.  Put simply, a  "persistent  offender"  is  someone  who  keeps  on
    breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to  keep  on
    offending until the date of the relevant decision or up  to  a  certain
    time before it, or that the  continuity  of  the  offending  cannot  be
    broken. Whilst we do not accept Mr Malik's primary  submission  that  a
    "persistent offender" is a permanent status that can never be lost once
    it is acquired, we do accept his submission that an individual  can  be
    regarded as a "persistent offender" for the purpose of  the  Rules  and
    the 2002 Act even though he  may  not  have  offended  for  some  time.
    Someone can be fairly described as a person who keeps breaking the  law
    even if he is not currently offending. The  question  whether  he  fits
    that description will depend on the overall picture and pattern of  his
    offending over his entire offending history up to that date. Each  case
    will turn on its own facts.
    54.  Plainly, a persistent offender is not simply someone  who  offends
    more than once. There has to be repeat offending but  that  repetition,
    in and of itself, will not be enough to show persistence. There has  to
    be  a  history  of  repeated  criminal  conduct  carried  out  over   a
    sufficiently long period to  indicate  that  the  person  concerned  is
    someone who keeps on re-offending.  However,  determining  whether  the
    offending is persistent is not just a mathematical exercise. How long a
    period and how many offences will be enough will depend  very  much  on
    the facts of the particular case and the nature  and  circumstances  of
    the offending. The criminal offences need not be the same, or  even  of
    the same character as each other. Persistence may be shown by the  fact
    that a person keeps committing the same type of  offence,  but  it  may
    equally be shown by the fact that he has committed a  wide  variety  of
    different offences over a period of time."

[2]  117D Interpretation of this Part
  (1)    In this Part-
    "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
    "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
       (a) is a British citizen, or
       (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
       years or more;
    "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
       (a) is a British citizen, or
       (b)who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
       Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
  (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
    (a)  who is not a British citizen,
    (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
    (c)  who-
       (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
       months,
       (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
       or
       (iii) is a persistent offender.


[3]  117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals
  (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
  (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
  greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
  (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
  to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
  requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
  (4)    Exception 1 applies where -
    (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
    life,
    (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and
    (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into
    the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
  (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
  parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's
  deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
  (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
  period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
  requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over
  and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
  (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
  account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
  foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
  the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted."

[4]  ibid

[5]  In HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ  1176  the  Court  of
Appeal at [56] stated:


    "The second point focuses on what are said to be the risks of  treating
    KO as establishing a touchstone of whether the degree of harshness goes
    beyond "that which is ordinarily  expected  by  the  deportation  of  a
    parent". Lord Carnwath  does  not  in  fact  use  that  phrase,  but  a
    reference to "nothing out of the ordinary" appears  in  UTJ  Southern's
    decision. I see rather more force  in  this  submission.  As  explained
    above, the test under section 117C (5) does indeed require an appellant
    to  establish  a  degree  of  harshness  going   beyond   a   threshold
    "acceptable" level. It is not necessarily wrong to describe that as  an
    "ordinary" level of harshness, and I note that Lord  Carnwath  did  not
    jib at UTJ Southern's use of that term. However, I think the Appellants
    are right to point out that it may be misleading if used  incautiously.
    There seem to me to  be  two  (related)  risks.  First,  "ordinary"  is
    capable  of  being  understood  as  meaning  anything  which   is   not
    exceptional, or in any event rare. That is not  the  correct  approach:
    see para. 52 above. There is  no  reason  in  principle  why  cases  of
    "undue" harshness may not occur quite commonly. Secondly, if  tribunals
    treat the essential question as being "is this level of  harshness  out
    of the ordinary?" they may be tempted to find that Exception 2 does not
    apply simply on the basis that the situation fits into  some  commonly-
    encountered pattern. That would be  dangerous.  How  a  child  will  be
    affected by a parent's deportation will depend on an almost  infinitely
    variable range of circumstances and it is not possible  to  identify  a
    baseline of "ordinariness". Simply by way of  example,  the  degree  of
    harshness of the impact may be affected by the child's age; by  whether
    the parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or separated father  may
    still have a genuine and subsisting relationship with a child who lives
    with the mother); by the degree of the child's emotional dependence  on
    the parent; by the financial consequences of his  deportation;  by  the
    availability of emotional and financial support from a remaining parent
    and other family  members;  by  the  practicability  of  maintaining  a
    relationship with the  deported  parent;  and  of  course  by  all  the
    individual characteristics of the child."


[6]  ibid
[7]  In NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 the court stated:-


    "32. Similarly, in the case of a  medium  offender,  if  all  he  could
    advance in support of his Article 8 claim was a  "near  miss"  case  in
    which he fell short of bringing himself within either  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2, it would not be possible to say that  he  had  shown  that
    there  were  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2". He would need to have a far  stronger
    case than that by reference to the interests protected by Article 8  to
    bring himself within that fall back protection. But again, in principle
    there may be cases in which such an offender can say that  features  of
    his case of a kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2  have  such  great
    force for  Article  8  purposes  that  they  do  constitute  such  very
    compelling circumstances, whether taken by themselves or in conjunction
    with other factors relevant to Article 8 but  not  falling  within  the
    factors described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it  the
    Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the  matters  relied
    upon collectively, in order to determine whether they are  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the high public interest in deportation.
    33. Although there is no 'exceptionality'  requirement,  it  inexorably
    follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in which circumstances
    are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
    deportation will be rare. The commonplace  incidents  of  family  life,
    such as ageing parents in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between
    parents and children, will not be sufficient.
    ...
    35. The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that paras. 398 to 399A of
    the 2012 rules constituted a complete code. The same  is  true  of  the
    sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act, read in conjunction with paras. 398
    to 399A of the 2014 rules. The scheme of the Act and the rules together
    provide the following structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal
    can resist deportation on Article 8 grounds.
    36.  In relation to a medium  offender,  first  see  whether  he  falls
    within Exception 1 or Exception 2. If he does, then the Article 8 claim
    succeeds. If he does not, then the next stage is  to  consider  whether
    there are "sufficiently compelling circumstances, over and above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2". If there  are,  then  the  Article  8
    claim succeeds. If there are not, then the Article 8  claim  fails.  As
    was the case under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there
    is no room for a general Article 8 evaluation outside the  2014  rules,
    read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

[8]  In HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 Underhill LJ
stated:-

    "60. Although the two-stage exercise  described  in  NA  (Pakistan)  is
    conceptually clear, it may occasionally make the analysis unnecessarily
    elaborate.  There may be cases where a tribunal is satisfied that there
    is a combination of circumstances, including but  not  limited  to  the
    harsh effect of  the  appellant's  deportation  on  his  family,  which
    together constitute very compelling reasons sufficient to outweigh  the
    strong public interest in deportation, but where it  may  be  debatable
    whether the effect on the family taken on its own (as section 117C  (5)
    requires) is unduly harsh.  (An equivalent  situation  could  arise  in
    relation to Exception 1: there might, say, be significant obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration in the country to which it is  proposed  to
    deport him, but  it  might  be  questionable  whether  they  were  very
    significant.) In such a case, although  the  tribunal  will  inevitably
    have considered whether the relevant Exception has been  satisfied,  it
    is unnecessary for it to cudgel its brains  into  making  a  definitive
    finding. The Exceptions are, as I have  said,  designed  to  provide  a
    shortcut for appellants in particular cases, and it is  not  compulsory
    to take that shortcut if proceeding  directly  to  the  proportionality
    assessment required by  article  8  produces  a  clear  answer  in  the
    appellant's favour."

