
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02685/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th May 2016                     |On 1st July 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Aly, Morden Solicitors London
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1979.   He  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision dated 21st October 2015  refusing  to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom  and
    refusing his human rights claim.  His appeal was heard by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Moxon on 17th March 2016.  The appeal was dismissed
    on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 24th March 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley on 15th April 2016.
     The permission states that it is arguable  that  the  judge  may  have
    erred in law for failing to apply a test of fairness when he refused to
    adjourn the hearing to another day.  The  permission  states  that  the
    judge recognised the potential importance  of  the  Appellant's  wife's
    oral evidence by his offer to stand down the matter until the afternoon
    on the same day to allow the wife to attend but the permission goes  on
    to state that it is arguable that  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was
    likely that the wife would fail to  attend  an  adjourned  hearing  was
    speculative.  The grounds have added another limb to  this  appeal  and
    are challenging the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge
    against the Appellant and the documentary  evidence.   This  ground  is
    included in the permission.

 3. The Appellant's wife was at the hearing  centre  with  their  children.
    One of the children came into the room with  the  Appellant  while  the
    error of law hearing was being  conducted.   His  wife  and  the  other
    children remained outside the court.  There was no objection to this.

 4. The Appellant's representative submitted that she  is  relying  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal and that an adjournment should have been granted  for
    fairness to enable the Appellant's wife to  attend  the  hearing.   She
    submitted that because the adjournment was  not  granted  there  was  a
    deprivation of fairness in the hearing.  I was referred to the case  of
    Nwaigwe [2004] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 5. I was  referred  to  paragraph  9  of  the  judge's  decision  and  the
    representative submitted that the  Tribunal  has  to  deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly and that Rule 2(2)(c) was not satisfied.  This states
    that so far as practicable the parties should be  able  to  participate
    fully in the proceedings.  The  representative  submitted  that  it  is
    clear that the judge felt that the Appellant's wife's evidence could be
    important as he was prepared to adjourn the case for three and  a  half
    hours to enable the Appellant's wife to  attend.   She  submitted  that
    good reasons were given for this not being acceptable.  The Appellant's
    children were at school and his wife had to pick them up.  She was also
    26 weeks pregnant.

 6. I pointed out that at the date of the First-tier hearing there  was  no
    statement from the Appellant's wife.  The representative submitted that
    had his wife been asked for a statement she would have given  this  but
    she is at the hearing centre today with her  children.   She  submitted
    that it is therefore clear that the judge was wrong when he stated that
    the Appellant's wife might well  not  attend  a  hearing  date  in  the
    future.

 7.  I  asked  the  representative  if  the   Appellant   had   had   legal
    representation before the First-tier hearing and she said  he  had  but
    the  barrister  at  the  First-tier  hearing  had  suggested  that  the
    Appellant's wife should give evidence.  She submitted that her evidence
    might well only have been corroborative but even this would  have  been
    useful for the Tribunal because of the  inconsistencies  found  in  the
    Appellant's evidence.  She submitted that the  Appellant's  wife  could
    have given evidence about her family background and what her family had
    wanted and what their behaviour  had  been.   She  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's wife would have been the best person to give that evidence.
     She submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  therefore  deprived  of  the
    opportunity for a fair hearing as the judge did not allow his  wife  to
    give evidence.  She submitted that only a short time  would  have  been
    required for a further hearing to be listed but the fact that his  wife
    would have had notice of having to give her evidence  and  there  would
    have been notice for her children being taken out of school, would have
    made a difference.

 8. The representative went on to deal with the findings of the  First-tier
    Judge relating to the  Appellant's  evidence  and  the  inconsistencies
    found by him.  I was referred to the  case  of  Chiver  Romania  [1994]
    UKIAT 10758 and she submitted that the centrepiece of  the  Appellant's
    claim stands.  She submitted that there were no inconsistencies in  the
    core of the Appellant's account.

 9. I was referred to the First-tier Judge  not  properly  considering  the
    Appellant's evidence that because his brother-in-law,  whom  he  fears,
    has links to the police in Pakistan he could have influenced the people
    who gave the evidence that the FIR submitted by the Appellant  for  his
    First-tier hearing was false.  I asked  the  representative  about  the
    false medical report.  She submitted that the spelling  error  referred
    to therein was not important. It could still be  genuine  report.   She
    submitted that the judge had not properly considered the influence  the
    Appellant's wife's brother had with the police.

10. The representative submitted that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    inconsistent.  I was referred to paragraph 52 of the decision in  which
    the judge states that the Appellant  has  been  inconsistent  with  his
    evidence.  She submitted that  the  evidence  given  by  him  has  been
    broadly the same as the evidence provided with the application, that he
    had to move about because he was afraid of his wife's  family  and  she
    submitted that there  is  nothing  in  his  evidence  which  is  wholly
    inconsistent.  She submitted that the First-tier  Judge  made  a  wrong
    analysis of the evidence as the core of the story is consistent.

11. The representative referred to the judge seeking corroboration relating
    to a second FIR which was not with the evidence and she submitted  that
    corroboration is not required in asylum cases and I was referred to the
    case of Kasolo Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge failed to take  into  account  the  Appellant's  wife's  family's
    connections to the police and the Appellant's evidence about the second
    FIR.

12. With regard to  the  Appellant  not  claiming  asylum  until  2015  she
    submitted that the Appellant had valid leave in the United Kingdom as a
    Tier 4 Student until it was curtailed  and  that  is  when  he  claimed
    asylum.  Because he had valid leave he did not realise that  he  should
    have claimed asylum at an earlier date.  She submitted that he  did  so
    when it was necessary and this should not damage his credibility.

13. The Presenting Officer made his submissions  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response which is on file.

14. He dealt first of all with the adjournment request and  submitted  that
    the judge in his decision has given good reasons for not  granting  the
    adjournment.  He has  been  balanced  in  his  approach  and  gave  the
    Appellant's wife an opportunity to give evidence but this was  rejected
    by the Appellant.  All the circumstances of the adjournment request are
    narrated by the judge in the decision and he gave the  Appellant  three
    and a half hours to bring his wife to the hearing centre.  He submitted
    that everything the judge did was fair. He considered the circumstances
    and the health of the parties and the fact that  the  Appellant's  wife
    was  26  weeks  pregnant.   He  referred  to  the  Procedure  Rules  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision and at paragraph 10 states  that  he
    does not accept that it was ever the intention of  the  Appellant  that
    his wife would give evidence at the hearing.  There  was  no  statement
    from his wife and the Appellant  had  been  legally  represented.   The
    Appellant had considerable warning of the hearing date and  had  plenty
    of time to prepare. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge may
    have gone too far when he found that the Appellant's  wife  might  well
    not attend a further hearing but the judge made a balanced and reasoned
    response and found that there would be little impact if the Appellant's
    wife did not attend to give evidence.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    properly reasoned that if the Appellant's wife was unable to attend  at
    that hearing in May 2016 the hearing at a later date could  well  be  a
    day with bad weather and she could be more heavily pregnant or  have  a
    young baby.  He submitted that there was  no  deprivation  of  fairness
    because the Appellant's wife did not attend the First-tier hearing.  He
    submitted that the Appellant gave his evidence, was cross-examined  and
    his evidence was tested and the judge made his decision based on this.

15. With regard to the second ground of appeal and the credibility  issues,
    the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  grounds  are  merely  a
    disagreement with a reasoned set of findings.  With regard  to  Article
    8, the judge made findings of fact at paragraph 51 and then stated that
    he does not find the Appellant to be a credible witness.  At  paragraph
    52 he explains the inconsistencies he finds  and  at  paragraph  53  he
    makes reference to the false documents, being the first FIR and medical
    report.  The judge has relied on the case of Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  and
    at paragraph 54 he refers to the Country Information  and  Guidance  on
    Pakistan.  At paragraph 55 he gives weight to the verification reports,
    which he was entitled to do.  At paragraph 55  he  states  that  it  is
    unlikely that the Appellant's father-in-law would  have  been  able  to
    corrupt not only the official from the embassy who made  the  enquiries
    but also people within the police station  and  the  hospital,  getting
    them to provide inaccurate information.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    has considered everything before him and has not made any error of law.
    He has given greater weight to  certain  parts  of  the  evidence  than
    others.  He submitted that the grounds are merely a  disagreement  with
    the judge's decision.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 56 of  the  decision
    the judge may well have speculated on whether the Appellant would  have
    pursued his wife when he first met her after being told that her family
    was dangerous. He points out that the Appellant states that because  he
    was afraid, he left his home but the judge finds it to lack credibility
    that if he did this he would continue to  attend  his  work  place.  He
    submitted that there are sufficient reasons for the judge's credibility
    findings.

17. He submitted also that the judge was entitled to take into account  the
    fact that no second FIR was produced and to find that  this  undermines
    the Appellant's credibility.  He not only refers to this in relation to
    his credibility findings he also notes that there is no  evidence  from
    either the Appellant's aunt or his brother,  both  of  whom  supposedly
    were visited at least once or twice by the Appellant's aggressors.   He
    submitted that the judge was entitled to comment on this.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that with  regard  to  Article  8  the
    judge's starting point was adverse credibility.  This is referred to at
    paragraph 66 of the decision.  At paragraph 67 he goes on to deal  with
    the best interests of the Appellant's children and Section 117B of  the
    2002 Act.  He submitted that all the evidence on Article 8 and the best
    interests of the children is brought together at paragraphs 75, 76  and
    77 and he again submitted that the grounds of application are purely  a
    disagreement with the judge's decision.  I  was  asked  to  uphold  the
    judge's decision.

19. The Appellant's representative submitted that the  time  given  to  the
    Appellant's wife to  attend  the  hearing  was  not  appropriate.   Her
    children were at school. She would have had to take them out of  school
    and she was 26 weeks pregnant.   She  submitted  that  she  is  at  the
    hearing centre today and so the judge was wrong to find that she  would
    not attend a hearing in the future.  She submitted that  there  was  no
    medical report on the Appellant's wife as this would  have  had  to  be
    obtained in advance and  she  submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
    adjourned the hearing.  She submitted that the judge took note  of  the
    barrister's statement that the Appellant's  wife's  evidence  could  be
    important.

20. The representative submitted that the judge did not  properly  consider
    the Appellant's wife's family's influence over the police.  He did  not
    consider whether perhaps the verification  documents  could  have  been
    falsified.

21. With regard to the credibility issues she submitted  that  the  wedding
    was quiet and was held in a friend's house.   She  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's wife's sister told the family members about the wedding and
    the Appellant's wife, had she been given the chance to  give  evidence,
    could have given evidence about whether her sister  is  trustworthy  or
    not.

22. The representative referred to the country guidance on Pakistan and the
    FIR report.  She submitted that there is corruption in the police force
    and the judge recognised this but it was  unreasonable  of  the  judge,
    based on his findings about the original FIR  and  medical  report,  to
    find that as no FIR was submitted for the  second  incident  this  goes
    against the Appellant's credibility.

23. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and set the decision aside.

Decision and Reasons

24. I shall  deal  with  the  second  ground  of  appeal  first  being  the
    credibility findings made by the judge in his decision.  The judge  has
    referred to inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence.   He  has  not
    only  referred  to  them  but  he   has   explained   why   these   are
    inconsistencies at paragraph 52.  He then goes on to deal with the fake
    FIR and fake medical report and refers to the case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed.
    The judge has considered the  document  verification  reports  and  has
    given these weight and he has done so based on the background  evidence
    on Pakistan as well as the oral evidence and the Appellant's statement.
     The judge finds that the verification reports  should  be  given  more
    weight than the documents which, based on the verification reports,  he
    believes  are  forgeries.   The  Appellant  told  the  judge  that  the
    documents are genuine but the judge points out at paragraph 55 that  if
    they are genuine the Appellant's father-in-law must have corrupted  the
    official from  the  embassy  who  made  the  enquiries  and  must  have
    corrupted people within the police station and the hospital to  provide
    inaccurate information.   He  finds  that  this  is  unlikely  and  has
    explained why. He goes on to refer to the spelling error in the medical
    report.  He has given proper reasons for finding that  these  documents
    are forged.  In particular he considered the  objective  evidence.   He
    also finds it to lack credibility that the Appellant would  leave  home
    but continue to attend his work place if he was afraid of his  in-laws.
    The judge also pointed out in the decision that there  is  no  evidence
    from the Appellant's aunt or his  brother,  who  apparently  have  been
    bothered by the aggressors in Pakistan.  The judge then goes on to deal
    with the lack of the FIR from the complaint in June 2010  and  explains
    why the lack of this FIR undermines the  Appellant's  account  that  he
    made a complaint at that time.

25. The judge clearly finds that Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  applies  because  of  the
    Appellant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum.   I   do   not   accept   the
    representative's submission that because the Appellant had  a  visa  he
    did not claim asylum.  If he feared for his life in Pakistan an  asylum
    claim should have been made immediately. This  also  goes  against  his
    credibility.

26. Throughout the decision the judge has made it clear  why  he  does  not
    believe the Appellant's evidence.

27. The judge then goes on to deal with Article 8 of ECHR.   He  refers  to
    the relevant case law and deals with Article 8 and the  best  interests
    of the children.

28. The judge has made a clear proportionality assessment taking all  these
    things into account referring  to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and public interest and explains why it
    would not be a breach of Article 8 to  return  the  Appellant  and  his
    family to Pakistan.

29. I then come to  the  adjournment  situation.   It  is  clear  from  the
    evidence that the Appellant had no intention of having  his  wife  give
    evidence at the hearing.  Apparently his barrister on the day suggested
    that this would be a good idea for corroboration purposes.   The  judge
    gave the Appellant a chance to fetch his wife to enable her  to  attend
    the hearing.  This was not unreasonable.  The judge did not require  to
    do this.  There is no evidence that the Appellant's wife was unwell  at
    the date of the first hearing and there is nothing to suggest that  she
    could not have picked the children up  early  from  school.   Being  26
    weeks pregnant is not a reason for  not  attending  the  hearing.   The
    judge has explained all this in his decision.  He has  also  considered
    the Tribunal Procedure Rules and has considered fairness.

30. The judge may have  overstepped  the  mark  when  he  stated  that  the
    Appellant's wife might well not attend a hearing on the next  occasion.
    She was at the hearing centre  while  this  hearing  went  ahead.   She
    brought the children with her.  The children of course are  on  holiday
    today.  Whether she would have come to the hearing if she  had  had  to
    take the children out of school is debateable.  In any case  the  judge
    has properly considered the adjournment request and I do not find  that
    the fact that he was prepared to give the Appellant three  and  a  half
    hours to bring his wife to the hearing centre means that he found  that
    her evidence was essential. I find that what he was doing was trying to
    find a solution to a matter which had not been  considered  before  the
    date of the hearing. He did not require to do anymore than he did.   He
    states at paragraph 12 "It is not submitted that the  Appellant's  wife
    is to give evidence that is not before me from any other source.  I can
    assess submissions as to the fact that she would have given  consistent
    evidence.  As such no unfairness arises from my failure to adjourn".  I
    find that this is correct.

31. I find that there is no error of law in the judge not  adjourning  this
    hearing to another date.

32. I find that with regard to the judge's credibility findings  and  false
    document findings the grounds of application are merely a  disagreement
    with thoroughly explained reasons for these findings.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
promulgated on 24th March 2016.

The First-tier Judge's decision that the Appellant's claim is  dismissed  on
all grounds must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 1st July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
