
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02598/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2017                           |On 28 June 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mrs ayda abdella mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ahmed (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    M R Oliver, promulgated on 20th October 2016, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 18th August 2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a 30 year old Ethiopian woman, who was  born  on  11th
    December 1985.  She appealed against  the  refusal  of  asylum  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State in a decision dated 1st March  2016,  and
    the rejection of her claim for humanitarian protection under  paragraph
    339L of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. Essentially, the Appellant's claim is that she had applied for  a  visa
    to visit the UK for ten days on 13th March 2015 because  she  had  been
    invited in North London for business reasons.  She was a  self-employed
    woman with a pepper and ginger and oil  factory.   She  had  chosen  to
    travel with her husband to the UK and she had disclosed the  fact  that
    she had previously travelled also to South Africa, to China, to Brazil,
    and to Italy.  Both she and her husband arrived in the UK on 21st April
    2015 on a direct flight with Ethiopian Airlines.  On 27th  April  2015,
    however, barely a week after their arrival in this country, her husband
    returned back to Ethiopia and her own visit visa was due to  expire  on
    23rd September 2015.  On 26th August 2015 then, the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum and contacted the Home Office.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found that the Appellant's reasons for claiming  asylum  were
    "inherently questionable".   She  had  claimed  that  her  husband  was
    arrested in Ethiopia on 19th  August  2015  and  that  her  mother  was
    arrested the following day.  The mother  was  detained  for  four  days
    because they could not find the Appellant.  Her claim  also  rested  on
    her knowing a man whom she had known from youth association meetings in
    2003 and 2004.  She claimed that he approached her again eight to  nine
    years later, even though he would not have  known  whether  she  agreed
    with his views.  She had met him,  she  claimed,  without  telling  her
    husband, even though they were in the process of getting married.   The
    Secretary of State had already decided that because she had not been  a
    member of a political party and had not been  active  politically,  the
    authorities would not be looking for her.   Any  subsequent  activities
    that she engaged in were not of a high profile.  It was not accepted by
    the Secretary of State that her husband and mother had  been  arrested.
    She had not explained why a record was kept of an informal  meeting  of
    only five people.  She had also told the Red Cross that she  could  not
    find work here.  She then waited three  weeks  to  claim  asylum  after
    hearing that her husband and mother had been arrested.  She also claims
    to be unaware of the political views of her husband and the  judge  did
    not find this to be credible, especially  given  that  she  planned  to
    marry him on 31st October 2012.

 5. Secondly, the judge considered it to be highly relevant that  when  the
    Appellant came to the UK with  her  husband  "it  was  for  a  specific
    business purpose" (paragraph 32).  It was a short business trip for ten
    days only.  Yet, she arrived and claimed asylum, and during the  asylum
    interview she claimed that she  did  intend  to  return.   Her  husband
    returned after six days, "but at that time  he  clearly  did  not  fear
    persecution on return, and nor did she" (paragraph 32).

 6. The judge went on to say  that  the  developments  that  the  Appellant
    relied upon are stated in what purports to be a summons  produced  late
    in the day by the Appellant, and this did not necessarily mean that the
    production of the document was authentic as to its contents.

 7. Finally, the judge did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  assumed
    political membership of the EPPF because  she  submitted  a  membership
    card so late in the day and even then only downloaded it  in  an  email
    form (see paragraph 35).

 8. In short, the judge did not regard  the  Appellant  to  be  a  truthful
    witness and made adverse credibility findings  against  her  (paragraph
    36).

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had erred in failing to give clear reasons  as  to  why  the  chain  of
    events claimed to have  taken  place  in  Ethiopia  after  her  husband
    returned are not reasonably likely.  Furthermore, it was arguable  that
    adverse inferences should not have  been  drawn  from  the  Appellant's
    failure to disclose details to the Red Cross.  In the event, the  judge
    ought not to have rejected the authenticity  of  the  summons  and  the
    events which led to that summons.  The Appellant also was  involved  in
    sur place activities.

10. On 10th January 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

11. On 13th February 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me Mr Ahmed, appearing as a solicitor  on  behalf
    of the Appellant relied upon his Grounds of  Appeal.   He  also  relied
    upon the grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal.  He then  made  the
    following submissions.  First, at paragraph 34 of the determination the
    judge accepts that the document came  in  the  manner  described,  when
    referring to the summons that was before  the  Tribunal,  and  yet  the
    judge then  purports  to  question  its  authenticity,  without  giving
    reasons for doing so.  Second, the Appellant had relied  upon  his  own
    witness evidence, but the judge provides no analysis  of  this  witness
    evidence, and  does  not  explain  what  weight  is  attached  to  this
    evidence, and given that the asylum seeker is not required  to  provide
    corroborative evidence, this evidence should not have been rejected out
    of hand.  Third, there was a risk of return to  the  Appellant  as  was
    clear from the objective evidence  in  the  form  of  the  "Operational
    Guidance Note (Ethiopia)" for November 2013.

13. For her part,  Mrs  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that the Grounds of Appeal amounted to nothing  more  than  a
    mere disagreement with the findings of the judge.  First, the judge did
    commence his findings at paragraph 31.  It  was  made  clear  that  the
    judge was looking at all the evidence.  This included the  evidence  in
    the asylum interview as well as a witness statement.  Second, the judge
    did not find the Appellant to be credible because of her choice not  to
    tell the Respondent at the first opportunity that her husband had  been
    arrested (see paragraph 33).  Third, the judge did consider the summons
    produced in a proper manner (at paragraph 34) and was entitled to  find
    that it was not a  genuine  document.   Fourth,  with  respect  to  the
    Appellant's sur place activities by joining the EPPF, the judge did not
    accept the evidence that  the  Appellant  had  found  it  difficult  to
    contact the London branch of the EPPF (see paragraph 35)  because  "the
    main address appears easily on the website and provides a  registration
    facility and an address to  send  the  completed  form  to  in  Geneva"
    (paragraph 35).  It  was  in  this  context  that  the  judge  was  not
    impressed by the fact that the Appellant had only provided a downloaded
    email form of her membership rather late in the day.  He  was  entitled
    to so conclude.   Finally,  the  judge  did  consider  the  Appellant's
    position on risk on return (at paragraph 36) because references he  had
    made to the "Dutch Country of Information Report, dated 18th May  2016"
    as well as the US State Department Report on Human Rights Practices  in
    Ethiopia, dated 13th April 2016.  Moreover  the  Amnesty  International
    Report on Ethiopia for 2015 and 2016 is also taken into  account.   For
    all these  reasons,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had not satisfied and discharged the burden of proof that was
    upon her.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  The judge gives  proper  reasons
    (at  paragraph  31)  when  he  concludes  that  the  account  given  is
    "inherently questionable" because it is fully explained as to how there
    were meetings of those attracted towards the  opposition  within  youth
    association meetings.  It  is  also  explained  fully  as  to  why  the
    Appellant should meet a person on a few occasions in  2003,  2004,  who
    would then  some  nine  years  afterwards  be  willing  to  give  false
    evidence.  The judge also explains why it could be  assumed  that  this
    Appellant will be amenable to  a  further  approach.   He  also  cannot
    understand why her husband  would  not  have  discussed  with  her  the
    political thinking before marrying  of  the  two  of  them.   She  also
    claimed to have joined  the  EPPF  seven  months  after  her  husband's
    release, even though her husband had been a member of this party  since
    2008.  The judge's firm conclusion was that the Appellant was not  only
    inactive politically but had not been a member  of  a  political  party
    (paragraph 31).

15. Second, it is significant that the background to this  claim  was  that
    the Appellant arrived on a short business trip  for  ten  days,  during
    which time some six days later, her husband returned back to  Ethiopia.
    The judge was clear here that "at that time he  clearly  did  not  fear
    persecution on return, and nor did she".

16. Third, this then raises the question of her husband's suggested arrest.
     The judge has no difficulty in rejecting this.  This  is  because  the
    arrest is not brought to the  attention  of  the  Home  Office  at  the
    earliest opportunity and it is not mentioned to the Red Cross.  What is
    mentioned to the Red Cross is that the Appellant has not been  able  to
    find employment (see paragraph 33).  None of this  indicates  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine fear of ill-treatment or persecution.

17. Fourth, insofar as there is a view expressed as to the authenticity  of
    the summons, the judge does this in the context of the wider  evidence,
    before going on to say that, "even if it was true that her husband  had
    recently escaped from  prison,  the  interest  of  the  authorities  in
    tracking him down would in principal be proper" (paragraph  34).   That
    was a view that the judge was reasonably entitled to come to.

18. Finally, the judge does have regard to the objective  evidence  from  a
    variety of sources (at paragraph 36) and his final remarks are that the
    Appellant herself asserted in her interview "that she was not a  member
    of a political party and was not active politically" such that she  had
    failed "even to the lower  standard"  in  making  out  her  claim  (see
    paragraph 36).  These conclusions were entirely open to the  judge  and
    they were well reasoned and properly arrived at.  There is no error  of
    law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th June 2017



