
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/02270/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 April 2021                     |On 23 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SJ

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



For the appellant:     Ms Johnrose

For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



1. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh with date of  birth  given
   as 16.12.97, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against
   the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  6.10.20  (Judge
   Curtis), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against the decision of the
   Secretary of State, dated 7.2.20, to refuse his claim  for  international
   protection.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  10.11.20.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kamara  granted  permission  on  9.12.20,  considering  it
   arguable that, (a) between [31] and [40] of the decision the judge made a
   recurring reference to missing evidence, thereby imposing  a  requirement
   of corroboration "and arguably erred in concluding that its  absence  was
   detrimental to the appellant's claim"; (b) "entered into speculation  and
   placed weight on immaterial matters; (c)  "considered  and  rejected  the
   medical  opinion  only  after  having  arrived  at  negative  credibility
   findings."

3. The  Rule  24  response,  dated  11.1.21,  argues  that  pursuant  to  TK
   (Burundi) v Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 40 (cited at [38]  of  the
   decision), the judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  fact  that
   evidence which was or should have been readily available,  had  not  been
   provided. It is submitted that the judge was also entitled to  take  into
   account and assess the credibility of the  appellant's  explanations  for
   absence of evidence; for example, the claim  that  she  could  not  prove
   contact with her family because the landlords  who  were  supporting  her
   refused to allow her to use her phone to reset her  password.  The  judge
   was also entitled to take account of the inconsistency between the  claim
   that her family was extremely strict and sending her outside her father's
   control of contact with males outside the  family.  The  respondent  also
   rejects the claim that the medical  report  was  only  assessed  after  a
   conclusion reached on the other evidence.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the helpful submissions  of  both  representatives  and  the
   grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge   imposed   a   requirement   of
   corroboration, as claimed. It is clear from a reading of the decision  as
   a whole that a thorough assessment of the evidence has been undertaken by
   the judge. At [42] of the decision the judge reminded  himself  that  the
   appellant only required to prove her  case  to  the  lower  standard  but
   remarked that the case presented by her  "constituted  only  a  'skeleton
   framework'",  referencing  several  key  aspects  in  respect  of   which
   supporting evidence was not provided, "when it ought reasonably  to  have
   been so." Examples of such evidence are set out within the decision, some
   of which I have addressed below.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
   explanations for the absence of such evidence, finding those explanations
   not cogent, which, together with the appellant's vague answers,  led  the
   judge to have "significant concerns as to the veracity of the core of the
   appellant's account."

6. However, I find it difficult to justify  the  judge's  criticism  of  the
   appellant for the absence of some  aspects  of  potential  evidence;  for
   example, the declining of her landlords to give evidence. Unless  it  had
   been shown that she controlled whether or not they were prepared to  give
   evidence, it is unfair to  hold  their  refusal  against  the  appellant.
   Similar points may be made about at least some of the other  elements  of
   missing evidence.

7. One of the factors that causes me concern and which  I  spent  some  time
   addressing with the two representatives  is  the  judge's  concentration,
   particularly  at  [32]  of  the  decision,  on  the  appellant's   living
   conditions in London and in particular  the  judge's  apparent  disbelief
   that if her parents were the strict Muslims the appellant  claimed,  they
   would not have consented to their daughter living in a property in  which
   a single man also resided. As Ms  Johnrose  pointed  out,  there  was  no
   evidence that the parents were aware of  these  living  arrangements  and
   more significantly, this issue of concern was never raised by  the  judge
   with the parties during the hearing; it only appeared in  the  Tribunal's
   written decision. I also find it difficult to see how the judge justified
   this concern as undermining of the credibility  of  the  claim  that  the
   appellant's parents would be hostile to her on return to Bangladesh as an
   unwed pregnant mother. It is implicit from the findings  that  the  judge
   concluded that because the parents allowed the appellant  to  live  in  a
   home of former neighbours from Bangladesh in which  a  single  young  man
   also lived, the parents would welcome their daughter  home,  despite  her
   illicit relationship resulting in pregnancy. Whilst Ms Pettersen resisted
   this as the implicit conclusion, she was unable to  point  to  any  other
   purpose of the judge devoting so much of the decision to this issue,  one
   which was not raised by either party and was never part of  either  case.
   On the basis of the concerns as to living  conditions  in  London,  I  am
   satisfied such a conclusion was a leap too far. I am satisfied that  this
   foray was in error  of  law  and  sufficiently  central  to  the  overall
   credibility findings that the decision cannot stand and must be set aside
   for this reason alone.

8. Ms Johnrose also pursued  the  other  grounds  of  appeal  and  there  is
   certainly force in some of the points she made.  For example,  the  judge
   found incredible that the  appellant  would  be  living  in  London  when
   studying in Hamilton. In fact, as Ms Johnrose pointed out, the  appellant
   was studying at the London Campus of the University of West Scotland.  In
   rejecting the claim of threats made to her, the judge also criticised the
   absence of evidence of online communications such as Facebook  Messenger,
   when at least some of  the  threats  were  made  orally  so  that  online
   material could not have assisted. Similarly,  the  judge  criticises  the
   absence of evidence of hospital admission during her pregnancy  when  the
   fact that the appellant was pregnant was never in  dispute.   Considering
   these issues together, in the  round,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
   embarked on a consideration of a  number  of  peripheral  and  immaterial
   issues, using negative findings  made  in  respect  of  these  issues  to
   undermine the credibility of the appellant's claim. Whilst I accept  that
   many aspects of the appellant's factual claim appear remarkably weak,  if
   not lacking in credibility, I  have  to  accept  that  the  judge  placed
   considerable reliance on matters that were either not raised as an  issue
   at the hearing or which were immaterial to the core issues and  therefore
   amounted to procedural irregularity and contributed to a decision made in
   error of law.

9. Ms Johnrose also pointed out that, perhaps because the judge was  fixated
   on the peripheral issues referred to above, the core issues  of  risk  on
   return were not engaged with; for example, how a single parent woman with
   an illegitimate child would  be  treated  on  return  to  Bangladesh,  as
   addressed in SA (Divorced women - illegitimate child) Bangladesh  Country
   Guidance [2011]. I find force in  this  submission  and  agree  that  the
   failure to address this issue amounts to an error of law.

10. In relation to the claim that medical evidence  was  not  considered  in
   the round, at [43] the  judge  accepted  Dr  Ghosh's  evidence  that  the
   appellant has been diagnosed  with  depression  and  anxiety,  for  which
   psychological therapy is the appropriate treatment. It is clear from [44]
   of the decision that in considering the credibility  of  the  appellant's
   claim to be at risk on return from  her  brother,  the  judge  took  into
   account the diagnosis of depression and anxiety. It is  also  clear  from
   [40] and [41] of the decision  that  the  judge  considered  the  medical
   evidence  when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the  claim  that   being
   hospitalised led her to admitting her pregnancy to her family. At the end
   of [40] the judge refers to the absence of other  potentially  supportive
   medical evidence, which had not been produced. As  the  medical  evidence
   was accepted, it is difficult to see how the assessment of that  evidence
   could have been adversely affected by negative credibility  findings.  It
   is necessary for a judge to set out the reasoning  of  a  decision  in  a
   logical and organised way and that requires issues  to  be  addressed  in
   some form of order. It does not necessarily follow  that  anything  flows
   from the particular order in which a decision is set out. The fallacy  of
   this ground of appeal is the assumption that the  judge  only  reached  a
   conclusion on individual aspects of the evidence as it was being typed up
   into the decision. The formulation of a decision is the  distillation  of
   the judge's thought processes, setting out  the  reasoning  for  findings
   made. Nothing in the  grounds  or  the  decision  demonstrates  that  the
   medical evidence was addressed only  as  an  after-thought  and  rejected
   because of adverse credibility findings made.

11. Nevertheless, for the reasons set out above, particularly the  foray  or
   digression into the appellant's living circumstances in  London,  I  find
   such material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   that it must be set aside to be remade. As the errors largely  relate  to
   the credibility findings, nothing can be preserved from the decision  and
   it must be remade de novo. In the premises, the appropriate venue is  the
   First-tier Tribunal, in accordance with the Senior  President's  Practice
   Statement at paragraph 7.2

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The making of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal to be remade afresh with no findings preserved.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021





