
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa027692016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 31 July 2017               |
|On 20 July 2017                               |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel instructed by Krisinth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in  this  case  is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  of  Tamil
    ethnicity.  He was born in 1992.  He arrived in the UK in October  2015
    and claimed asylum on 17 November  that  year.   This  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 6  March  2016.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley in August 2016 and his appeal was dismissed  in
    a determination which was promulgated on  1  September  of  that  year.
    This decision was set aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Latter  on  16
    November 2016 and remitted for re-hearing at Taylor House.

 2. Because Taylor House was undergoing  refurbishment  at  that  time  the
    appeal was heard at Harmondsworth.  It came before Upper Tribunal Judge
    Widdup  on  19  January  2017  but  in  a  relatively  short   decision
    promulgated on 25 January 2017 the appeal was dismissed.  The appellant
    now appeals again to the Upper Tribunal permission having been  granted
    by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray.

 3. There are a number of grounds and I have been assisted by a  relatively
    lengthy skeleton argument which  had  been  produced  for  the  hearing
    before Judge Widdup.  I have also looked at the grounds, which were not
    settled by Ms Jones, who appeared for the appellant both  before  Judge
    Widdup and before this Tribunal and which set  out  all  the  arguments
    which could possibly be made.   Happily  at  the  hearing  before  this
    Tribunal Ms Jones concentrated on the more obviously  arguable  grounds
    which were contained within the grounds themselves and  which  are  for
    the reasons I will give below sufficient  to  persuade  me  that  Judge
    Widdup's decision is not sustainable.

 4. The appellant's case was supported by expert evidence  provided  by  Dr
    Martin in respect of the  appellant's  scarring  and  Dr  Lawrence  who
    referred to his psychiatric condition and  found  that  he  was  deeply
    traumatised and had severe mental health problems.  It was accepted  by
    Judge Widdup on the basis of Dr Lawrence's evidence that  it  would  be
    right to treat the appellant  as  a  vulnerable  person  and  therefore
    subject to guidance which has been given with regard to  the  treatment
    of evidence of such persons.  In particular it is acknowledged by  this
    Tribunal that someone who has experienced trauma whether in the form of
    combat or ill-treatment or torture in detention (as rightly set out  by
    Judge Widdup at paragraph 49) "is unlikely to have a complete recall of
    all events".  Judge Widdup stated at the conclusion  of  paragraph  49,
    that "I have also taken into account the need for  sensitive  treatment
    of a vulnerable individual".  At paragraph 12 he  states  further  that
    "in due course I will  consider  whether  any  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's case are or may be attributable to  trauma  experienced  by
    him".

 5. The case as advanced on behalf of the respondent both  by  Ms  Pal  but
    more particularly in the Rule 24 response on which she placed reliance,
    was that the judge did consider the inconsistencies  properly  in  this
    way and gave sustainable reasons for finding that those inconsistencies
    were such that they could not be attributable to trauma experienced  by
    him.  On behalf of the appellant however Ms Jones submitted that it was
    quite clear from the decision itself that the judge  had  not  properly
    made  the  allowances  he  should  have  made   for   the   appellant's
    vulnerability  and  that  he  had  not  adequately  explained  why  the
    relatively minor inconsistencies which he set out within  the  decision
    were sufficiently strong to outweigh the medical evidence which he  had
    also claimed to have had regard to.

 6. The most important medical evidence  was  that  of  Dr  Martin  who  as
    acknowledged by Judge Widdup had stated clearly (see  paragraph  46  of
    the decision) that "he found the scars are either typical or consistent
    with the appellant's account", the judge  going  on  to  say  that  "Dr
    Martin considered whether the  scars  might  be  the  result  of  self-
    infliction by proxy but  he  discounted  this  because  there  were  no
    presenting facts to make it more than a  possibility  and  the  overall
    pattern was not consistent with self-infliction".

 7. In this paragraph the judge also noted that Dr Martin's  "expertise  is
    such that he is well able to express an expert opinion on the  possible
    causes of scars and the degree of consistency with the account given to
    him" as well as that  "he  has  also  considered  possible  alternative
    causes of the marks he observed" and  that  "he  found  the  scars  are
    either typical or consistent with the appellant's account".

 8. For reasons which are not clear the judge then  went  on  to  state  at
    paragraph 47 that "in passing I find that it is highly improbable  that
    someone in the appellant's position would inform a clinician  of  facts
    suggestive of self-infliction".  That may or may not be correct but  it
    is a very odd observation to make in circumstances where what the judge
    should have done is rule out as a  serious  possibility  (applying  the
    lower standard of proof) that the  injuries  were  self-inflicted.   Dr
    Martin had considered this and had ruled it out;  there  was  no  basis
    upon which the judge could have had in mind at  all  that  this  was  a
    serious possibility, and accordingly the finding that was made at  [47]
    is at best irrelevant and at worst suggests that  the  judge  may  have
    started from a position which could be said to be  prejudicial  of  the
    appellant's case.

 9. Ms Jones has taken the Tribunal  through  the  various  inconsistencies
    referred to by the judge in his decision and has argued that these were
    sufficiently insignificant as not  to  outweigh  the  medical  evidence
    which was before him or at  the  very  least  to  render  the  position
    unclear.  She submitted that where matters were unclear, the  appellant
    should have been given the benefit of the doubt.  This may or  may  not
    be a good argument (and no doubt this will be argued  later)  but  this
    would not of its own, in my judgment constitute  a  proper  reason  for
    setting aside the decision.  Matters of weight are as is well-known,  a
    matter for the fact-finder and there were some  inconsistencies  within
    the account.  Provided the judge  has  shown  that  he  has  given  due
    allowance for the possible effects of trauma and has taken into account
    that the appellant should be treated as a vulnerable person, he is  not
    obliged to take everything that a vulnerable person says at face value.
     If this were  not  so,  then  it  would  be  very  difficult  ever  to
    disbelieve an account given by a vulnerable person.  However, it is  Ms
    Jones' case that because the inconsistencies are relatively small,  and
    to some extent misstated within the decision, the inference  should  be
    drawn that the wrong standard of proof was applied.  I do not make  any
    finding on that because it is not necessary for me to do so, because  I
    think there is a more serious fault within this decision which  can  be
    seen from the way  in  which  Dr  Martin's  report  was  considered  at
    paragraph 59.

10. Although at paragraph 59 the judge says that he has taken  Dr  Martin's
    report into account, having set out that Dr Martin has  said  and  that
    the judge accepts "that the appellant is scarred and that  these  scars
    are typical of or consistent with ill-treatment" the judge goes  on  to
    say that "Dr Martin does not say, and he cannot  say,  that  the  scars
    must have been caused by Sri Lankan authorities in the way described by
    the appellant".  He then states as follows:

         "Having regard to the adverse credibility findings I  have  made  I
         find that Dr Martin's report adds little to the overall  weight  of
         the appellant's claim".

11. Although the judge had said at paragraph 44 that he has considered  all
    the evidence in the round, what is  said  at  paragraph  59  is  wholly
    inconsistent with that.  Even Ms Pal, trying to defend this  aspect  of
    the decision was obliged to concede, and I quote, that "[this sentence]
    is a bit awkward and clumsy, the way he expresses himself" before  then
    submitting that it did not materially affect  the  overall  credibility
    findings.  She noted that "thankfully he has not gone on  to  speculate
    how [the appellant]  got  the  injury".   I  appreciate  that  although
    evidence has to be considered in the round, a decision has to be  given
    chronologically, and so some matters will be referred to before  others
    and I would be very hesitant indeed to make a finding of  an  error  of
    law merely on the basis  of  semantics.   However,  on  any  view,  the
    statement that "Dr Martin's report adds little to the overall weight of
    the appellant's claim" cannot be said to show that the judge had  given
    fair and proper consideration to the appellant's claim.  While  it  may
    very well have been open to the judge (and may be open to another judge
    hearing  this  appeal)  to  find   for   reasons   such   as   material
    inconsistencies in the evidence that notwithstanding Dr Martin's report
    the appellant's claim should still be rejected,  in  my  judgement  his
    claim has to be regarded as significantly stronger with the benefit  of
    Dr Martin's evidence than without it.  I asked Ms Pal if  she  accepted
    that this must be the case and she fairly accepted that  that  was  so.
    Accordingly and reluctantly the conclusion I am forced to draw from the
    judge's statement as already set out above in  the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 59 is that  the  judge  had  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the
    appellant's lack of credibility and that it was because of this finding
    that he did not consider that the medical report added very much to his
    claim.  What he should have done was demonstrate  within  the  decision
    that the finding had indeed been made in the round, which he does  not.
    Accordingly the findings with regard  to  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's  account  were  not  made   having   factored   into   that
    consideration Dr Martin's report (without which the  claim  would  have
    been much weaker) and accordingly this must be a material error of law,
    because it cannot be said with any certainty  that  the  decision  must
    have  been  the  same  had  Dr  Martin's  report   been   factored   in
    appropriately.

12. Both parties are agreed that in the event that I find a material  error
    of law the appropriate course is to remit this appeal (reluctantly, yet
    again) back to the First-tier Tribunal for  yet  another  judge  to  be
    faced with the responsibility of re-hearing this appeal and I  will  so
    order.



Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  as  containing
a material error of law  and  remit  this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Taylor House for rehearing before any  judge  other  than  Judge
Widdup or Judge Greasley.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017
