
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02300/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 31 July 2017                     |        On 8 August 2017          |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                             TADIOS MEHARI GEDEY
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Adams (counsel) instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:  Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 18 January 2017,  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  13/05/1991.  The  appellant  says  he  is  a
   national of Eritrea. On 17/10/2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
   Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Fox ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 06/04/2017  Judge  Nightingale  gave
   permission to appeal stating

      2. The grounds argue that the judge erred by interrupting  submissions
      on behalf of the appellant and ending the hearing  before  these  were
      completed. It is also argued that the judge erred in consideration  of
      aspects of the expert report.


      3. In view of the allegation made, it is arguable that the judge erred
      in the procedure followed at  the  appeal  hearing.  Evidence  of  the
      events at the hearing  must  be  provided  and  a  statement  from  Ms
      Cleghorn (counsel) filed and served forthwith.


      4. Whilst of less immediately identifiable arguable merit,  permission
      is also granted regarding the  judge's  consideration  of  the  expert
      evidence. Permission is granted on all grounds pleaded.

The hearing

5. (a) Miss Adams, for the appellant, referred me to the  witness  statement
of Ms Cleghorn, counsel who appeared before the First-tier tribunal. In  her
witness statement, Ms Cleghorn says that she started making submissions  and
had only spoken for approximately 2 minutes when the Judge interrupted  her.
She says that the  Judge  spoke  to  her  harshly,  raising  his  voice  and
adopting an angry tone.

(b) Ms Adams told me that there were two parts to  the  grounds  of  appeal.
The first is a procedural issue. She told me that the Judge  interrupted  Ms
Cleghorn and prevented her from making full submissions. By the  time  there
was an exchange between the  Judge  and  Ms  Cleghorn,  the  respondent  had
already made complete and uninterrupted submissions. She told  me  that  the
fact that the respondent was able to make submissions, but counsel  for  the
appellant was not, raised the question of fairness, or  at  least  perceived
unfairness. She relied on the case of ML Nigeria  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
844.

(c) Ms Adams told me that the appearance that submissions for the  appellant
will not be considered effects the Judge's consideration of the evidence  in
the case and in particular of an expert report. She told me that  the  Judge
had left the bench before counsel for the appellant had the  opportunity  to
make submissions in relation to the expert report. She took me  to  [23]  of
the decision, and told me that the Judge's summary of the content  of  a  70
page expert report is inadequate. She then referred me to  various  passages
in the expert report which, she said, supported the  appellant's  claim  but
was not considered by the Judge.

(d) Ms Adams told me  that  the  appellant  had  been  deprived  of  a  fair
hearing. She urged me to allow the appeal and to  remit  this  case  to  the
first-tier.

6. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, relied on  the  rule  24  note  dated  26
April 2017. He told me that  he  did  not  challenge  anything  said  in  Ms
Cleghorn's statement. He read an extract from  the  Home  Office  presenting
officer's report,  which  indicated  that  counsel  for  the  appellant  was
repeatedly  interrupted  by  the  Judge.  He   described   a   sequence   of
interruptions as "some discussions of a heated nature".

Analysis

7. In Elayi (fair hearing - appearance) [2016] UKUT 508 (IAC)  it  was  held
that justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen to  be  done.
The appeal was allowed when the Judge had engaged in a private  conversation
relating to the Appellant's case with the Appellant's representative in  the
absence of the other party's representative, in the precincts of  the  court
room but partly out of sight and earshot of the Appellant  and  his  spouse,
in a setting other than that of bench/bar  before  the  Appellant's  hearing
began: the contents whereof, other than a  question  about  the  Appellant's
religious adherence, itself an improper enquiry made in this  fashion,  were
not divulged to the Appellant.

8. On 16 February 2016 directions were issued in this  case  requiring  both
the appellant and respondent to lodge a paginated and indexed bundle of  all
the documents to be relied on at appeal, with  a  schedule  identifying  the
essential  passages.  The  hearing  scheduled  for  16  September  2016  was
adjourned on the appellant's application. The appeal hearing took  place  on
17 January 2017.

9. The appellant's first  bundle  was  tendered  on  7  September  2016.  It
contained a chronology, a skeleton argument, documentary  evidence  and  375
pages of background materials and caselaw.

10. The appellant's second bundle of documents  was  lodged  on  11  January
2017. That bundle contains the appellant's witness statement,  a  supporting
letter, and a 68 page report prepared by Gunter  Schroder.  The  appellant's
representatives did not produce a schedule identifying essential passages.

11. Despite the procedural history, the number of documents lodged  and  the
directions dated 16 February 2016, the appellant's representatives  did  not
produce  a  schedule  identifying  essential  passages.  Is   not   entirely
surprising that when counsel's attention turned to  the  significant  volume
of documentary evidence the Judge wanted to  know  why  directions  had  not
been followed. Although Ms Cleghorn emphasises the manner and tone  she  was
spoken to by the Judge, I make nothing of that. The Judge has  not  had  the
opportunity to comment either on the grounds of appeal or the content of  Ms
Cleghorn's witness statement, which  despite  the  terms  of  the  grant  of
permission to appeal on 6 April 2017 (evidence of the events at the  hearing
must be provided and a  statement  from  Ms  Cleghorn  (counsel)  filed  and
served forthwith) was not produced until 27 July 2017, and  was  not  signed
and dated until the morning of this hearing.

12. What is important is the impression that  was  created  when  the  Judge
interrupted counsel. As I have already indicated, the Judge was  correct  to
ask counsel why directions had not been followed.  There  is  nothing  wrong
with the Judge mentioning an error in preparation. In Singh [2016] EWCA  Civ
492  it was held that a Judge did not act amiss  if,  in  relation  to  some
feature of a party's case which struck  him  as  inherently  improbable,  he
indicated the need for unusually compelling evidence to persuade him of  the
fact. Such statements could positively assist the advocate  or  litigant  in
knowing where particular efforts might need to  be  pointed.  There  was  no
need to bar robust expression by a Judge so long as it  was  not  indicative
of a  closed  mind.  Such  expressions  might  be  positively  necessary  to
displace a presumption  or  misapprehension  which  was  potentially  highly
material to the case.   There  could  be  no  objection  to  the  FtT  Judge
stating, at an early  stage,  that  he  disagreed  with  the  argument  that
documentary evidence was of lesser importance  in  these  kinds  of  appeal.
That was a perfectly proper view for the Judge to hold and it  was  entirely
appropriate for him so to say, with a view to avoiding any  misapprehensions
on  the  part  of  counsel  in  thereafter  conducting  the  appeal  to  the
Claimant's best advantage.

13. However, a potential difficulty is created when one party is  given  the
benefit of making full submissions, and  another  party  is  prevented  from
making submissions. The correct course may well have been to adjourn  whilst
an essential passages index  was  created  and  then  resume  to  hear  full
submissions, or at least to invite written submissions within a  short  time
period. The appearance of treating  parties'  agents  differently,  allowing
the respondent's  presenting  officer  to  speak  at  length,  but  bringing
counsel for the appellant to an abrupt halt,  creates  the  impression  that
one representative is treated more favourably than the other.

14. Before me, parties' agents agree that Ms Cleghorn was not able  to  make
submissions concerning  the  expert  report  relied  on  by  the  appellant.
Because the Judge  cut  those  submissions  short  and  because  no  written
submissions were made, the impression may be created in  a  reasonable  mind
that the Judge has not given full consideration to the expert report.

15. Grounds of appeal focus on procedural impropriety. Although a  challenge
is taken to [23] of the decision. no other part of the Judge's findings  are
the subject of criticism. Were  it  not  for  an  error  in  procedure,  the
decision would stand. But justice must not only be done it must be  seen  to
be done.  In CD (DRC) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
EWCA Civ 1425 the Judge  had  made  comments  when  allowing  permission  to
appeal and then went on to determine the second stage of  the  appeal.   The
Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the  test  of  bias  was  whether   all   the
circumstances of the case would lead a fair-minded and informed observer  to
conclude that there was a real possibility that  the  Tribunal  was  biased:
Porter v McGill [2001] UKHL 67 applied.

16. In this case the record of proceedings discloses that  the  respondent's
representative completed her submissions. Counsel for the appellant was  not
able to complete hers. On that basis, I find  that  the  appellant  must  be
left with the impression that he had not had a fair and complete hearing.  I
must therefore set the decision aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
the  impression  might  be  created  that  the   appellant's   hearing   was
incomplete.  A new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the  findings
of fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  North  Shields
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Fox.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  18  January  2017.  The
appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined
of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 4 August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
