
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02834/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 April 2017                      |On 15 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs B Faryl, Counsel, instructed by Immigration
Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant, who claims  to  be  a  Palestinian,  has  permission  to
    challenge a decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Herwald sent on
    13 January 2017 dismissing her appeal against a decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 26 November 2015 refusing  her  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claims.

2.   The sole ground of challenge is to the judge's refusal to  adjourn  the
    hearing despite the evident physical distress  of  the  appellant.   It
    will assist to set out the judge's reasons for refusing to  adjourn  at
    paragraphs 3-5:

         "3.  The Appellant chose to give evidence without  an  interpreter,
             although  one  had  been  booked.   As  her  cross-examination
             progressed, she appeared to be struggling slightly  with  some
             English, and at Ms Faryl's request, the interpreter was  asked
             to step in.  The Appellant continued to  answer  questions  in
             English, and although I was prepared to allow her to choose to
             do so, Ms Faryl wisely advised her that she should go  through
             the interpreter at all times.  At 10.40am  I  stood  the  case
             down for some time, as the Appellant appeared to be  vomiting.
             Thereafter the case resumed.   I  stood  the  matter  down  at
             11.05am and allowed time for the Appellant to  give  evidence.
             Her  representative  returned  to  court  to   say   that   'a
             psychologist who has accompanied the Appellant says  that  she
             is in shock and ought not to proceed'.   I  stood  the  matter
             down and Ms Faryl came back into court at 12.50pm.   She  said
             that the Appellant would not return  to  court  and  asked  me
             either to agree to adjourn the hearing, or to order  that  the
             hearing be aborted, and begun again in front of an all  female
             court.


         4.   Mr Jaffri opposed this application.  He pointed out  that  the
             Appellant had just about concluded cross-examination.  He told
             me what two further questions he would have wished to ask, and
             I opined that those particular questions would not  assist  me
             in  the  decision  making  process.   Ms  Faryl  had   already
             indicated  that  she  would  only  'possibly'  have  some  re-
             examination.  I took into  account  the  inordinate  delay  at
             present involved if one adjourns  an  asylum  hearing,  and  I
             shared with the parties that a resumed hearing might not  take
             place until the middle of 2017, which  could  not  be  in  the
             interests of a nervous Appellant.  I reminded myself that  the
             case had had to be adjourned before, due  to  the  Appellant's
             medical state and  that  it  looked  as  though  I  had  heard
             sufficient information  in  order  to  enable  me  to  make  a
             decision in this case.  Ms Faryl had opined that it might  not
             be safe to rely on the evidence thus  far  heard,  considering
             that her client appeared to be retching and was not  now  well
             enough to come into court again.


         5.    That  said,  I  announced  that  we  would  move  to  hearing
             submissions, whereupon  the  Appellant  reappeared,  with  the
             psychologist in tow, (She had made a statement but who was not
             being called to give evidence).  The Appellant sat  down  once
             again in the seat reserved for the Appellant,  and  took  part
             once again in the proceedings.  There was  no  further  cross-
             examination or re-examination, but the Appellant  was  invited
             by me to  share  any  further  thoughts  that  she  wished  in
             relation to her claim.  She went on to make a speech about why
             her asylum claim should be  allowed,  and  why  she  had  fled
             Jordan.   This  was  with   the   tacit   agreement   of   the
             psychologist, who said she had no objections medically, to the
             question  posed.   The  Appellant  then  remained  for   final
             submissions.  Although Ms Faryl had said that she  would  only
             rely on the skeleton argument, and  not  make  a  speech,  she
             appeared to decide, in the presence of the Appellant, that she
             could make detailed oral submissions".


3.   I heard submissions from both representatives and express my  gratitude
    to them for their clarity.

4.    I am persuaded that the ground of appeal is made  out.   I  have  some
    sympathy for the position the judge found himself  in.   I  also  think
    that when the appellant became ill the judge did try to proceed fairly,
    by putting the case back to allow time for the  appellant  to  complete
    her evidence and then taking stock of the fact that the  appellant  had
    just about concluded being  cross-examined.   However,  there  are  two
    considerations which lead me to conclude that the judge  was  wrong  to
    refuse to adjourn.  First, the judge does not appear to have understood
    that the appellant was a vulnerable witness within the meaning  of  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.  That had been  attested
    to  by  medical  evidence  that  was  before  the  judge  from  both  a
    psychotherapist and a mental health practitioner.   Both  practitioners
    had identified that the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD,  anxiety  and
    depression and when asked about the matter of her claim  to  have  been
    the victim of  a  sexual  assault  she  was  someone  who  became  very
    distressed and physically agitated.  Whilst it can  be  said  that  the
    judge did make certain allowance when the appellant  became  physically
    sick (vomiting three times), by then standing the case down for a short
    period, he appears to have assumed that the  appellant's  evidence  had
    been unaffected up to the point when she became sick.  In my  judgment,
    in view of the medical evidence, that was an unsafe  assumption,  since
    the medical evidence indicated that the appellant was  likely  to  find
    the business of giving evidence distressing.

5.   I am also concerned  about  the  judge's  stated  assumption  that  the
    psychologist, Ms Bell, who had been in the hearing room and had earlier
    said the appellant was in shock and not ready to proceed, condoned  the
    appellant coming back after the break  and  making  a  statement.   The
    judge records at paragraph 5 that this "was with the tacit agreement of
    the psychologist who said  she  had  no  objections  medically  to  the
    question posed".  That is at odds with the record presented by the Home
    Office Presenting Officer who  simply  records  that  the  psychologist
    advised the appellant's representative that  the  appellant  could  not
    continue.  It is not  clear  why  the  psychologist,  having  said  the
    appellant  could  not  continue,  should  shortly  after  approve   the
    appellant making a statement in answer  to  a  question  asked  by  the
    judge.

6.   Compounding my concerns about the  judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence is the fact that later on in the determination, when assessing
    the substance of the appellant's account, the judge states that the two
    written medical reports could only be  accorded  "very  slight"  weight
    because they were "entirely based on self-reporting".  I find  this  an
    oversimplification of what the two experts concerned  were  doing  when
    they gave their reports.  Both had  examined  the  appellant  and  both
    through training would be highly  unlikely  to  base  their  assessment
    "entirely" on the appellant's  own  description  of  her  psychological
    condition. That is not to say that their reports were above  criticism,
    simply that they should not have been misunderstood.

7.   Mr McVeety submits that he would not have opposed the appeal  save  for
    the timing of the problem that arose.  By the time the appellant became
    physically sick, he  pointed  out,  she  had  virtually  completed  her
    evidence and the judge gave an entirely reasonable explanation for  why
    he did not press the  appellant  to  complete  cross-examination.   The
    difficulty with this submission is the same as  I  identified  earlier.
    It was an unsafe assumption to be made,  in  respect  of  a  vulnerable
    witness, that her vomiting was not simply an extreme  manifestation  of
    the fact that the appellant was anxious and distressed  throughout  the
    course of giving evidence.   Indeed  later  on,  when  considering  the
    substance of the appellant's claim, the judge acknowledged at paragraph
    17(l)  that  "the  appellant  may  have  been  stressed  by  the  court
    appearance". It is not clear to me that the judge  made  any  allowance
    for that.

8.   Ture it is that the appellant's case had  been  adjourned  once  before
    due to  the  appellant's  medical  state.  True  it  is  also  that  by
    adjourning the judge would cause  further  delay.  But  the  judge  who
    previously adjourned had not forewarned the appellant that if she could
    not give evidence for medical reasons again, the Tribunal may well rely
    solely on her written evidence.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    adjourn the hearing and as a result his decision must be set aside.

10.  I consider that in light of the procedural unfairness that took  place,
    no findings of fact made by the FtT can be preserved and that the  case
    should be remitted to the FtT.

11.  However, in view of the history of  adjournment  for  medical  reasons,
    the appellant must understand that if she is,  once  again,  unable  to
    give or complete her oral evidence, the FtT will proceed  to  determine
    the case on the basis of her written evidence (which it is open to  her
    to add to if  submitted  ten  days  prior  to  the  next  hearing)  and
    submissions.

12.  To facilitate the prospect of the appellant being  able  to  give  oral
    evidence next time in conditions liable to  minimise  stress,  I  shall
    direct that the hearing take the form of an all female court - so  that
    both the representatives, the interpreter and the Tribunal judge(s) are
    female.  Whilst I am somewhat troubled by the fact that in  her  asylum
    interview the appellant  did  not  voice  any  concerns  about  a  male
    interpreter, I note that Ms Bell has stated her  medical  opinion  that
    the appellant's PTSD level is very high near men and that a request for
    an all female court was made at the hearing before  Judge  Herwald.   I
    shall also direct expedition.

13.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


Direction

The case is remitted to the FtT to be heard by an all female court.

The case is to be put before a resident  judge  with  a  view  to  as  early
    listing as is practicable.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 12 May 2017
                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


