
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02065/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 D A (iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Muneeb Akram, Counsel instructed by Halliday
Reeves
                  Law Firm
For the respondent:    Mr Andrew McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This order  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection  or  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The appellant is an  Iraqi  Kurd  from
    Kirkuk.

 2. The respondent accepts that there is a risk to this  appellant  in  his
    home area of Kirkuk, and also that he cannot be expected to exercise an
    internal flight option to Baghdad.  The appeal  turns  on  whether  the
    Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) is an appropriate internal flight option for
    him.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  a  Sunni  Muslim  Kurd,  from  a
    contested area, Kirkuk.   In 2003, the appellant's father was killed by
    the Asayish or people who worked for the IKR government, because he had
    worked for the Ba'ath party as a border guard.

 4. While in Iraq, the appellant lived with  his  widowed  mother  and  his
    siblings.  He is in possession of a CSID.   He learned Arabic at school
    and speaks it to a reasonable level.

 5. In 2008 or 2009, the appellant began to work with Mines Advisory  Group
    Iraq (MAG), a branch of an international charitable organisation  which
    'saves and improves lives by reducing  the  devastating  effects  armed
    violence and remnants of conflict have on people around the world'.  In
    1997, MAG was joint winner of the Nobel Peace Prize.

 6. The appellant produced a reference confirming that he  worked  for  MAG
    Iraq from June 2009 until July 2015, working first as a Mines Detection
    Dog Team Leader and later just as a dog  handler.   The  appellant  had
    successfully passed the international course for MDD Team Leader at the
    NPA  Global  Training  Centre  in  Sarajevo,  Bosnia.   He  worked  and
    cooperated with people from different national,  religious  and  racial
    groups, without any bias or prejudice.

 7. The country director for MAG Iraq  in  October  2015,  Nina  Seecharan,
    confirmed the length of the appellant's employment  and  its  Technical
    Field Manager for Mine Detection Dogs (MDD), Adnan Avdic,  gave  him  a
    splendid  reference,  noting  that   he   had   successfully   achieved
    qualifications in Manual  Demining  Clearance  as  a  deminer,  a  team
    leader, a dog handler and a dog team leader, that he  was  '[ready]  to
    learn and gain new knowledge and skills and quality  [and]  impart  the
    acquired knowledge to others'.

 8. Mr Avdic said that the appellant had unexpectedly decided to resign and
    emigrate to the United Kingdom but that he would  gladly  reemploy  him
    should he return to Iraq, as the appellant was 'fully capable to accept
    all working challenge'.

 9. The appellant's explanation for his sudden decision, which was accepted
    in the First-tier Tribunal, was that in July 2014, he lost  his  mobile
    phone, which was found by an Islamist, who realised from materials  and
    photographs on that mobile that the appellant was working for a British
    company.  The Islamist telephoned the appellant, warning him  to  leave
    his job and calling him an infidel and a spy.

10. The appellant reported this to a friend who was a  policeman,  but  the
    police were unable to trace the caller and the policeman said that they
    would be unable to protect him.  The appellant gave up his job for  two
    weeks, but was depressed and returned to work, this time  merely  as  a
    dog handler not a team leader.  The appellant was careful:  he  changed
    his telephone number, wore his civilian clothes until he got  to  work,
    and varied his route to and from work.

11. On 26 June 2015, the appellant received a direct threat from  Abu  Omar
    Askari, who said  he  was  from  Islamic  State/Daesh.   He  asked  the
    appellant to provide him with explosives, and to give him the names  of
    Kurdish, British and  foreign  personnel  working  for  MAG  Iraq.   He
    threatened to kill the appellant if he refused.

12. The appellant contacted his friend in the police, who again  said  that
    no protection was available.  ISIS Daesh  had  people  working  in  the
    government and everyone was in danger.  The appellant telephoned a work
    colleague, who advised him to go and stay at the MAG Iraq base  and  to
    advise his family members to stay away from their home.

13. On 27 June 2015, just a day later, there was another threat.  A Kurdish
    person working with a jihadi group told the appellant he must  obey  Mr
    Alaskari or be killed.  Three days later, a grenade and a  letter  from
    Mr Alaskari was thrown into the courtyard of the appellant's home.  The
    grenade killed the family dog.  The letter contained threats from  both
    ISIS/Daesh and the Kurdish jihadi group:

         "Your cooperation protects your life from death, and we  warn  you,
         for  the  last  time,  to  help  the  heroic  Mujahideen  and  make
         forewarned be forearmed."

    The appellant's mother telephoned him to say what  had  happened.   The
    appellant obtained the letter from his mother and relied on it  in  his
    appeal.

14.  The  appellant  contacted  his  work  colleague,  who  took   him   to
    Suleimaniyah, and he left Iraq,  travelling  via  Turkey,  Hungary  and
    France to the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  was  fingerprinted  in
    Hungary  but  did  not  claim  asylum  there  because   the   Hungarian
    authorities ill-treated him.

15. The appellant had lost contact with family and friends in Iraq and said
    that he could not relocate to Baghdad, because he was a Sunni Kurd,  or
    in the IKR, where he had no sponsor and the Kurdish  jihadi  group  had
    threatened him.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. First-tier Judge Myers, sitting in Bradford, dismissed the appeal.   He
    accepted the appellant's core account as credible, save that he did not
    believe the appellant's evidence that he  would  be  unable  to  obtain
    current contact details for his friend in  the  Kirkuk  police  or  his
    former work colleague, or his mother and siblings in Kirkuk.

17. The judge accepted that the Kirkuk work colleague's mobile phone number
    had stopped working in 2016, a year after the appellant left Iraq.   He
    considered that these two people would help  the  appellant  again,  as
    they did in the past.

18. The judge did not explain why, apart from his own perception that  this
    should be possible, an otherwise credible witness should be treated  as
    lacking in credibility on that issue.

19. The judge accepted that the appellant could not return to Kirkuk  where
    it was 'far too early to assess the situation' and that there  remained
    an Article 15C risk in Kirkuk.  Additionally, the judge considered that
    it would be unreasonably harsh to expect him to live in Baghdad,  where
    he had no friends or family, and  would  be  a  member  of  a  minority
    community.

20. The judge directed himself by reference to AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) and the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  He found at [38]  that  as  a
    Kurd with a CSID the appellant would not need a sponsor to get into the
    IKR.

21. The judge did not accept that the appellant remained at risk in the IKR
    by reason of his father's links to the Ba'ath party or from the Kurdish
    jihadi group which threatened him  in  2015.   The  IKR  was  virtually
    violence free.

22. The appeal was dismissed on the basis that in resettling in the IKR the
    appellant would benefit from assistance from his mother and siblings in
    Kirkuk, and his former work colleague and policeman friend in Kirkuk.

23. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

24. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  only  one  of  the  two  grounds
    advanced: at ground 1, Ms Cleghorn (who  settled  the  grounds)  argued
    that:

         "... It is submitted that the First-tier Judge  clearly  finds  the
         appellant a credible witness  [28]  and  has  given  an  incredibly
         detailed account. He has submitted his CSID to the  respondent  and
         gave evidence 'to his credit' that he speaks Arabic to a reasonable
         level [36].  It makes no sense why she would later then 'not accept
         that the appellant has not contact with family and friends in Iraq'
         [39].  Given that Kirkuk is currently contested, i.e. that there is
         indiscriminate violence to the extent that it engages 15(c), it  is
         not clear why his evidence would not be accepted that he has  tried
         and failed.  Likewise, it is not clear how he could simply  'trace'
         his mother given the significant numbers displaced  in  and  around
         Kirkuk and, even if he could, how they  could  assist  from  Kirkuk
         given the checkpoints between Kirkuk and the IKR."

25. When granting permission, First-tier Judge Scott Baker found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding that there was no risk to  the  appellant
    from his late father's involvement with the  Ba'ath  party  because  no
    country evidence to that effect had been adduced before the judge,  was
    'made without any findings relating to the appellant's father  and  was
    made in a complete vacuum', rendering the decision arguably  irrational
    and arguably also tainting the internal relocation findings.

26. Ground 2, which relies on country evidence which  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, was excluded from the grant of permission.

Rule 24 Reply

27. The respondent's Rule 24 Reply argued that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was thorough and that, given that the appellant had  some
    contact with his friends in Kirkuk since  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2015, it was not unreasonable to assume that he could  grace
    them now and obtain help from his family in Kirkuk, if  they  could  be
    traced. The respondent continued to argue that there  was  no  credible
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of a real risk of serious  harm
    in the IKR from which the authorities could not protect him.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. I heard oral submissions from both parties.  There was no new  evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal for the error of law hearing.

30. For the appellant, Mr Akram argued that it was very unlikely  that  the
    appellant would be able to trace his family and friends in  Kirkuk  and
    that the physical removal of ISIS/Daesh did not  remove  the  Ba'athist
    influence. The appellant's family and friends were all in  a  contested
    area which was still considered to be at  15(c)  levels  of  risk.   He
    pointed out that the respondent had a separate  CPIN  on  the  risk  to
    those formerly associated with the Ba'ath party and further,  that  the
    appellant was known to have worked for a non-governmental organisation,
    MAG Iraq.  He would remain at risk on return.

31. For the respondent, Mr McVeety said that ISIS/Daesh had no presence  in
    Iraq or Syria  now.   The  appellant  had  previously  worked  for  the
    government and that would assist  him  in  resettling  in  the  IKR  on
    return.  He would be returning from the  United  Kingdom  not  directly
    from the contested area, which should allay any suspicions  of  him  by
    Kurds living in the IKR.

Analysis

32. The risk to this appellant is put in two ways:  first,  that  his  late
    father was a Ba'ath party border guard and was killed in 2003 for  that
    reason; and second, that he himself worked  for  MAG  Iraq  as  a  mine
    detector and dog handler, and that an Islamist threatened his  life  on
    several occasions, telling him to stop working for MAG  Iraq  and  then
    asking him to give weapons and the names of those with whom he  worked.



33. That risk is not related to his late father, but to the appellant's own
    work for a British company, leading the jihadist who threatened him  to
    regard him as an infidel and a spy: in short, a collaborator.

34. The First-tier Judge did not adequately engage with that element of the
    account, and the findings of fact that the appellant  was  lying  about
    being unable to reach his former friends and family  in  Kirkuk,  given
    the existence of an Article 15(c)  situation  there,  are  inadequately
    reasoned, particularly in the  light  of  the  generally  detailed  and
    credible account he gave.

35. I remind myself that by paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules HC  395
    (as amended):

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

36. It was accepted  by  the  First-tier  Judge  that  this  appellant  was
    subjected to direct threats of serious harm in 2015 when he  left  Iraq
    and that it is not safe to return him to Kirkuk, his home area, nor  to
    Baghdad because he is a Sunni Muslim.  The evidence  before  the  judge
    that there were 'good reasons to  consider  that  such  persecution  or
    serious harm will not be repeated' was slight.

37. The appellant has no contacts in the IKR and the evidence of his  still
    having any contacts or family in the contested  Kirkuk  area  consisted
    solely of supposition on the part  of  the  First-tier  Judge.   It  is
    difficult to see how they could help him from Kirkuk, even if he  could
    find them.

38. Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is a material error  of  law  in
    the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  in  that  the  First-tier  Judge's
    reasoning is inadequate. I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

39. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was insufficient to  amount
    to 'good reasons to consider' that the appellant will  not  now  be  at
    risk from Islamists or jihadis who consider him to  be  a  collaborator
    because he worked  with  MAG  Iraq.   I  therefore  consider  that  the
    appellant has discharged the burden upon him, to the lower standard, of
    showing that  he  remains  at  risk  in  the  IKR,  the  only  internal
    relocation  option  which  has  been  advanced  as  possible   by   the
    respondent.

40. I remake the decision in this appeal by allowing the protection appeal.



DECISION

41. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.

    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     29 July 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



