
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02798/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 21st November 2016              |On 1st December 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                  Najma [A]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, Counsel instructed by Broudie, Jackson
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Miss Najma [A] against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly, promulgated on the 17 August 2016, to  dismiss
    her appeal against the refusal of her Protection Claim.  The  basis  of
    the appeal is that the judge  erred  in  law  by  making  contradictory
    findings of fact.

 2. The essence of the appellant's claim was (and is) as follows. She is  a
    Somali national who was born in  Mogadishu  and  is  a  member  of  the
    majority Darood/Ogaden clan. She was brought up from  the  age  of  two
    years, together with her elder brother and her parents,  in  a  refugee
    camp in Kenya. The family remained in Kenya following  the  closure  of
    the camp in 1997. Her sister was born in  Kenya  in  2000.  The  family
    returned to Somalia in 2007 because her father had been  working  as  a
    driver but was unable to obtain a driving licence. The family lived  on
    Chula Island, where her father worked as a  boat  maker.  From  January
    2015 onwards, her father received several visits from a  group  of  men
    who spoke to him in private. The appellant later learnt that they  were
    seeking to recruit her father to Al  Shabaab.  As  a  result  of  these
    visits, the family planned to leave Somalia in April 2015. However,  in
    March 2015, a group of over 10 men arrived  at  night  and  killed  the
    appellant's father, beat her husband and brother, and raped her and her
    mother. As a  result  of  the  attack  upon  her,  the  appellant  lost
    consciousness.  She  awoke   in   a   hospital   in   Mombasa,   Kenya.
    Coincidentally, a friend of her mother  from  Kenya  was  visiting  the
    hospital at the time, and she put her in touch with a people  smuggler.
    The appellant and the people smuggler travelled together by plane to  a
    third country, where he gave her a false passport and  a  plane  ticket
    for Manchester. She has had  no  contact  with  her  family  since  her
    arrival in the UK and she does not therefore know what became of  them.
    She believes that the men responsible  for  her  father's  murder  were
    members of Al Shabaab. She fears that if she returns to  Mogadishu  she
    will either be targeted by Al Shabaab or become destitute.

 3. The Respondent accepts that the appellant is a Somali national and also
    accepts her account of the family fleeing the violence in Mogadishu  in
    2002.  The  issue  before  Judge  Farrelly  thus  revolved  around  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of (a) her return to Somalia  in
    2007, and (b) events leading up  to  her  eventual  departure  for  the
    United Kingdom in 2015. Judge Farrelly's reasons for finding that  that
    account was not credible may be summarised as follows.

 4. Given that the appellant is  from  a  Somali  majority  clan  and  from
    Mogadishu, it is not apparent why her  father  would  have  decided  to
    relocate to one of the islands which are typically occupied  by  Bajuni
    minority clan members (paragraph 14). The appellant was unable to offer
    any explanation as to how she came to be in a hospital in  Kenya,  some
    800 km away, when there were nearer  hospitals  in  Somalia  (paragraph
    16). It was "incredibly fortuitous" that a friend of her mother  should
    happen to meet her in a Kenyan  hospital,  especially  given  that  the
    appellant claimed not to have resided in Kenya for some 8 years at that
    time. It was "even more incredulous" that the friend happened to have a
    brother who was wealthy and a people  trafficker,  let  alone  that  he
    would be willing to travel with  her  to  the  United  Kingdom  without
    recompense (paragraph 17). It was "surprising" that the  appellant  had
    not made any effort to trace her family through the Somali community in
    the UK.

 5. Judge Farrelly's conclusions are set out in paragraphs 19  and  20.  It
    was these paragraphs upon which Miss Khan focused the majority  of  her
    criticism of the judge's findings. I therefore set them out in full.

         "19. It is my conclusion that the appellant's claim about events in
         March 2015 has been fabricated. I accept  that  the  appellant  was
         living Kenya. I do not accept that she returned to  Somalia.  I  do
         not find it credible that the family would  have  relocated  to  an
         island where they have no  stated  connection.  While  things  were
         difficult in Kenya there was no risk to life. One  explanation  for
         the appellant stating the  family  moved  to  an  island  would  be
         awareness that the situation in Mogadishu is now stable. I  believe
         that she has fabricated a claim around Al Shabaab in an area  where
         they still have  a  presence.  I  believe  this  explains  why  she
         originally mentioned being Bajuni. It is also not credible that her
         father would have no difficulties in 2007 until  January  2015  and
         then be approached three times.

         20.  It is my conclusion that the appellant could  be  returned  to
         Mogadishu.  I  appreciate  a  single  female  is  in  a  vulnerable
         position. However she is a majority clan member  and  could  expect
         some support from her  clan.  If  her  claim  were  believable  her
         benefactress in  Kenya  could  also  provide  support.  The  family
         originally are from Mogadishu. It may be she can be  reunited  with
         members of her family. Because I do not believe her  account  about
         Al Shabaab it would mean her parents brother and husband are  still
         in the country."

 6. The above analysis discloses two inconsistencies of approach. The  most
    glaring  of  these  is  the  judge's  finding  that   the   appellant's
    benefactress in Kenya would be able to provide support to the appellant
    upon her return to Somalia, having earlier found that  this  aspect  of
    her claim was wholly incredible. Whilst I  appreciate  that  the  later
    finding purports to be conditional upon the appellant's  account  being
    "believable", it is an error of  law  to  reject  a  factual  claim  as
    incredible only later to rely  upon  it  as  providing  support  for  a
    finding that the claimant will not be at risk on return to her  country
    of origin. Such an approach involves having  the  proverbial  cake  and
    eating it.

 7. In the second and third sentences of paragraph 19, the judge stated  in
    terms that he did not accept that the appellant had returned from Kenya
    to Somalia. Given that  it  was  the  appellant's  case  that  she  had
    returned to Somalia with her parents and siblings, that  is  a  finding
    which it is impossible to reconcile with  the  later  finding  (in  the
    final sentence of paragraph 20) that "her parents, brother, and husband
    are still in [Somalia]".

 8. Given that the supposed availability of support from a benefactress and
    close family members was an integral part  of  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant could safely return to  Mogadishu,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge's inconsistent  reasoning  is  such  as  to  infect  the
    entirety of the decision. The decision must therefore be set aside  and
    none of its factual findings are to be preserved.

 9. Having announced the above decision at the end  of  the  hearing,  both
    representatives agreed that the appropriate course was  to  remit  this
    appeal to the first-tier Tribunal for  a  complete  rehearing.  I  also
    acceded to Miss Khan's request for the matter  to  be  reheard  at  the
    Bradford hearing centre given that this is the most convenient location
    to the appellant's current address.



Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is allowed, the decision of the first-tier Tribunal  is  set
    aside, and the appeal is remitted for rehearing at the Bradford hearing
    centre.


Signed   Date 1st December 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

