
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02814/2016
                                                               PA/02818/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 5th January 2017            |on 25th January 2017                 |
|Prepared on 18th January 2017        |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                MRS WETHTHANGE SUGATHADASA - FIRST APPELLANT
                   MR AYUJIHWA KANDAMBY - SECOND APPELLANT
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitworth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are both citizens of Sri Lanka and are wife and husband
      respectively. The first Appellant was born on 5th of October 1984  and
      the 2nd Appellant was born on 26th of August 1980. They appeal against
      a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie sitting at Hatton
      Cross on 2 September 2016  in  which  she  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeals against decisions of the Respondent dated 10th of March  2016.
      Those decisions were to refuse  the  first  Appellant  asylum  in  the
      United Kingdom with the 2nd Appellant as her dependent. For  the  sake
      of convenience I will refer to the first Appellant  as  the  Appellant
      and the 2nd Appellant as the Appellant's husband.

   2. The Appellants entered the United Kingdom on 10 February 2012 when the
      Appellant had a Tier 4 (General) Student  Visa  valid  until  30th  of
      March 2014. In March 2014 they were granted further leave to remain as
      a student and dependent respectively until 5th of January  2016.  They
      returned to Sri Lanka on 23rd of May  2014  returning  to  the  United
      Kingdom one month later on 25th of June 2014. The Appellant's  college
      had its certificate revoked as a result of which on  9  December  2014
      the Respondent  curtailed  the  Appellant's  leave  to  expire  on  13
      February 2015. On that date the Appellant submitted an application for
      leave to remain under Article 8 but this was refused on  13th  of  May
      2015 with no in country right of appeal. On  29th  of  July  2015  the
      Appellant made an appointment to claim asylum and  on  6th  of  August
      2015 she formally made her claim for asylum. It  was  the  refusal  of
      that claim by the Respondent on 10th of March 2016 that led  to  these
      proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's case was summarised by the Judge at paragraphs 8 to 18
      of the determination. The Appellant graduated with a  degree  in  Mass
      Communications from the University in Sri Lanka in 2008. She  went  to
      work for Lanka E News (LEN), a news website in  September  2008  as  a
      trainee journalist. There were 3 news editors, a business editor, 3 or
      4 reporters  of  varying  experience  and  3  typists.  LEN  sometimes
      published articles critical of the government.  During  the  time  the
      Appellant worked there about 5 or 6 particularly  contentious  stories
      were published. One story related  to  the  deaths  supposedly  of  36
      soldiers in a firefight in November 2008 but in  all  probability  far
      more. The government had minimised the number of soldiers  killed  but
      an  investigation  published  by  LEN  in  which  the  Appellant   had
      participated stated that 3 army trucks had  been  seen  at  a  funeral
      parlour with over 100 bodies  inside.  The  authorities  arrested  the
      Appellant on 9th of January 2009 and questioned her  about  where  LEN
      had obtained its information. The Appellant was detained  for  3  days
      and  released  after  a  friend  of  her  father,  a  police  officer,
      intervened and arranged for the  Appellant  to  be  bailed  and  given
      reporting conditions.

   4. The Appellant was required to report weekly every Monday and continued
      to do so until she left the country in  February  2012.  A  few  weeks
      after leaving Sri Lanka the police came to her  parents'  home  making
      enquiries about her.  She  did  not  tell  anyone  at  LEN  about  the
      detention. She left LEN in 2010 because she was getting  married.  She
      married her husband on 25th of April 2011 and  went  to  live  at  his
      family home. She applied for other jobs but was unable to find them as
      a journalist or as a lecturer because  LEN  was  blacklisted  and  her
      experience there was not considered valid. The LEN offices were set on
      fire in January 2011 and an editor was arrested in March 2011. The LEN
      website was closed by court order in April 2011. The Appellant claimed
      that others who had written or worked for LEN  moved  abroad  or  were
      arrested. The Appellant decided to change her career and retrain.  She
      obtained a Master's degree in International Human Resource  Management
      from the University of Bedfordshire in November  2013.  She  began  to
      study for a diploma in Strategic Direction and Leadership at  Bradford
      Regional College on 5th of March 2014. On 23rd of May 2014 she and her
      husband travelled to Sri Lanka. She was detained at  the  airport  and
      held in custody for 10 days and was then taken to  court.  The  family
      arranged a lawyer and she was released on bail and ordered to  report.
      She did so until she left Sri Lanka on 25 June 2014  on  her  existing
      return air ticket. Her husband arranged a friend to  pay  a  bribe  to
      airport officials to enable her to leave the country.

   5. After returning to the United Kingdom the licence of Bradford Regional
      College was revoked and the Appellant's leave to remain was curtailed.
      She was  unable  to  find  another  course  in  another  college.  She
      consulted a solicitor who said that if she claimed  asylum  she  could
      not continue studying but as she was  pregnant  she  could  apply  for
      leave to remain on that basis. She then made an application for  leave
      to remain under Article 8 but that was refused.


   6. In support of her eventual asylum application she contacted  a  number
      of persons who had known her as a student. She produced a copy of  her
      press card identifying her as a trainee  journalist  with  LEN  and  a
      letter from an attorney in Colombo.  Printouts  of  web  news  reports
      regarding LEN were also provided. At the substantive asylum  interview
      the Appellant said she had tried to find articles she had written  for
      LEN but had been unable to find them online. All  the  paper  archives
      had been destroyed in the January 2011  fire.  She  produced  a  media
      accreditation card issued by LEN which the Judge noted  was  different
      in style from media accreditation  cards  issued  by  the  Sri  Lankan
      government.


   7. The Appellant also produced a letter from her University lecturer that
      the Appellant began to work  as  a  trainee  journalist  with  LEN  in
      September 2008. LEN was a popular web news station and  the  Appellant
      was placed with  the  company  for  work  experience.  The  Judge  was
      satisfied from background information (contained on the  BBC  website)
      that LEN had been critical of the  government  and  its  offices  were
      burned down in January 2011 with the arrest of a news editor and  that
      the web site of LEN was suspended.


   8. Thereafter the Judge indicated that she did not accept  the  remainder
      of the Appellant's account. It was surprising that the  Appellant  had
      not  spoken  to  a  particular  individual  who  appeared  to  be  her
      journalist mentor about the January 2009  detention.  The  Appellant's
      father had not mentioned in his supporting evidence that the Appellant
      had onerous reporting conditions for three years and neither  had  the
      Appellant's husband despite the reporting  conditions  continuing  for
      two years after the couple had met.  The  Appellant  had  changed  her
      address in May 2011 when she went to live with her husband. The  Judge
      did not accept it was credible that the Appellant  would  continue  to
      report at a considerable distance from her home when she had left  her
      employment as a  journalist  (or  that  her  husband  would  not  have
      mentioned the inconvenience this must have meant).  Despite  being  on
      bail with reporting conditions the Appellant had been able to obtain a
      passport and visa and leave the country without any problems.

   9. As she was married it was not credible that the police would go to her
      father's address looking for her rather than to her  own  address.  It
      was reasonable to expect that the Appellant  would  have  changed  her
      address as part of her bail conditions. The Appellant  did  not  leave
      Sri Lanka because of any ongoing mistreatment but rather  because  she
      wanted to follow a new career but could not obtain employment  in  Sri
      Lanka.

  10. The Judge did not accept the account of the second arrest as  credible
      either. The Appellant claimed she  was  detained  at  the  airport  on
      return to Sri Lanka in May 2014. Although the Appellant said  she  was
      taken to court she did not know if she was charged with  any  offence.
      Even if she were too stressed after detention to know that, her father
      and husband who had it was said instructed a lawyer would  have  found
      out what charges there were. If she were  bailed  with  a  substantial
      surety, there would be documents showing the bail order  or  at  least
      the forfeit of the money but no such documents had been produced.  The
      lawyer who had acted for her was apparently deceased and evidence  was
      produced from a surviving colleague. In a letter produced to the First-
      tier he did not say how he would know anything about  the  Appellant's
      case. He did not comment on the charges on which she  was  brought  to
      court and added that it would do no good to visit  the  court  records
      room as he would not be able to obtain official copies  of  the  court
      record due to restrictions in terrorism -related cases.

  11. The Judge was not impressed by this mention  of  terrorism  since  the
      criticisms  of  the  political  establishment  made  by  LEN  were  of
      corruption rather than indicating support of terrorism. In  any  event
      if the court documents could only be  given  on  personal  application
      there was no reason why the Appellant's father could not obtain  them.
      There were inconsistencies between what the Appellant her husband  and
      the Appellant's father said  were  the  reporting  conditions  of  the
      Appellant's father. The Judge expressed concerns at  paragraph  60  of
      her determination between the letters produced by the Appellant  about
      her involvement in journalism. The Judge also noted the delay  of  the
      Appellant in making her claim for asylum  which  had  only  been  made
      after she had been refused  leave  to  remain  under  Article  8.  The
      explanation that she had been advised  not  to  claim  asylum  as  she
      wished to continue her studies was rejected by the Judge  because  the
      Appellant's application to three universities had been rejected before
      she made the Article 8 application. She had no realistic prospects  of
      continuing her studies at the time of that application. In  short  the
      Appellants were not witnesses of truth.  Although  the  Appellant  had
      worked as a trainee journalist in Sri Lanka from  September  2008  she
      had not worked as a journalist since at the very latest December 2010.



  12. The Judge directed herself in accordance  with  the  country  guidance
      case of GJ [2013] UKUT 00319. The Appellant had not  been  engaged  in
      any diaspora activities and had not  been  involved  with  LEN  for  6
      years. There was no  reliable  evidence  that  there  was  any  arrest
      warrant or court order against her or that she  would  be  on  a  stop
      list. She did not fall within the groups referred to at paragraph 7(b)
      or (d) of the headnote to GJ. She was  not  entitled  to  a  grant  of
      asylum and the appeals were dismissed.

The Onward Appeal

  13. The Appellant appealed against the Judge's decision in grounds settled
      by counsel who had represented the Appellant at first instance and who
      also appeared before me. The first ground was that once the Judge  had
      found the Appellant had been a journalist, on  that  basis  alone  the
      appeal should have been allowed. The Appellant fell  within  the  risk
      category identified at paragraph 356 (b) of GJ that  is:  "journalists
      (whether in print or other media) or human rights  activists,  who  in
      either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan government, in  particular
      its human rights  record  or  who  are  associated  with  publications
      critical of the Sri Lankan government". The  definition  of  criticism
      was not limited to criticism of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  human
      rights record. The Appellant had been associated  with  a  publication
      critical of the Sri Lankan government. The fact that the criticism was
      mainly directed at corruption and  the  Appellant  had  left  6  years
      before did not take the  Appellant  outside  that  category.  Diaspora
      activity was not a pre-requisite. The Respondent  had  accepted  there
      was a risk to journalists and there was nothing in  GJ  which  limited
      the risk to those currently working for the publication.

  14. The 2nd ground was that the  Judge  had  applied  the  wrong  test  to
      establish whether the Appellant was at risk of  persecution  referring
      to the fact that she, the Judge, did not accept that the Appellant was
      a person of "high risk of persecution". This  undermined  the  Judge's
      adverse conclusions. Further the  Judge  had  erred  in  some  of  her
      credibility  findings  for  example  that  the  Appellant's  reporting
      condition did not last until the Appellant came to the United Kingdom.
      The Appellant's husband had not been asked in cross-examination  about
      how long the Appellant's reporting conditions had gone on for. He  had
      said in his witness statement he believed his wife's account was true.
      He was thus adopting her account. There was no evidence that people on
      reporting conditions were unable to obtain  a  passport  or  that  the
      issuing authorities would enquire whether  someone  was  reporting.  A
      reporting condition was insufficient to prevent  departure,  what  was
      needed was a warrant or a passport impeded by a court.

  15. At paragraph 55 of the determination the Judge had rejected  the  2014
      (second) detention because the Appellant did not know what the charges
      were against her and had not discovered them from her  father  husband
      or lawyer. Pre-charge detention was permitted and if that was the case
      here it was more than likely that there would be no charge. I pause to
      note here that argument in the grounds misses the point being made  by
      the Judge. It was not so much that the Appellant did not know  whether
      she was charged or not  but  rather  that  other  persons  were  in  a
      position to know whether she was charged or not but had  not  said  or
      made that clear. The grounds continued that given  the  anti-terrorism
      powers which the Sri Lankan authorities had it was credible  that  the
      Appellant would have been detained under those anti-terrorism  powers.
      The point made by the Judge  that  the  criticisms  of  the  political
      establishment made by LEN were of corruption rather than a support  of
      terrorism fell away.

  16. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Designated Judge Murray on 3 November 2016. In refusing permission  to
      appeal the Designated Judge noted that Judge Wylie  had  not  believed
      the Appellant's account and there was no error when the Judge had said
      that the Appellant could not have obtained a passport and Visa if  she
      was reporting. The  Judge  had  referred  to  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence and although she had referred to a high risk  of  persecution
      she had made it clear at paragraph 64 of the  determination  that  she
      was not satisfied on the lower standard of proof  that  the  Appellant
      had suffered detention in Sri Lanka when she returned there  in  2014.
      The appeal had failed because of a lack of credibility which had  been
      adequately explained by the Judge.

  17. The Appellant renewed her application for permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal on similar grounds to the  application  to  the  First-
      tier. The renewed application came on the papers before Upper Tribunal
      Judge Rimington on 1 December 2016. In granting permission  to  appeal
      she found it arguable that Judge Wylie had erred with  regard  to  the
      credibility findings as to reporting and/or  the  May  2014  detention
      bearing in mind that the Respondent had accepted  that  the  reporting
      condition was not enough to  prevent  departure  and  that  pre-charge
      detention was permitted under the Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act.  The
      Judge's findings that: (i) the Appellant had been a trainee journalist
      for LEN which had been critical of the Sri Lanka government; (ii)  was
      detained in 2009 and (iii) that she had previously been  on  reporting
      restrictions did not sit well with the finding at paragraph 68 of  the
      determination that the Appellant did not fall under the group referred
      to in paragraph 7(b) of GJ that journalists were persons at risk.  All
      grounds were arguable.


  18. I pause to note here that there appears to be an error in the grant by
      the Upper Tribunal of permission to appeal since although  it  is  the
      case that the Judge accepted at paragraph 47 of the determination that
      the Appellant had begun work as  a  trainee  journalist  with  LEN  in
      September 2008, she had not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
      detained in January 2009 and nor did she accept the Appellant's  claim
      to be under reporting conditions from about May 2009  until  she  left
      Sri Lanka in February 2012, see the first sentence of paragraph 52  of
      the determination.

  19. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated 16th
      of December 2016 in which she said that the  First-tier  had  directed
      itself appropriately. Paragraph 3 of  the  Respondent's  letter  noted
      that  the  Appellant's  claimed  detention  in  2009   and   reporting
      restrictions had been rejected by the Judge as incredible. There was a
      complete lack of evidence to demonstrate that the authorities had  any
      interest in the Appellant. Although the Appellant had been accepted as
      working with LEN some 6 years ago the Appellant could not produce  any
      copies of her work and articles were not said to have  been  published
      under her name. She had not been involved in any degree of media print
      for a significant number of years  and  her  account  of  having  been
      apprehended by the authorities in 2014 when she returned was rejected.
      GJ had been applied correctly. The  Appellant  could  not  demonstrate
      that she had in any regard criticised the  government  of  Sri  Lanka.
      Since the new Sri Lankan government came into office in  January  2015
      there has been a change in  the  ability  of  media  professionals  to
      express themselves. The onus was on the Appellant to demonstrate  that
      she would be at real risk on return from the current rather  than  the
      previous government.  Her  involvement  with  LEN  was  an  historical
      engagement. The Tribunal was entitled to conclude that at the date  of
      hearing the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof upon her.

The Hearing Before Me

  20. Counsel sought to make two points. Firstly, it was accepted  that  the
      Appellant had worked LEN which had been critical  of  the  government.
      LEN had been targeted by the authorities. The Appellant was  therefore
      in the risk category identified in GJ of journalists or  human  rights
      activists. What had been said in the  determination  about  the  first
      detention of the Appellant was plainly not an adverse finding  by  the
      Judge. The Appellant was required to report which indicated that there
      had been a detention. That evidence was important  because  it  showed
      that the Appellant worked for LEN.  That  the  Appellant  had  stopped
      working for LEN was not decisive because she  had  worked  LEN  for  2
      years. She still had information about which she could  be  asked  for
      example who had provided stories to LEN. GJ did not limit in time when
      the journalism was said to have taken place. There had to be  evidence
      that the journalists concerned were  critical  or  associated  with  a
      journal that was critters critical. It would not be sufficient if  for
      example the Appellant had worked for a balanced publication but it had
      to be one which in the eyes of the Sri  Lankan  government  criticised
      the government. LEN  had  been  critical  and  its  website  had  been
      suspended. That put LEN into that category.

  21. The second point was a criticism  of  the  Judge's  rejection  of  the
      (second) detention in 2014. It was not a fair point  to  take  against
      the Appellant that her husband had not mentioned reporting conditions.
      His was a short statement but he knew  what  was  in  the  Appellant's
      witness statement. That the Appellant had been able to obtain  a  visa
      to travel to the United Kingdom had nothing to  do  with  whether  the
      Appellant was or was not on reporting conditions. The Judge criticised
      the Appellant's lack of knowledge of what the charges  were  following
      the 2014 detention but the Appellant had  produced  a  letter  from  a
      lawyer in Sri Lanka. Counsel accepted that court documents obtained by
      local lawyers were often  put  forward  in  Sri  Lankan  asylum  cases
      although that argument was not a point taken against the letter by the
      Respondent in the First-tier. I queried with counsel that if the Judge
      had been right to reject the second detention as incredible would that
      not show that  the  Appellant  was  of  no  further  interest  to  the
      authorities. Counsel replied that the Appellant did not have to show a
      certainty that she would be detained if returned  now  to  Sri  Lanka.
      That she had "got away with it" this time did not mean that she  would
      always get away with it in the future.

  22. For the Respondent reliance was placed on the rule 24 response.  There
      was no acceptance by the Judge of the 2009 detention. GJ did not  mean
      that any journalist could succeed in an asylum claim it  had  to  mean
      that someone had to be critical of the regime. One had to look at  the
      facts in the case as it was 5 years since LEN was closed down and  the
      Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka without any adverse attention from
      the authorities. That meant she would be at  no  risk  of  persecution
      upon return in the future.  The  Judge  had  given  more  reasons  for
      rejecting the Appellant's  credibility  than  the  grounds  of  onward
      appeal  had  said  she  did.  One  had  to  look  at  the  Appellant's
      immigration history. The Appellant had  belatedly  made  a  claim  for
      asylum. The Judge had taken that into account. It was not  clear  what
      had been put to the Appellant's husband in cross examination about the
      Appellant's reporting  conditions  in  the  absence  of  a  record  of
      proceedings.

  23. In response counsel argued that whilst there were  other  reasons  for
      the Judge's rejection of the Appellant's credibility including reasons
      under section 8 of the 2004 Act, one could not be sure that  the  same
      adverse conclusion would be reached if some of the supporting  strands
      on which  those  conclusions  were  reached  were  removed.  The  risk
      category in GJ was couched in the terms  that  it  was,  if  you  were
      associated with a critical publication you were  at  risk.  Similarly,
      there was a risk if one came back from United  Kingdom  which  brought
      the Appellant within that category.

Findings

  24. The Judge at some length and  in  some  detail  set  out  her  adverse
      findings on credibility. The key point made by the Appellant  is  that
      it was accepted she was associated with a news  organisation  critical
      of the Sri Lankan government. Others, it  was  well  established,  had
      suffered for their involvement and therefore the  Appellant  following
      the relevant passage in  GJ  would  be  at  risk.  There  are  I  find
      difficulties with this approach. The Upper Tribunal has been at  pains
      to point out that risk categories in Sri Lankan country guidance cases
      are not meant to be a checklist. In GJ at paragraph 229 it was said:

    "The judicial head note in LP  emphasised  that  each  case  should  be
    considered on its own facts, rather than treating the twelve factors as
    a "check list".  We consider that fact-based assessment continues to be
    the proper approach,  and  that  it  is  time  to  reassess  the  risks
    overall."

  25. This the Upper Tribunal did in GJ when it indicated  that  journalists
      were at risk of harm upon return but  the  reassessment  of  risks  to
      include journalists did not mean that the "non-checklist" approach set
      out in LP no longer applied. GJ was not making a new point, that there
      was now a checklist which, provided an appellant was  in  one  of  the
      named categories, meant that that Appellant automatically succeeded.

  26. The Appellant had some association with a media organisation that  had
      been critical of the government, that association with  LEN  consisted
      of a placement as a trainee journalist. The Appellant was quite unable
      to produce any evidence that she  herself  had  written  any  articles
      critical of the Sri Lankan government.  Had  the  Judge  believed  the
      Appellant's account of detentions  and  onerous  reporting  conditions
      that might not have mattered. However, the Appellant's  accounts  were
      in the Judge's view fabricated and the Judge gave cogent  reasons  for
      arriving at such a conclusion. The Judge did  not  apply  too  high  a
      standard of  proof.  She  made  it  clear  that  the  case  was  being
      determined on the lower standard and said so in terms at paragraph 64.




  27. The Appellant could not show she had written any articles,  she  could
      not show that she had been persecuted by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
      and she could not show that she was of any adverse interest  to  them.
      She had been able to return to Sri Lanka in 2014 and stay there for  a
      month and then leave again on her own return ticket according  to  the
      findings of the Judge, without suffering any harm. The important point
      was that the Appellant had to demonstrate a profile that would put her
      at risk in the future upon return to Sri Lanka. It was not enough  for
      the Appellant to say that she had once been connected to LEN  for  her
      asylum claim to be automatically granted. What she  had  to  show  was
      that she had been involved with the publication to the extent that she
      would arouse the adverse interest of the authorities.


  28. The difficulty for the Appellant was that she could not show this.  As
      I have indicated she could not show that she had actually written  any
      articles and her  evidence  as  to  being  detained  or  on  reporting
      conditions was rejected by the Judge for the reasons which I have  set
      out above. Her witnesses contradicted themselves on for  example  what
      were  the  reporting  conditions  of  the  Appellant's  father's.  The
      Appellant had only claimed asylum after her efforts to secure leave to
      remain in this country on other grounds had failed and the  Appellant,
      the Judge found, had been able to return to  Sri  Lanka  for  a  month
      without harm. If the Appellant had been able to do this it  was  clear
      that she was of no adverse interest to the authorities. She was not on
      any form of stop notice, she had not been  stopped,  although  at  one
      point  it  was  claimed  that  she  was.   The  authorities  were  not
      interested in her for any breach of bail conditions suggesting that no
      such conditions had been imposed.


  29. The Appellant's response that she had been lucky thus  far  but  might
      not be lucky again ignored two points. The first was that  the  nearer
      in time to the Appellant's alleged  activities  the  more  likely  the
      authorities would still have an adverse interest in her.  Secondly  as
      the Respondent pointed out in the rule 24 response country  conditions
      if anything had changed such that someone in the Appellant's  position
      was less likely to be of adverse interest in the authorities. I accept
      the point that one has to look at GJ on the basis  of  what  it  says,
      even though it is now almost four years old, but there  were  numerous
      points in this case where it  was  reasonable  to  have  expected  the
      Appellant to obtain some form of supporting evidence but she was quite
      unable to do so. One such example would be articles or other work  she
      had done for LEN and another example would be court documents relating
      to any court appearances. As I have indicated and as this Tribunal  is
      familiar with, court documents are obtained in relation to persons who
      have been of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities and  taken
      before the Sri Lankan courts. The argument that such  documents  could
      not be obtained because if a case was concerned with  terrorism  (even
      ignoring the distinction between corruption cases  and  terrorism)  is
      clearly not borne out by the objective evidence and by the  number  of
      times that court documents are produced  to  this  Tribunal  from  Sri
      Lanka showing that a person has been before the courts.

  30. The Judge gave cogent reasons for disbelieving the Appellant and it is
      noticeable that the Appellant has not sought to engage in  any  detail
      with many of those cogent reasons. One  such  is  that  the  Appellant
      claimed to have been reporting  for  almost  three  years  before  her
      departure in 2012 and yet at the same time had changed her address and
      moved a considerable distance away from her original address. That was
      a significant point which affected whether the  Appellant  was  indeed
      signing on as she claimed. There has been no answer to that  point  by
      the Appellant thus undermining the  Appellant's  claim  that  she  was
      arrested detained and then released on  reporting  conditions  between
      2009 and 2012. Similarly there has been no engagement with the section
      8 point taken against the Appellant  as  to  the  delay  she  made  in
      claiming asylum. The Judge rejected the Appellant's claim that she had
      delayed making a claim for asylum on advice from a solicitor  pointing
      out the implausibility of that explanation (see paragraph 11 above).


  31. The situation that the Judge was thus faced with was an Appellant  who
      had had some involvement  with  a  news  organisation  that  had  been
      critical of the government but who herself  had  been  of  no  adverse
      interest to the authorities. The Appellant had been able to leave  Sri
      Lanka, come back and then leave again without  any  difficulties.  She
      had  fabricated  an  account  of  arrests,  detentions  and  reporting
      conditions. The Appellant's case is that  merely  being  a  journalist
      involved in a news organisation critical of the Sri Lankan  government
      is  sufficient  by  itself  to  establish  a  claim  for  asylum.  The
      difficulty is that the Appellant's claim to have experienced  problems
      was rejected by the Judge for sound reasons. What the Appellant cannot
      demonstrate therefore is that her involvement such as it was with  LEN
      has brought any difficulties  for  her.  In  those  circumstances  the
      Appellant cannot show a profile sufficient to  bring  her  within  the
      protection afforded by the Refugee Convention. Had the Appellant  been
      able to establish she was a credible witness and her account indicated
      a reasonable likelihood of future persecution the situation might have
      been different but that was not the situation faced by the Judge.


  32. A number of criticisms were made of the Judge's  credibility  findings
      but they are  mere  disagreements  with  those  findings  rather  than
      arguments which raise any real concern as to the Judge's  conclusions.
      Whilst the Appellant's husband might  not  have  been  cross  examined
      about the reporting conditions his wife was under, it is reasonable to
      have expected him to have mentioned  those  conditions  without  being
      prompted since they would potentially have been almost as  problematic
      for him as they were for his  wife.  He  may  well  indicate  that  he
      accepts what  his  wife's  statement  says  but  what  the  Judge  was
      concerned  about  was  that  there  was  next  to  nothing  from   the
      Appellant's husband as to the effect on  him  of  what  his  wife  the
      Appellant was said to have gone through. No real explanation  for  the
      absence of  such  comments  has  been  given  save  to  say  that  the
      Appellant's husband was not asked about it. The point is if  his  wife
      had suffered under severe reporting conditions which would have had an
      impact on him it is reasonable to  have  expected  him  to  have  said
      something about it without having to be prompted.


33. The Judge formed the view that if the  Appellant  was  on  a  reporting
    condition she would not have been able to leave the country  as  easily
    as she obviously did. If the Appellant was of such adverse interest  to
    the authorities one could reasonably expect her to have  been  on  some
    form of stop notice (as the Appellant herself at one point  claimed  to
    be). The Appellant and her husband gave evidence that they were able to
    leave Sri Lanka through  bribes,  but  given  that  the  Appellant  was
    travelling on her own ticket, she must therefore have  been  travelling
    on her own identification documentation. This means that if she was  on
    a stop list that would have come to the authorities' attention and  she
    would not have been able to leave the country. The Judge  rejected  the
    evidence that the Appellant had been  signing  on  when  she  left  the
    country. She impliedly rejected the claim that a bribe would have  been
    paid to enable the Appellant to leave  the  country  since  no  purpose
    would be served as the Appellant was not of interest to anyone.

  34. The  Appellant's  argument  comes  down  to  a  claim  that  the  risk
      categories in GJ are in effect carved in stone and that one simply has
      to show one  was  a  journalist  or  connected  to  a  publication  to
      automatically succeed in an appeal. I do not accept that argument,  an
      Appellant must always show a personal profile which puts them at risk.
      This Appellant could not show such a profile. For  several  years  she
      had been able to live without any adverse interest or  harm  from  the
      authorities in circumstances where if her account were true she  would
      have been at risk of harm. I do not find that the Judge has  made  any
      material  error  of  law  in  this   determination   such   that   the
      determination should be set aside. I dismiss  the  Appellant's  onward
      appeal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 25th January 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 25th January 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
