
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02861/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2020 Remotely            |On 20 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    T A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Frost instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 10 October  2000.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely approximately on 21 June
    2016.  He was arrested and identified as a minor and placed with foster
    carers.  Shortly after, the appellant disappeared from his foster  care
    home until he was apprehended almost two years later.

 3. On 9 April 2018, the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of his  claim
    is that he comes from a village which has a fishing community.  He  was
    involved in a demonstration in Hanoi on 1 May 2016  protesting  against
    pollution produced by a factory near where he lived.  He claims that he
    held up a manuscript banner  at  the  demonstration  and  that  he  was
    arrested and detained by the police during which time he was beaten and
    ill-treated.  After four days, he was  released  and  returned  to  his
    family home and subsequently noticed that his home was being watched by
    police officers.  He also claims that, whilst attending church each day
    (he is a Roman Catholic), there were police at the church who disrupted
    the services.  As a result, at his mother's suggestion, he left Vietnam
    to avoid further mistreatment by the police.

 4. On 14 March 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 14 November 2019, Judge N J Osborne dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  On 30 December 2019, the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  L  S  Bulpitt)  granted   the   appellant
    permission to appeal.

 7. In the light of the  COVID-19  crisis,  the  Upper  Tribunal  initially
    expressed the provisional view that the decision to  determine  whether
    the judge had erred in law could be made without a  hearing.   However,
    in the light of submissions from both the appellant and respondent,  on
    3 July 2019 UTJ Owens directed that it  would  not  be  appropriate  to
    determine the error of law issue without a hearing  and  directed  that
    the appeal  be  listed  for  a  remote  hearing  as  requested  by  the
    appellant's representatives.

 8. Consequently, on 6 August 2020, the appeal was listed before  me.   The
    appeal took place at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre with me based  in
    the court and Mr Frost, who represented the appellant, and Mr  Howells,
    who represented the respondent, taking part in the hearing remotely via
    Skype for Business.

The Submissions

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Frost relied upon the grounds of  appeal
    and submissions made on behalf of the appellant (by Ms  Pollard)  prior
    to the hearing and dated 15 April 2020 and 23 April 2020.

10. First (relying on Ground 2), Mr Frost submitted that Judge Osborne  had
    reached two wholly inconsistent factual findings in his  determination.
    Mr  Frost  submitted  that  at  para  16,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's claim was "incredible" and at para 19 made the finding that
    he did not accept that the appellant had attended the demonstration and
    that  he  had  been  arrested  and  detained  and  mistreated  by   the
    authorities.  However, Mr Frost submitted that at para 37 the judge had
    made precisely the opposite finding when he said:

         "The Appellant, as I have found above, attended a demonstration  in
         Hanoi with many others.  He was arrested, detained and ill-treated,
         again with many others.  The appellant after four days was released
         to his mother.  He returned home."

11. Mr Frost submitted that this was not a "slip" because  the  judge  then
    went on in subsequent paragraphs to deal with the appellant's claim  on
    the  basis  that  he  had  found  that  the  appellant   attended   the
    demonstration  and  was  detained  and  ill-treated  as  the  appellant
    claimed.  Mr Frost submitted that there were no reasons given for these
    inconsistent findings.  The judge's decision was, as a result,  legally
    flawed.

12. Secondly (relying on Ground 1), Mr Frost submitted that the  judge  had
    misunderstood the appellant's evidence concerning who had organised the
    demonstration in Hanoi.  Mr Frost submitted that the appellant had not,
    as the judge stated in para 19, given contradictory evidence.   He  had
    said throughout that the demonstration in Hanoi was organised by people
    against the government but that his  local  group's  participation  had
    been instigated by the local priest.  He had not said  that  the  local
    priest organised the demonstration in Hanoi.  That, Mr Frost submitted,
    resulted in the judge's adverse finding  in  para19,  namely  that  the
    appellant had not taken part in the  demonstration,  been  arrested  or
    detained and mistreated, legally unsustainable.

13. Thirdly (relying on Ground 3), Mr Frost submitted that  the  judge  had
    made an adverse finding as  to  whether  the  appellant,  as  a  former
    demonstrator, would be at risk on  return  by  misapplying  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Tran.  He submitted that, contrary to the  judge's  view
    expressed in para 46, Dr Tran had  not  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of persecution on return when  he  registered  his
    profile/CV with the local authority in order to obtain a job or open  a
    business.  Mr Frost submitted that reading paras  5.1  and  5.4  of  Dr
    Tran's reports together made it clear that the appellant would be asked
    about why and how he had left Vietnam and would have to lie  about  his
    arrest and detention.

14. Fourthly (relying on Ground 5), Mr Frost submitted that the  judge  had
    failed to adequately take into account the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr
    Battersby in assessing the appellant's  evidence,  in  particular  when
    identifying inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  about  the  periods  of
    surveillance outside his house and when he had attended  church,  given
    Dr Battersby's view that the "cogency  of  his  evidence  will  ...  be
    slightly reduced by his PTSD".

15. Fifthly (relying on Ground 4), Mr Frost submitted  that,  although  the
    judge had made the positive finding that  the  appellant  was  a  Roman
    Catholic, when he considered that as a risk factor at paras 22 - 26, he
    did so in isolation  having  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  found  the
    appellant's  claim  to  have  been  involved  in  a  demonstration  and
    arrested, been detained and  ill-treated  incredible.   The  point,  Mr
    Frost submitted, was  that  this  was  an  aggravating  factor  if  the
    appellant had taken part in political activity before.

16. On behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  Mr  Howells  relied  upon  the
    submissions made by the respondent prior to the hearing (by  Mr  Bates)
    dated 20 April 2020.

17. First, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had  not  made  inconsistent
    findings  as  to  whether  the  appellant  had  taken   part   in   the
    demonstration in Hanoi and  had  been  arrested  and  ill-treated.   He
    submitted that what the judge said in para 37 was a "slip".  Mr Howells
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  no  reasons  anywhere  in  his
    determination for that finding but, by contrast, he had earlier in  the
    determination found the appellant to  be  "incredible"  and  had  given
    reasons at  paras  18  -  22  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account
    concerning the demonstration and thereafter.

18. Secondly, in any event,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  made
    alternative findings at paras 38 - 43 that the appellant would  not  be
    at risk on return even if he had been involved in a  demonstration  and
    arrested and ill-treated as he claimed.

19. Thirdly, in respect  to  his  finding  in  paras  38  -  43,  that  the
    authorities had not shown any interest in him after the  demonstration,
    Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not failed to take into account
    Dr Battersby's evidence that he suffered from "mild PTSD" and her  view
    that the "cogency of his evidence will ... be slightly reduced  by  his
    PTSD".  She had not said that he was severely affected  and  the  judge
    specifically took into account, at para 32, that the  appellant  was  a
    young person and, at para 27, the judge treated the appellant  (at  the
    request of Mr Frost) as a 'vulnerable witness' throughout the hearing.

20. Fourthly, as regards the judge's finding that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk as a former demonstrator,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge had properly applied Dr Tran's report at para 5.1  where  he  had
    unequivocally said that  the  appellant  would  not  be  persecuted  on
    account of his involvement with the demonstration in 2016. Dr Tran  had
    recognised  that  the  appellant  would   be   "mistreated"   but   not
    "persecuted" when he registered with his local  authority  and,  as  Dr
    Tran recognised, was likely to be summoned to the police  station  when
    he sought to register his profile/CV in order  to  obtain  a  job.   Mr
    Howells accepted, however, that Dr Tran may not have had  in  mind  the
    legal distinction  between  "persecution"  and  "mistreatment"  falling
    short of that.  He submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  find  in
    para 47 that the appellant would not be at risk on  return  because  he
    would be able to explain to the authorities in his local area  that  he
    had left Vietnam in an attempt to obtain work in the UK and  trace  his
    father.

21. Fifthly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not misunderstood  the
    appellant's evidence about who had organised the demonstration  or  his
    involvement in that demonstration.  Mr Howells submitted  that  in  the
    appellant's asylum interview (at Q47) the appellant had not  mentioned,
    what he subsequently claimed,  namely  that  a  priest  instigated  his
    involvement.  He pointed out that a subsidiary question to question  47
    had been "Was there any one person in your area who  organised  this?",
    to which he had  replied  a  group  of  people  who  were  against  the
    government.

22. Finally, relying on  Mr  Bates'  written  submissions,  the  respondent
    contended that the judge  had  properly  considered  the  risk  to  the
    appellant as a result of his Roman Catholic faith.

Discussion

23. I deal first with the issue of whether  the  judge  erred  in  reaching
    inconsistent findings on whether the appellant had taken  part  in  the
    demonstration in Hanoi on 1 May 2016 and had  been  arrested,  detained
    and ill-treated by the police.

24. At paragraph 16 of his determination, the judge set out, in advance  of
    his reasons, his conclusion on the appellant's  credibility.   He  said
    this:

         "... I find the  appellant's  claim  is  incredible.   It  contains
         discrepancies, the cumulative effect of which is  to  cast  serious
         doubt upon the reliability of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the
         veracity of his case."

25.  Then  at  paras  18-19,  under  the  heading  "Arrest,  Detention  and
    Mistreatment", the judge gave his reasons  for  finding  the  appellant
    incredible and why he did not accept the appellant's  claimed  activity
    in Vietnam.  The judge said this:

         "18. Although in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the  Respondent
             rejects the Appellant's account of his arrest,  detention  and
             mistreatment  by  the  police,  Mrs  King,  Counsel  for   the
             Respondent conceded on behalf of the Respondent that that part
             of the Appellant's account is accepted.   However,  after  the
             hearing by telephone with Tribunal staff, Mrs  King  corrected
             her position and explained that the Respondent's  position  is
             set out in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.   Consequently,  I
             issued directions dated 31 October 2019 which was sent to  the
             parties.  Mr Frost  (Counsel)  has  provided  further  written
             submissions on behalf of the Appellant.

             Objective/background  information  confirms  that  there  were
             demonstrations on 1 May  2016  in  Hanoi  organised  by  local
             clergy against the Formosa environmental disaster.

         19.  Additionally, the Appellant's country expert Dr Tran  Thi  Lan
             Anh in a report dated 15 August 2019 confirms that in May 2016
             following  the  Formosa  pollution  disaster,  there   was   a
             demonstration  in  Hanoi  at  which  many  demonstrators  were
             temporarily arrested by police and then released.  Apparently,
             hundreds of  protestors  were  pushed  into  police  cars  and
             removed from the area.  That is well-known and has been widely
             documented and reported.   The  Appellant  gave  contradictory
             evidence as to who organised the demonstrations; in his AIR he
             stated that people just gathered around and the  participation
             from his area was organised by people  who  were  against  the
             government.  In his witness  statement  the  Appellant  stated
             that the demonstration by his own locality  was  organised  by
             the local  priest.   The  Appellant  has  given  fundamentally
             inconsistent evidence upon a central part of his claim.   That
             discrepant evidence undermines the Appellant's reliability  as
             a witness, his personal credibility and the credibility of his
             account to attend the demonstration.   If  the  Appellant  had
             genuinely attended the demonstration by  going  with  a  large
             group from his own locality he would have known precisely  who
             organised it.  The fact that he was inconsistent about such an
             important matter undermines his claim  to  have  attended  the
             demonstration whether as claimed by the Appellant or  at  all.
             It follows from  that  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not
             arrested and/or detained and/or mistreated by the  authorities
             whether as claimed by the Appellant or at all."

26. As can be seen, the judge did not accept the appellant's  account  and,
    in particular,  he  relied  upon  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning who had organised the demonstration.  I will return
    to that reasoning shortly.

27. Having made that finding, the judge then at para 37 said this:

         "The Appellant, as I have found above, attended a demonstration  in
         Hanoi with many  others.   He  was  arrested,  detained,  and  ill-
         treated, again with many others.  The Appellant after four days was
         released to his mother.  He returned home."

28. Mr Howells submits that that was a "slip" and that the judge's  finding
    was that the appellant was incredible which led the judge to reject the
    appellant's claimed  involvement  in  the  demonstration.   That  is  a
    difficult submission to sustain given what the judge said  in  para  37
    which is not capable of  being  easily  reconstructed  to  produce  the
    opposite conclusion.  Further, the  finding  in  para  37  is  entirely
    consistent with the way the  judge  then,  thereafter,  approached  the
    issue of the risk to the appellant on return in paras 38 -  43  dealing
    with what, if any, interest was shown in the appellant (as  he  claimed
    by the police carrying out surveillance) after the  demonstration  and,
    at paras 45 - 47, whether the appellant would  be at  risk  as  someone
    who had been involved in the demonstration on 1 May 2016.  At no  point
    does the judge indicate that he is, in these passages, dealing with the
    appellant's claim "at its highest" and so assuming that his account  is
    true but nevertheless concluding he is not  at  risk.   These  sections
    follow a clear and unequivocal  finding  in  para  37  that  the  judge
    believed  the  appellant's  account.   I  do  not  accept  Mr  Howells'
    submission that it is a mere slip.  The judge has reached  inconsistent
    findings  on  a  central  issue  in  the  appeal,  namely  whether  the
    appellant's account was true.

29. Mr Frost suggested that the inconsistency might have arisen because  of
    the change of position by the respondent's Counsel after  the  hearing.
    At the hearing, she had accepted (departing from  the  refusal  letter)
    that the appellant had been involved in the demonstration and had  been
    detained and mistreated as he claimed.  However, the following day, she
    telephoned the Tribunal to indicate that the respondent's position  was
    as initially set out in the refusal letter and that she did not  accept
    that the events had occurred.  That, of course, required the  judge  to
    consider the credibility of the appellant's claim which,  at  least  at
    the hearing, had not been in issue.

30. What happened is unusual.  The judge, quite properly, gave the  parties
    (in particular the appellant) an opportunity to make submissions  given
    the respondent's change of position after the hearing.  As I was  told,
    Mr Frost made written submissions - which I have seen -  subsequent  to
    the hearing.  It was, however, very unusual that such a dramatic change
    of position post-hearing by the respondent's representative should have
    occurred.  I cannot speculate what effect, if any, that may  have  had.
    It is incumbent upon a judge to both make relevant  findings  and  give
    adequate reasons for those findings.  It is plain,  however,  that  the
    judge's inconsistent findings are irreconcilable and only  one  finding
    has any reasons given for it.  The absence of a clear, finding  whether
    or not he accepted that the appellant was involved in the demonstration
    and was arrested and ill-treated by the police, amounted to an error of
    law.

31. Of course, if the appellant could not succeed even if his  account  was
    true, that  error  might  not  be  material  to  the  judge's  ultimate
    decision.  On the basis of Mr Frost's submissions, I am  not  satisfied
    that this error was immaterial to the outcome of  the  appeal.   I  say
    that for two principal reasons.

32. First, I accept Mr Frost's submission that the judge,  in  finding  the
    appellant to be incredible at paras 18  -  21,  did  misunderstand  the
    appellant's evidence and  wrongly  found  an  inconsistency  in  it  in
    relation to who had organised the Hanoi demonstration.  The appellant's
    evidence throughout was that  the  local  group's  involvement  in  the
    demonstration, of which he was a part,  was  instigated  by  the  local
    priest.  At para 7 of his asylum statement (dated  26  May  2018),  the
    appellant said this:

         "The local priest  instigated  our  participation...  and  we  were
         joined by people from may other villages affected.  There were lots
         of people at the demonstration, I would guess about 1000 people."

33. Likewise, in very similar terms, at para 9  of  his  witness  statement
    (dated 29 April 2019), the appellant said:

         "The local priest instigated our participation in this and we  were
         joined by people from many villages affected.  There were a lot  of
         people at the demonstration, I would guess about 1,000 people."

34. In his asylum interview (on 26  February  2019)  at  question  47,  the
    appellant was initially asked "Who  organised  this  demonstration  you
    went to?", to which he replied:

         "People just gathered and organised together".

35. Then he was asked a supplementary question "Was there any one person in
    your area who organised this?", to which he replied:

         "Yes a group of people who are against the government so I kind  of
         heard from people in the demonstrations that the  group  of  people
         are from Hanoi."

36. The judge relied upon the fact that the appellant  failed  to  say,  in
    response to the supplementary question, that the local involvement  had
    been at the instigation of the priest.  But, it is plain from  question
    47, that the appellant was not answering that question as asked.   That
    may be because he did not understand the question but,  in  any  event,
    the sense of his answer is clearly  not  about  local  involvement  but
    rather about the demonstration in Hanoi which was not in his  locality.
    In other words, he was asked  a  question  about  who  organised  local
    involvement but answered focused on the demonstration in Hanoi.   There
    was, therefore, a mismatch of answer to  question.   Whilst  of  course
    that might be understood as a failure by the appellant to  mention  the
    fact, as he had said all along, that the priest was responsible for the
    local organisation, it is not an inconsistency in the sense  identified
    by the judge at para  19.   The  answer  in  his  AIR  relates  to  the
    demonstration in Hanoi  and  the  evidence  in  his  witness  statement
    relates  to  who  organised  his  local  participation  in  that  Hanoi
    demonstration.  This claimed inconsistency was a central  part  of  the
    judge's reasoning in paras 19 why  he  reached  his  finding  that  the
    appellant's account was incredible.  He made this finding  despite  the
    appellant's account of the demonstration being consistent both with the
    background evidence and that of  the  expert,  Dr  Tran  given  in  his
    report.  In my judgment, in relying upon this  "inconsistency"  in  the
    appellant's evidence, the judge erred in law in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.

37. Secondly, the judge's findings that the appellant would not be at  risk
    on return, based (now) on his finding in para 37 that  the  events  did
    occur on 1 May 2016,  as  the  appellant  claimed,  are  in  themselves
    unsustainable.

38. As regards the judge's reasoning in paras 38 - 43, he concluded that he
    did not accept that the appellant had been under police surveillance at
    his  home  as  he  claimed.   Here,  again,  the  judge  identified   a
    discrepancy in the appellant's evidence.  At para 38 he said this:

         "When the Appellant returned home with  his  mother  following  his
         release from  detention,  the  Appellant  claims  that  two  police
         officers appeared in the street outside his home.  He  has  claimed
         that they were there to monitor him and that he  was  unnerved  and
         disturbed by  their  presence.   In  the  Appellant's  two  witness
         statements he claims that the two officers were present for between
         two - three hours each day.  However,  in  his  oral  evidence  the
         Appellant initially stated that to be the case but then went on  to
         say that sometimes the police officers were there for two to  three
         hours twice per day.  I find that the Appellant  failed  to  resist
         the  temptation  of  exaggerating  his  claim  for   effect.    The
         Appellant's claim that the officers were present for  two  -  three
         hours twice a day was inconsistent with his earlier  oral  evidence
         and his written evidence given  in  his  witness  statements.   The
         inconsistency  in   the   Appellant's   evidence   undermines   his
         reliability  as  a  witness,  his  personal  credibility,  and  the
         credibility of his claim that the  police  officers  monitored  him
         after  his  release  from  detention  whether  as  claimed  by  the
         Appellant or at all."

39. Of course, in this passage the judge is proceeding on the basis that he
    has accepted the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  of  being
    involved in the demonstration and as a result being arrested,  detained
    and ill-treated by the police.  Mr Frost  relied  upon  Dr  Battersby's
    expert psychiatric evidence that the appellant suffered from  PTSD  and
    that the "cogency of his evidence will ... be slightly reduced  by  his
    PTSD".

40. I accept, as Mr Howells submitted, that the judge properly treated  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness during the hearing (see para 27)  and
    he took into account the appellant's young age (para 32).  However, the
    only reference to Dr Battersby's evidence was at paras 20 - 21  of  the
    determination:

         "20. The Appellant has produced a psychiatric report prepared by Dr
             Alison Battersby dated 5 September 2019.  In that  report,  Dr
             Battersby, a well-known and respected  expert,  diagnoses  the
             Appellant as  suffering  from  a  mild  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder.  She finds that the Appellant must have been exposed
             to a stressful event or situation but Dr Battersby reports  at
             page A71 of the Appellant's bundle that,

                  'At all times his behaviour and responses were  consistent
                  with someone who had mild PTSD.  It is extremely difficult
                  to consistently feign those conditions over an  interview.
                  .... I have considered  whether  he  is  exaggerating  his
                  difficulties but in  my  interview,  he  was  avoidant  of
                  discussing his symptoms.  He told me that he does not have
                  significant difficulties with his mental  health  and  was
                  very reluctant to talk about his  problems  despite  being
                  reminded that  this  was  important  for  his  immigration
                  matter.  This is strongly supportive  of  a  diagnosis  of
                  PTSD.    At  one  point  in  the  interview   he   briefly
                  disassociated.  At no point was his verbal  or  non-verbal
                  behaviour inconsistent with someone who had mild PTSD.  In
                  my opinion he has found it very difficult to accept how he
                  is struggling with his mental health.'

             Dr Battersby considers that the main risk to the Appellant  is
             of re-traumatisation but in her opinion, this is low.

         21.  The Appellant in his interview with Dr Battersby  consistently
             described he had been mistreated during his four-day detention
             in  Vietnam.   It  is  no  part  of  Dr  Battersby's  role  or
             responsibility to assess the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
             account.  That is the task of the judge.   I  have  found  the
             Appellant's  account  of  his  arrest  and  detention  to   be
             incredible.   The  Appellant  might  well  have   suffered   a
             stressful event or  situation  such  that  he  has  been  left
             suffering from the condition diagnosed by Dr Battersby.  It is
             not for  me  to  speculate  how  the  Appellant  came  by  his
             condition.  However, for all the reasons set out herein, I  am
             not satisfied, even  to  the  low  standard  that  has  to  be
             applied, that the Appellant has suffered  that  condition  for
             the reasons claimed by the Appellant."

41. Here, however, the judge made no reference to Dr Battersby's opinion as
    to the potential effect of the appellant's mental health on the cogency
    of his evidence.  Indeed, in para 21 the  judge  said  he  had  already
    found  the  appellant's  account  of  arrest  and   detention   to   be
    "incredible".  The discrepancy relied upon by the judge in para 38 is a
    minor one.  Whilst I  accept  that  the  judge  also  identified  other
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, for  example  at  para  40
    that the appellant said that they were present on Saturdays and Sundays
    or alternatively every day  in  his  evidence,  that  too  was  also  a
    relatively minor inconsistency which at least  warranted  consideration
    in the light of Dr Battersby's evidence.  The judge, in my view, failed
    to have regard to the relevant expert evidence in assessing whether  he
    accepted the appellant's account that,  having  been  involved  in  the
    demonstration and arrested and ill-treated, the  authorities  continued
    to have an interest in him thereafter.

42. Further, in relying upon Dr Tran's expert evidence for his finding that
    the appellant would not be at risk on return,  the  judge  has,  in  my
    view, failed properly to take that evidence into account.

43. At paras 45-46, and under the heading  "Risk  to  the  Appellant  as  a
    Former Demonstrator", the judge considered the evidence of Dr  Tran  as
    follows:

         "45. Dr Tran, the Appellant's  country  expert,  reports  that  the
             primary risk to  the  Appellant  upon  return  does  not  come
             directly from his prior involvement in the demonstration on  1
             May 2016.

             I  find  that  the  Appellant,  when  he  attended  the   said
             demonstration, was of such low profile and  the  demonstration
             is now more than three and a half  years  later,  that  it  is
             unlikely that the state authorities would have any interest in
             him.

         46.  The evidence from Dr Tran suggests that the Appellant faced  a
             risk of being mistreated by the local authority when  he  asks
             the  approval  from  the  local  authority  for  his  personal
             profile.  Mr Tran reports it is likely that he will  be  asked
             why and how he left Vietnam and what he did overseas.  In that
             capacity, the Appellant risks being abused at the local police
             station.   However,  the  evidence  in  this   respect   falls
             considerably short of a risk of persecution.  Mr Tran's report
             at page A25 of the Appellant's bundle at  [5.1]  that  as  the
             Appellant was only involved in a demonstration with the  local
             authority in May 2016 when he was  still  a  minor  (under  18
             years), he will not be persecuted by the local authority  upon
             his return to Vietnam.  However, if  he  is  returned  to  his
             original local authority, he still would face a risk of  being
             mistreated.  Mr Tran draws a distinction  between  persecution
             and mistreatment falling short of persecution."

44. What Dr Tran said in paras 5.1-5.4 so far as relevant was  as  follows.
    At 5.1 he said this:

         "In my  view,  as  the  appellant  only  involved  in  the  dispute
         (demonstration) with the local authority in May 2016  when  he  was
         still in the minor age  (under  18  years  old),  in  my  view,  if
         returned to Vietnam,  he  will  not  be  persecuted  by  the  local
         authority."

45. That is a finding, consistent with what the judge says in para 46, that
    merely by being involved in the earlier demonstration would not  result
    in him being persecuted on return.

46. However, Dr Tran goes on in para 5.1 to say this:

         "However, if he is returned to his  original  local  authority,  he
         still would face with the risks  of  being  mistreated  from  local
         authority when he would ask the approval from local  authority  for
         his personal profile (CV) with the details set out below."

47. Dr Tran then goes in in para 5.2 to explain the process for registering
    a "profile/CV" in order to obtain work.  Then at para 5.3 he said this:



         "So, even if the appellant was not prosecuted due  to  his  protect
         activities, the negative treatment from the local  authority  would
         very likely apply to him."

48. I anticipate that Dr Tran intended to say that the appellant would  not
    be  "persecuted"  due  to  his  protest  activities  rather  than   not
    "prosecuted".

49. Then, importantly at para 5.4 Dr Tran said this:

         "In addition, as the appellant applied to the asylum in the UK.  He
         does not want to return to Vietnam.  If being forced to  return  to
         Vietnam, he will be returned under the special arrangements such as
         removal directions.  In my experience and knowledge  about  Vietnam
         immigration policy, he will be arranged to return to  his  original
         local authority.  In this case, it is very likely that he  will  be
         summoned to the police station to answer about why and how he  left
         Vietnam and what he did overseas.  As a result he would  face  with
         the risks of being abusing at the local authority as in May 2016.

         For the risks of being abused at the  police  station,  please  see
         part 6 below for further information."

50. Then, in part 6 of his report Dr Tran  sets  out  instances  of  abuse,
    including "violent abuse" in police stations.

51. Whilst Dr Tran's report, written no doubt in his second  language,  has
    some grammatical problems, his conclusion is  palpably  clear.   Whilst
    the appellant would not, simply be at risk  of  persecution  on  return
    because of his prior involvement in the demonstration as a minor,  when
    he returns and wishes to work, he will return  to  his  original  local
    authority and it is very likely that he will be summoned to the  police
    station to answer why he had left  Vietnam  and  what  he  did.   As  a
    result, he would be faced with the risks of being abused at  the  local
    police station as in May 2016.  Of course, what happened to him in  May
    2016 at the police station - at least if his account is accepted  -  is
    that he was seriously ill-treated.  He was beaten daily.  Dr  Tran  is,
    therefore, postulating the appellant's circumstances on  return  to  be
    that he would be exposed to precisely the same risk of persecution even
    though he refers to it as abuse or "negative treatment".  As Mr Howells
    accepted,  Dr  Tran  may  not  have  been  using  these  words   in   a
    discriminating way to reflect particular legal concepts.  Consequently,
    the judge, in my view, failed properly to take into account  Dr  Tran's
    view as to the likely consequences for the appellant if he returned  to
    Vietnam.

52. One final point.  At para 47, the judge added this as regards the  risk
    to him on return:

         "I have every confidence that the appellant will be able to explain
         to the Vietnamese authorities  in  his  local  area  that  he  left
         Vietnam in an attempt to obtain work in the UK and in an attempt to
         trace his natural father in this country."

53. That, of course, would be potentially a permissible course of action if
    the appellant had not been involved in a demonstration and arrested and
    mistreated by the police.  However, the judge expressed this view in  a
    section of his determination premised on a finding that he was involved
    in the demonstration and detained and abused as he claimed  (see  paras
    37 and 45).  If, therefore, the judge reached this  conclusion  on  the
    basis that he accepted the appellant's account but that, in effect, the
    appellant could  persuasively  lie  or  dissemble  about  his  previous
    political  involvement,  then  the  appellant  would  fall  within  the
    principle in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
    [2012] UKSC 38 and would, on that basis, have a claim that he was being
    persecuted for a  Convention  reason  by  being  required  to  lie,  or
    dissemble, about his political activities.

54. For these reasons, the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  and  his
    finding that the appellant would not be at risk on return based upon an
    acceptance of his account, were legally flawed.

55. It is not necessary for me to reach a view on the  final  point  relied
    upon by Mr Frost, namely that the judge failed properly  to  take  into
    account "holistically" the  appellant's  Roman  Catholic  faith  having
    accepted that he was a Roman Catholic.  Suffice it to say  that,  since
    the appellant's appeal has to be re-determined de novo,  the  appellant
    will, to the extent that it is relevant,  be  able  to  rely  upon  his
    claimed faith as an aspect of the circumstances which, he says, put him
    at risk on return to Vietnam.

Decision

56. For all these reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.  The appeal  must  be  re-
    heard de novo.

57. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding, and having regard  to  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at para 7.2, the proper  disposal
    of this appeal is, as both representatives recognised if Mr Frost  made
    good his grounds of appeal, to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge N J Osborne.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              14 August 2020

