

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/02002/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2019                     |On 13 November 2019               |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  ANGE [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination follows on from:

      i) The respondent's decision, dated 3 February 2017.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Doyle, promulgated on 25 August 2017.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT.

      v) The grant of permission by the UT, dated 2 July  2018,  finding  an
         arguable issue  over  whether  the  appellant's  child  is  an  EEA
         national, and the extent to which the appellant was entitled to the
         assistance of the respondent in establishing that; and over whether
         the article 3 disposal was adequate.

     vi) The UT's directions and reasons, dated 12 July 2019.

    vii) Further directions, dated 4 and issued on 7 October 2019.

   viii) Appellant's response to directions, dated 11 October 2019.

     ix) Respondent's response, dated 28 October 2019.

      x) Appellant's skeleton argument, dated 4 November 2019.

 2. Mr Haddow also tendered a well prepared and  useful  bundle,  including
    most of the above.  His skeleton argument reformulates the two grounds,
    the first being:

      Procedural fairness: whether the FtT erred by  declining  to  exercise
      its power to direct the  respondent  to  produce  evidence  about  the
      father of the appellant's  child,  relating  to  his  nationality  and
      immigration status in the UK, with the result that  "a  central  issue
      was decided on the basis of her inability  to  adduce  evidence  which
      only the respondent could obtain".  At 54.1, the UT is asked  to  find
      "that the FtT unfairly failed to insist that the  respondent  complied
      with its duties to thoroughly investigate the appellant's claims [and]
      unfairly denied the appellant the opportunity to obtain  evidence  ...
      reasonably likely ... to be in possession of the respondent".

 3. The appellant's application to the FtT for directions,  dated  21  July
    2017, is item 1 of her bundle.  The request was for directions  to  the
    respondent "to verify the immigration status" of Mr  [E]  on  27  April
    2015, the date of birth of the appellant's child.  It was said that the
    issue was important as if Mr [E] had been settled in the UK, the  child
    would be a British citizen;  the  respondent  had  been  provided  with
    sufficient information to do so "either through the address provided or
    by way of corresponding with HMRC"; and that  due  to  issues  of  Data
    Protection [unspecified], the appellant could not obtain  the  required
    details without the assistance of the respondent.

 4. The letter does not say, and it has not been suggested since, that  the
    appellant approached the respondent directly  for  assistance,  without
    the intervention of the tribunal.

 5. The FtT's response on 26 July 2017, item 2 of the bundle, was to refuse
    the application, stating, "This appeal has been ongoing since  February
    2017 there has been adequate time to prepare the case".

 6. As Mr Haddow pointed out, that does not  relate  well  to  the  reasons
    advanced for the application.  It is more akin to a reason for refusing
    an adjournment.

 7. The  decision  of  Judge  Doyle  does  not  deal  with  the  matter  of
    directions.

 8. The first ground of appeal is essentially directed against the response
    of 26 July 2017 rather than against anything in the decision  of  Judge
    Doyle.

 9. The criticism of Judge Doyle is that he should have  issued  directions
    (and so should have adjourned) rather than  proceeding  to  decide  the
    case.  It is not said that he failed to deal with a renewed application
    at the hearing for directions.

10. The materials referred to above disclose much information which was not
    before the FtT.  No  doubt  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  error
    generally needs to be shown on the state of affairs before the FtT,  Mr
    Haddow submitted  that  by  making  directions  which  led  to  further
    information coming to light, the UT had engaged with the facts in  such
    a way that it  should  resolve  various  issues  on  all  evidence  now
    available.

11. I am not persuaded that the UT should depart from the general rule.  It
    is possible  for  inadvertent  procedural  unfairness  to  emerge  from
    matters not known to the original tribunal, but  this  is  not  such  a
    case.  The further  information  which  has  emerged  could  have  been
    ascertained by the appellant at an earlier stage.   Responsibility  for
    deficiencies in her case lies with her rather than with the  respondent
    or the  tribunal.   Neither  the  respondent  (nor,  subsequently,  the
    tribunal) may be expected to assist until approached on the basis  that
    other reasonable enquiries have been exhausted.

12. The UT was able to discover relevant information  by  a  simple  google
    search, which was promptly communicated to the  parties.  The  ease  of
    doing so shows that at  the  time  of  the  hearing  in  the  FtT,  the
    appellant had not reached the stage when other parties  ought  to  have
    been compelled to make her case, rather than doing so herself.

13.  Enquiries  made  in  terms  of  the  UT's  directions  of  the  German
    authorities and of Mr [E] were unproductive.  Mr Haddow argued that the
    negative outcome justified the appellant's position at the time of  the
    hearing in the FtT, but I am not persuaded.  It  was  firstly  for  the
    appellant to show that she had done what she could.

14. In course of the appeal to the UT, the appellant asked  for  directions
    to be issued to various government departments which are not  party  to
    the proceedings.  Given other reasons for dismissing the appeal,  there
    is no need to explore that matter further, but such requests  may  give
    rise to other issues.

15. The appellant does not show that there was anything before Judge  Doyle
    by which it was unfair to proceed  to  decide  the  case  on  available
    evidence,  rather  than  adjourning  and  issuing  directions  to   the
    respondent.  The appellant was in no position  to  show  that  she  had
    exhausted reasonable enquiries, or that she had  asked  the  respondent
    for reasonable assistance and been refused.  No duty had passed to  the
    respondent "to thoroughly investigate the appellant's claims".

16. The material now available potentially raises several issues, but these
    proceedings are not apt  for  decision  of  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant's case might be advanced on all evidence now available.

17. The second ground is formulated in the skeleton argument as:

      Reasoning in relation to finding no  breach  of  article  3  ECHR:  in
      concluding that the appellant could re-establish herself  without  the
      support of her family in Cameroon "as an independent educated  woman",
      failure to take account of issues independent of  the  risk  from  her
      father; absence of discussion of the  critical  question  whether  she
      would be "able to find suitable accommodation and employment to  avoid
      destitution"; no specification of the "weight of reliable evidence" to
      justify the conclusion; no reference to evidence  before  the  FtT,  a
      Refugee Board of Canada report, which "could  not  rationally  support
      the FtT's conclusions".

18. The FtT's decision at paragraph 14 (i) - (l) clearly explains why  even
    if the  appellant  had  a  violent  and  domineering  father,  she  had
    embellished her claim about any influence he had as a chief or in wider
    society.  The Refugee Board of Canada material is not entirely negative
    about the possibility for women to live alone in the larger  cities  of
    Cameroon, saying within section  4,  "Two  sources  state  that  it  is
    possible ... as long as they have the  necessary  resources;  the  same
    sources added that the level of education influences the quality of the
    employment".  The appellant is a university  graduate.   It  is  hardly
    surprising  that  enhances  her   employment   prospects.   The   FtT's
    characterisation of her as "an independent educated woman" is  correct.
    The comparison to be made was not with the most disadvantaged women  to
    be found in Cameroon.  There was no reason to think that she  would  be
    at disadvantage compared to other single mothers in that  country  (and
    she would have the advantage of relocation assistance  offered  by  the
    respondent).

19. Even if paragraph 14 (m)  is  somewhat  compressed,  I  find  that  the
    decision reaches a legally adequate resolution of the article  3  claim
    and of internal relocation, involving no error on a point of law.   The
    evidence did not realistically lead to  any  other  conclusion  for  an
    individual such as the appellant.

20. Proceedings have been protracted, partly at the instigation of the  UT.
    Despite the outcome,  that  may  not  be  a  fruitless  exercise.   The
    appellant was not entitled to expect  the  respondent  or  the  FtT  to
    research matters related to her daughter's paternity at the time of the
    FtT hearing, but she should now be able to clarify the  merits  of  any
    claim on that basis.

21. Neither ground of appeal is made out.  The decision of the FtT  stands.



22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      9 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman

