
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pA/02550/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 August 2016                  |On 9 November 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                              Appellant
                                     And

                                     ME
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mozham, Solicitor, Burton & Burton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.   This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Neither party invited me to rescind the order. I continue it
      pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).



Background

2.   The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (hereafter  "the
      claimant") appeals against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Juss ("the Judge"), promulgated on 5 July 2016, allowing  the
      appeal of ME  (hereafter  "the  respondent")  against  the  claimant's
      decision of 8 March 2016 refusing his protection claim.

3.   The respondent is a male national of Burundi born on 7  July  2003  who
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 September 2015 as an unaccompanied
      child. He was received in the United  Kingdom  by  his  uncle  and  he
      claimed asylum on 8 October 2015. The respondent's claim was  that  he
      had never lived in Burundi. He was born to refugees from  Burundi  and
      raised in a refugee camp in Tanzania. He feared that if he returned to
      Burundi that he  would  face  mistreatment  on  account  of  his  Hutu
      ethnicity and, as  an  unaccompanied  stateless  child  who  had  lost
      contact with his family. While the claimant refused the claim  on  the
      basis of  a  change  in  country  conditions  since  the  inter-ethnic
      conflict began, she did accept that he was  a  Burundian  national  of
      Hutu ethnicity who had spent  all  his  life  in  a  refugee  camp  in
      Tanzania.  She  did  not  however  accept  that  the  respondent   was
      stateless; that he and his family were specifically targeted whilst at
      the camp or that he had lost contact with his family.  Notwithstanding
      the refusal of  the  protection  claim,  the  respondent  was  however
      granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom on private life  grounds
      pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  until  7
      September 2018.

The Decision of Judge Juss

4.   The respondent's appeal was heard by Judge Juss on 9 June 2016. At  the
      hearing the respondent was 12 years old. As a matter of formality  the
      respondent adopted the contents of his respective witness  statements,
      but he was not cross-examined on account of his age.  The  Judge  then
      heard evidence from  the  respondent's  uncle.  The  Judge  found  the
      respondent's evidence was coherent and plausible and made reference to
      the fact that he was an  unaccompanied  minor  [17].  The  Judge  then
      observed that other than  giving  lip  service  to  her  duties  under
      section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  the
      claimant gave no meaningful consideration to her  duties  there  under
      'in the way that the Tribunal has set out in JO (Uganda)' (there is no
      citation but I assume the Judge intended to refer  to  JO  and  Others
      (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)).

5.   The Judge  then  identified  further  shortcomings  in  the  claimant's
      consideration and noted the possibility of internal relocation  and  a
      failure to apply the benefit of the doubt principle as set out in  the
      Rules in respect of child cases, and noted that no  attempt  had  been
      made to trace the respondent's  parents.  Drawing  these  shortcomings
      together the Judge concluded that the respondent's decision was flawed
      as she failed to have regard to that which she should have had regard.
      Accordingly, the Judge allowed the respondent's appeal solely  on  the
      basis that the claimant had failed to fully comply with her  statutory
      duties and therefore her decision was not in accordance with  the  law
      and remained outstanding pending its lawful consideration.

The Grounds of Appeal

6.   The Judge's decision caused the claimant to  apply  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal. There was no challenge  to  the  Judge's
      findings of fact, but the grounds challenged the Judge's  approach  to
      the consideration of the issues and the manner in which he disposed of
      the appeal. Essentially, it was argued that it was  not  open  to  the
      Judge to allow the appeal on the basis that  the  claimant's  decision
      was not in accordance with the law. It was further contended that  the
      claimant  had  not  acted  unlawfully  in  refusing  the   claim   for
      international protection.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge N Bennett on 21 July 2016 on all grounds.

8.   The Upper Tribunal issued directions that there should be a hearing  to
      ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  such  that
      the decision should be set aside and remade.  Thus  the  hearing  came
      before me.

Decision on Error of law

9.   At the hearing Mr Jarvis disavowed reliance on ground one.  In  essence
      it argued that it was not open to the Judge to allow the appeal on the
      basis that the decision was 'not in accordance with the law'  as  this
      was not an available ground of appeal following the amendments made by
      section 15  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  to  section  84  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  Mr  Jarvis  rightly
      accepted that following the guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Greenwood  No.  2  [2015]  UKUT  629  (IAC),  that  the  Tribunal  had
      jurisdiction to allow an appeal  if  it  considered  that  a  decision
      appealed against was not in accordance with the law.  Accordingly,  it
      was open to the Judge to find as he did and there is no error  of  law
      in his approach in this regard.

10.  However, in respect of ground two, I find  that  the  Judge  materially
      erred in allowing the appeal on the limited basis that he did for  the
      following reasons.

11.  The Judge considered that the claimant had not taken  material  matters
      into account. Whilst the analysis in the  refusal  letter  could  have
      been more detailed, I am satisfied that the claimant took into account
      her duties contrary to section 55 and considered the best interests of
      the child. That is evident by  her  grant  of  limited  leave  to  the
      respondent on private life grounds under the Immigration Rules. Whilst
      the Judge appeared to refer to the Tribunal's decision  in  JO,  in  a
      more recent decision, which the Judge failed to consider, the Tribunal
      in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015]  UKUT  00223
      (IAC) found that one of the options available to the Tribunal where it
      finds there has been a breach of section 55 is remittal. MK serves  as
      a reminder however that the decision in AJ (India) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
      Civ 1191 is authority for the proposition that  where  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decides that a decision of the Secretary of State is  not  in
      accordance with the law on account of a failure to discharge the first
      of the section 55 duties, the Tribunal is not  obliged  to  remit  the
      case to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision.

12.  In this case the Judge has not found a breach  of  section  55  on  the
      part of the claimant but has rather found the analysis lacking. In any
      event, even if the Judge was entitled to consider the section 55  duty
      as having been breached, he should have gone on  to  consider  whether
      this should result in a remittal to the claimant or whether  he  could
      and should consider the matter himself. In failing to  consider  this,
      the Judge has erred in law. Further, the Judge had all the information
      before him and there was  no  additional  evidence  or  detail  to  be
      considered in this case and, it is difficult to see if there  was  why
      this could not have been addressed by the Tribunal who had  the  added
      benefit of witness statements from the respondent and his uncle,  oral
      evidence and an appeal bundle.

13.  Further, whilst the Judge noted other factors such  as  the  claimant's
      vulnerability and whether the principle of the benefit  of  the  doubt
      should have been applied,  and  consideration  given  to  an  internal
      flight alternative, these were matters for the Tribunal to consider in
      discharging its statutory duty to decide the appeal and did not render
      the decision unlawful.

14.  As to the point about the claimant's  duty  to  attempt  to  trace  the
      family members of unaccompanied minors, this is  something  which  has
      been the subject of extensive litigation. However, it does not seem to
      me that given it was accepted that the respondent  had  no  family  in
      Burundi (the country of return) any allegation that the  claimant  had
      failed in her  tracing  duty  could  have  been  materially  relevant.
      Further, and perhaps more importantly, in TN, MA & AA v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40, it was pointed out  that
      in determining whether to accept an applicant's account, the  Tribunal
      must act on the evidence before it with no presumption of  credibility
      and the fact that the Secretary of State had failed, if  that  be  the
      case, to properly discharge her  tracing  obligation  did  not  affect
      that. It seems to me  that  against  that  background  the  First-tier
      Tribunal erred in law in adopting the approach it did.

Disposal

15.  Both parties invited the Tribunal to remit the  matter  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for the decision to be made in respect of the protection
      claim which had hitherto not been considered. By paragraph 7.2 of  the
      relevant practice statement for appeals on or after 25 September 2012,
      I must be satisfied that:
      "... the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is
      such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2  it  is
      appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal." In all  the
      circumstances I am satisfied that it would be appropriate to remit the
      case to the First-tier Tribunal given the nature and  extent  of  fact
      finding that needs to be made regarding the protection claim.



Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by  a  Judge
other than Judge Juss.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
