
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th October 2016                 |On 8th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Misghena [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Neville (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Eritrea, and  was  born  on  10th
    November 1977.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 26th October 2015 refusing  his  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection on the  basis  that  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  and  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights were not engaged.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 14th June 2016 and promulgated on 27th June
    2016.  In paragraph 27 of the determination, the judge held in  respect
    of the Appellant that, "I do not accept that he left Eritrea  illegally
    or that he is evading national service.  The burden  of  proving  that,
    albeit a low one is on him and it has not been  discharged"  (paragraph
    27).

 3. Both  Mr  Neville  and  Ms  Aboni,  appearing  as  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, at the hearing before  me  on  14th  October  2016,
    accepted that the Respondent in the refusal letter had already conceded
    both that the Appellant had left Eritrea  illegally  and  that  he  had
    evaded national service  (see  paragraphs  46  to  47  of  the  refusal
    letter).

 4. The judge had then gone on to rule that,

         "The question of illegal departures from Eritrea was considered  in
         MO (Illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00190
         (IAC) and it was found that the position adopted in MA,  which  was
         that a  person  of  or  approaching  draft  age  who  left  Eritrea
         illegally  is  reasonably  likely  to  be  regarded  with   serious
         hostility on return, was reconfirmed." (Paragraph 28)

 5. At the hearing before me on 14th October 2016, Mr Neville, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant,  made  two  basic  submissions.   First,  that
    before Judge Broe, the Presenting Officer, appearing on behalf  of  the
    Respondent, "said that he relied on the reasons for refusal letter save
    that he invited me to  consider  whether  the  Respondent's  concession
    about illegal exit was 'fair'" (paragraph 23).

 6. Mr Neville submitted that it was not open to a Presenting Officer to go
    behind a refusal letter, without making an application under Rule 24 in
    advance of the hearing, so that, if necessary, a  supplemental  refusal
    letter could be sent out by the Respondent amending the earlier refusal
    letter on a point, where it had been conceded that  the  Appellant  had
    both left Eritrea illegally, and had been a draft evader.

 7. Second, having applied the country guidance  case  of  MO  [2011]  UKUT
    00190, the judge then went on  to  curiously  state  that,  "I  am  not
    persuaded that the Appellant comes within a risk category.   I  do  not
    find it 'very likely'  that  he  would  be  perceived  as  having  left
    illegally" (paragraph 28).  This, submitted Mr  Neville,  had  reversed
    the position  in  the  country  guidance  case  because  all  that  the
    Appellant had to show was that there was a reasonable  likelihood  that
    he would be perceived as having left illegally, and not whether it  was
    "very likely".   That  is  not  what  the  country  guidance  case  had
    established.

 8. Mr Neville, for the sake of completeness, also drew my attention to the
    recent case of MST (National service  -  risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00443 which, however, Mr Neville was careful to point  out,
    had only just been  withdrawn  from  the  Tribunal  website,  and  from
    Bailii,  even  though  it  had  previously  been  sent  out,  and  this
    reconfirmed the country guidance given in MO [2011] UKUT 00190.

 9. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Respondent's Rule  24  response,
    but added that she would have to agree with Mr Neville on both  of  his
    basic submissions that he had noted.  The refusal letter  had  conceded
    two very important aspects of the claim, and if that concession was  to
    be challenged, there had  to  be  a  Rule  24  application.   She  also
    accepted that the judge gave no  reasons  for  why  the  Appellant  was
    within the relevant risk category given that it had been found that the
    Appellant had left Eritrea illegally and had evaded national service by
    the Respondent in the refusal letter.

My Consideration of the Appeal

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

11. First, it is clear that  the  refusal  letter  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant left Eritrea illegally and had evaded national service.

12. Second, if the Home Office Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Broe wished to go behind that  concession,  there  had  to  be  a
    proper application in advance of the hearing, and not for  an  advocate
    to simply suggest that such a concession was not fair.

13. Third, the judge was accordingly wrong to have ruled that, "the  burden
    of proving that, albeit a low one  is  on  him  and  it  has  not  been
    discharged" (paragraph 27), whereas plainly, on the basis of  what  the
    Home Office had  already  determined  at  paragraphs  46  and  47,  the
    Appellant had discharged this burden of proof.

14. Finally, the judge also concluded that, "I am not  persuaded  that  the
    Appellant comes within a risk category.  I do not find it 'very likely'
    that he would be perceived as having left  illegally"  (paragraph  28),
    when the case of MO [2011] UKUT 00190 had established that a person who
    has evaded draft service and has left illegally is reasonably likely to
    be regarded with serious hostility on return,  in  circumstances  where
    the risk categories were already quite narrow.

15. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am remaking this decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant on the basis of MO [2011] UKUT 00190 in  that  the  Appellant
    does fit in the risk categories because he has evaded military  service
    and then has subsequently left the country illegally and is bound, on a
    reasonable likelihood test, to  face  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  and
    persecution in Eritrea.



Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

17. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    5th November 2016
