
 [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02933/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st June 2017                  |On 01 August 2017                 |
|                                   |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR.PKI.

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant: M. S.Rogers of IAC Ltd.
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been grated permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands, dismissing
      his appeal.


   2. He is a national of the DRC. He said he worked for a government agency
      involved with family welfare. He claimed protection on the basis he
      would be at risk on return from the authorities because he reported a
      mass grave at Maluku to an NGO. The suggestion was that the bodies
      were of people who had taken part in demonstrations in January 2016
      and had been killed by government agents. Objectively, a mass grave
      existed but the government explanation was that it was the overflow of
      unclaimed bodies from a morgue.

   3. In the First tier hearing both parties were represented. The appellant
      gave evidence and adopted his statement. There was background material
      provided in support of the claim, including a newspaper article on his
      disappearance.

   4. The judge did not find the appellant credible. She referred to
      background information showing growing instability in the country
      because of attempts by President Kabila to change the Constitution.
      Given the appellant was a government employee this impacted upon his
      employment. The judge concluded he had decided to leave at this
      unstable time and had fabricated a claim around real events.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal. It
      was arguable whilst the judge gave a number of reasons for rejecting
      the appellant's credibility she did not give prominence to whether the
      appellant had established he, along with three women, had reported the
      mass grave to an NGO. Arguable in analysing the background information
      the judge unduly picked certain aspects.

   6. By way of a rule 24 response the respondent opposed the appeal,
      contending that the judge made a thorough and detailed assessment of
      the claim and provided numerous reasons for rejecting it. The
      consideration of the evidence about the grave was only part of the
      credibility assessment.

   7. At hearing, the appellant's representative referred to the judge's
      comments at paragraph 33 about the absence of reports of a smell. The
      appellant's representative said the articles submitted did refer to
      concerns over smells. The judge's view on this issue then led to a
      catalogue of rejections. It was submitted the reasoning at paragraph
      34 and 35 was infected by this.

   8. At paragraph 34 the judge referred to the suggestion that the burials
      occurred between the 18th and 19 March 2015.Reports indicated
      intelligence officers might have been in the area at 5 AM on the 19th.
      The appellant had referred to residents hearing the noise of trucks
      and noticing a bad smell. The judge concluded it was unlikely trucks
      would have been heard on more than one occasion.This was on the basis
      the bodies were buried over one night. She rejected the appellant's
      account of investigating a bad smell.

   9. At paragraph 35 the judge posed in the alternative there being smells
      which caused the appellant to have concerns. If this were so, she did
      not accept it was not within his remit to report this to his own
      agency. It was submitted the appellant had explained why he did not go
      to his own agency: namely, he did not trust the government
      authorities.


  10. The presenting officer relied upon the original refusal of permission
      to appeal wherein a First-tier Judge concluded the decision was
      comprehensive and well reasoned and engaged with the evidence.


  11. In response, the appellant's representative contended it was
      unreasonable to expect the appellant to be named in the country
      information.

  12. Both representatives agreed that if an error of law was found in the
      appropriate course was to remit the appeal for hearing de novo.

Consideration

  13. The country information clearly indicates a mass grave was found in
      Maluku. The appellant's bundle contains numerous references to this
      from reliable sources. There is an article from ONUSCO, part of the
      United Nations body tasked with monitoring abuses in the DRC. There is
      a report at page 68 of the appellant's bundle which refers to the
      grave. Footnote 72 refers to the discovery of the grave by members of
      the Municipality of Maluku. There was reference to 421 bodies. Page
      121 is a Human Rights Watch report referring to the grave. There is a
      Voice of America report, dated April 2015, referring to the discovery
      of the grave believed to have been created on 19 March 2015. A Human
      Rights Watch report of 8 June 2015 goes into detail. It refers to the
      unusual circumstances of the burial suggested by the authorities. It
      refers to a woman from Maluku telling Human Rights Watch that at 2 AM
      she was returning from her church when she noticed a large truck and a
      dozen or so men in uniform. There was also reference to a farmer who
      at 5 AM noticed a truck. He was subsequently questioned by government
      agents about what he saw and was threatened. There was reference to
      the suspicious death of the person in charge of the mortuary; Mr.
      Claude Kafese.The reported account was that he died in a drunken
      driving incident. Other reports referred to him having been shot.
      There was also reference to the January 2015 demonstration at which 32
      protesters were shot dead by government agents.

  14. The information suggests the discovery of the mass grave was widely
      reported in the media, with calls by family members and political
      groups for exhumations and investigations. The government had promised
      this.

  15. The appellant's claim is that he caused ONUSCO to learn of what has
      happened. His account of screening was that he was in the area
      speaking to women about family planning. He asked them if there any
      other issues and they referred to noise and a noxious smell. On his
      account he went to investigate the source of the smell, located it,
      and discovered blood. He then said he took the three women to ONUSCO's
      offices; spoke to an official and gave his details; and left the women
      to pass on their concerns. He then went home. He then gives an account
      in his substantive interview of men coming to his house on 26 June
      2015 looking for him. This prompted him to run away, stay with a
      friend, and then leave his home country.

  16. Consequently, the issue arising was whether the appellant had been
      instrumental in its expose and consequently at risk or whether he had
      woven an account to fit into a widely reported incident.

  17. The reason for refusal letter questioned why on the account there
      would have been such a delay on the part of the authorities pursuing
      the appellant. His account of people coming to his home lacked detail.



  18. His credibility was the central issue for the judge. His oral evidence
      and his statement referred to government officials coming to his place
      of work and that he was taken away and kept overnight. He was then
      released but required to return. He said this is why when he saw the
      people approaching his house on 26 June 2015 he knew they meant to do
      him harm. This was not referred to in his substantive interview. His
      explanation was that he had not been given the opportunity to fully
      answer.

  19. The judge has accurately recorded the claim made by the appellant. A
      summary is provided at paragraph 2 and further details given at 17
      through to 22. At paragraphs 33 onwards the judge reaches conclusions
      on the appellant's credibility and sequentially poses matters in the
      alternative. The judge recorded the existence of the mass grave was
      well reported.

  20.  The judge records there was no reference in the background material
      of the appellant or the three women reporting the mass grave. In fact
      in the Human Rights Watch there is a reference to a local woman and a
      farmer reporting the matter.

  21. The judge is speculating at paragraph 34 in stating it was unlikely
      there would have been blood once the bodies were being buried. The
      same applies in relation to the comment about the lorries and the
      number of journeys.

  22. The judge then went to consider the alternative whereby there was a
      smell and the appellant was concerned for the health of the women in
      the neighbourhood. The judge concluded in this situation he could have
      reported it to his own agency. The appellant had explained that he did
      not trust the government which would include his own agency as it was
      part of the State.


  23. Again, in the alternative, the judge accepted that it was more likely
      the appellant went to the area to speak to women in the course of his
      work connected with family planning rather than to investigate any
      mass grave. The judge did not accept his account of events following
      the visit of going to a non-government agency.

  24. At paragraph 37 the judge refers to lack of mention in the substantive
      interview of detention and interrogation on 19 June 2015. The judge
      rejected the claim he was not given an opportunity. At question 40 he
      was asked if he had any problems at work between 3 April 2015 and 25
      June 2015 and he said not. The judge concluded it was unlikely would
      have forgotten being taken from work and placed in a cell overnight.
      The judge concluded the appellant had embellished his account in order
      to explain his claim of running away when he saw officials approaching
      his home on 26 June 2015. Furthermore, the judge made the point that
      if government agents wanted to harm him they could have done so if he
      was in custody a few days earlier. Furthermore, the judge commented
      that it was likely they would maintain surveillance on his house. The
      judge pointed out there was no claim his wife and children
      subsequently suffered.

  25. The judge went on to referred to section 8 issues and did not accept
      the appellant's claim he did not know what third country he was in.
      The same applied in relation to his account of documentation being
      taken by the agent rather than destroyed by him.

Conclusions

  26. Going through the judgement individual aspects can be faulted. The
      comments about smell and blood are open to criticism. The judge also
      does not comment on the purported newspaper report of the appellant's
      absence. However, when the decision is read as a whole; bearing in
      mind the evidence that was before the judge, the judge was entitled to
      reach the conclusion made. The primary conclusion was that the
      appellant had fabricated the account of being responsible for the
      discovery of the grave. Consequently, he was not wanted by the
      authorities. When the decision is read in its entirety it is
      comprehensive and engages with the evidence. I find no material error
      of law established.





Decision.

No material error in the decision of First-Tier Judge Hands has been
established. That decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.




Deputy Judge Farrelly

28th July 2017






































