
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02987/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Court of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2016                      |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              Mr Gordy Kalombo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (hereinafter referred to as "DRC") who was born on 10 August 1995.  His
    parents were killed in the DRC in 1998 and he and his  sister  went  to
    live with his grandmother.  Their aunt and  uncle  were  by  that  time
    resident in the UK and adopted him (and his sister).  The appellant and
    his sister were granted indefinite leave to enter the UK on 7  December
    2007 and they arrived here eight days later.  The appellant has been in
    the UK ever since.

 2. In 2011 (when the appellant would have been 15  or  16)  the  appellant
    went into care following allegations of abuse which he had made and  he
    was thereafter accommodated by Glasgow  Social  Services  in  different
    children's  units.   He  has  thereafter  committed  numerous  criminal
    offences.

 3. As a result of these  convictions  the  appellant  was  served  with  a
    decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  on  17  September  2015,  in
    accordance with  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The
    appellant claimed that deportation would be in  breach  of  his  rights
    under both Article 3 and Article 8 of the  ECHR,  but  both  his  human
    rights claim and claim for protection were refused in a decision  dated
    6 November 2015.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  25
    January 2016.

 5. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 26 February 2016  Judge  Gibbs
    dismissed the appellant's appeal and the appellant now appeals  against
    this Decision to the Upper Tribunal, leave having been granted by First-
    tier Tribunal J M Holmes on 11 April 2016.

 6. The relevant history is set out  in  Judge  Gibbs'  Decision,  which  I
    briefly summarise.  His first conviction was on 12 October  2011  (when
    he was just 16) when for an offence of behaving in a threatening manner
    he was given a community payback  order  of  100  hours'  unpaid  work.
    Following this conviction,  the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  a
    further 25 offences, the details of which were set out in the Notice of
    Decision dated 6 November 2015 which is the  subject  of  this  appeal.
    His most recent conviction, and the index offence, was  on  24  October
    2014, when he was sentenced to seventeen months' imprisonment in a  YOI
    for "assault to  severe  injury  and  danger  of  life",  four  months'
    imprisonment  in  a  YOI  for  "assault  to   injury",   four   months'
    imprisonment for another "assault to injury" plus another  four  months
    in a YOI for assault.

 7. The respondent's case, as summarised by Judge Gibbs at paragraph  7  of
    her Decision is that:

         "In accordance with paragraph 398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the
         respondent concludes that the appellant's  deportation  is  in  the
         public interest because  he  is  a  repeat  offender  convicted  of
         multiple violent offences.  He does not meet the exceptions set out
         at either paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
         respondent is  not  satisfied  that  [there]  are  very  compelling
         circumstances that the appellant should not be deported.   Further,
         the respondent  is  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  be
         destitute on return to the DRC or that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
         treatment in breach of Article 3 ECHR".

 8. Judge Gibbs set out the provisions  contained  within  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and 399A and also gave consideration
    to the provisions of Section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002,  which  had  been  inserted  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  These provisions are also  set  out  within  her
    Decision.

 9. The judge's findings and conclusions are then set out  from  paragraphs
    16 to 25.  At paragraph 17 the judge gave specific consideration to the
    guidance set out in the reported decision of  this  Tribunal  in  Chege
    (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 165 as to the correct
    meaning of "very compelling  circumstances".   At  paragraph  23,  with
    regard to the appellant's Article 3 claim, she had specific  regard  to
    the guidance given by this Tribunal in the country guidance case of  BM
    and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC (CG) [2015]  293
    (IAC), concluding that the appellant did not fall  within  one  of  the
    risk categories identified by this Tribunal in that case.  This  aspect
    of the Decision has not been  challenged,  either  in  the  grounds  or
    during the hearing before me.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The first  ground  is  an  alleged  "misdirection  as  to  the  law  by
    impermissibly raising the bar for disproportionality  under  Article  8
    ECHR".  The basis of this submission within the grounds appears  to  be
    that this Tribunal's decision in Chege was wrongly decided and that the
    judge had been wrong also to follow the Court of Appeal decisions in AJ
    (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 and MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.
    The submission at paragraph 8 of the grounds is that  the  Rules  which
    now require an appellant to demonstrate that there are "very compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A" are not Article 8 compliant  but  were  "an  attempt  to  smuggle
    'exceptionality' in via the back door".  It is submitted  at  paragraph
    10:

         "The unlawful approach followed by the FtJ has the effect of giving
         dispositive weight to 'bright line' criteria (as contained in  para
         399 - 399A) that  are  not  compliant  with  Article  8  and  which
         preclude a Tribunal from giving  weight  to  factors  according  to
         circumstances (in accordance  with  the  Grand  Chamber  in  Maslov
         [referred to in the third ground]".

11. The second ground is that the judge erred by finding that the appellant
    had not spent "most" of his life resident in the UK.  It  is  submitted
    within the grounds that it is arguable  that  somebody  who  spent  the
    first twelve years of his life outside this country but the  next  nine
    years in this country could still be said to have spent "most"  of  his
    life in this country because (at paragraph 13 of the  grounds)  "'most'
    is not synonymous with 'majority'".  It is argued  that  "a  plain  and
    commonsense reading of the Rule" would allow a judge to  consider  that
    in these circumstances such a person could properly  be  said  to  have
    spent  "most"  of  his  life  here,  especially  as  elsewhere  in  the
    Immigration Rules there  are  explicit  requirements  that  in  certain
    circumstances an individual must have spent "more than  half  of  their
    lives" in the UK.  It is suggested in this context that  but  for  this
    error the judge could have found in favour of the appellant "given  his
    integration in the UK and the obstacles he would face returning to  the
    DRC for the first time in over a decade and for the very first time  as
    an adult" (at paragraph 14 of the grounds).

12. The third and final ground is that the judge did not apply properly the
    principles set out by the Grand Chamber in Maslov v Austria  -  1638/03
    [2008] ECHR 546.

The Hearing

13. Before me Mr Lay expanded upon  the  submissions  set  out  within  the
    grounds.  With regard to the third  ground,  the  failure  to  consider
    properly the Maslov criteria, he argued that the judge  had  failed  to
    have regard to the fact that the appellant did not speak either  French
    or Lingala.  The judge had also failed to make a specific finding as to
    whether or not the appellant had any family in the UK.  His  solicitors
    had made representations that every member of his family had  left  the
    DRC in order to come to this country.  His Article 8  case,  which  the
    judge should have considered, was that  first  the  appellant  did  not
    speak either Lingala or French, secondly  he  had  no  family  in  that
    country, thirdly he had been here since he  was  12  with  ILR,  which,
    although not determinative of his  right  to  remain,  was  nonetheless
    relevant to the weight to be given to any private life he had  in  this
    country and fourthly that he had  formerly  been  in  care,  which  was
    relevant to the judge's evaluation of his vulnerability on  return  and
    also his chances on return and the risk of his reoffending.

14. Also, while it was accepted that he could not now succeed on Article  3
    grounds following the country  guidance  decision  in  BM  and  Others,
    nonetheless his position in the DRC might  still  be  relevant  in  the
    context of his Article 8 claim.

15. Although at paragraph 24 the judge had considered  the  seriousness  of
    the offending she had not considered the other factors properly in  her
    proportionality assessment.  If this Tribunal  agreed  that  she  could
    have come to a different conclusion had she considered all the  factors
    properly, then there would have been a material error of law.

16. Moving on to the second ground, Mr Lay submitted that  the  judge  only
    got to consider the proportionality assessment because she had  decided
    that the appellant could not succeed within 399A, because of a  finding
    that he had not spent most of his life in  the  UK,  which  would  have
    required her then to consider whether "there would be very  significant
    obstacles to his integration" back into the  DRC.   He  relied  on  the
    arguments set out within the grounds to the effect that the word "most"
    could  not  properly  be  understood  as  just   requiring   a   simple
    mathematical calculation of how many  years  had  been  spent  in  this
    country and how many years outside.  The context of the time spent here
    also had to be considered.

17. Further and in any event, even if the appellant could  not  succeed  on
    the basis of having spent most of his life in the  UK,  nonetheless  if
    there were very significant obstacles to his integration back into  the
    DRC, this may amount to very compelling reasons,  notwithstanding  that
    there was a real risk  of  his  reoffending  if  he  remained  in  this
    country.  While it was accepted that the judge could have said that  it
    was proportionate to send him back, she had not properly considered the
    factors in his favour and for this reason her  Decision  was  wrong  in
    law, the error was material (because another judge considering the case
    properly might have reached a different  decision)  and  therefore  the
    decision should be remade.

18. In reply, Mr Jarvis, relying on the decision of the European  Court  in
    Balogun v UK [2012] submitted that  the  appellant's  reliance  on  the
    Maslov point was simplistic, because an error of law could only be made
    out if there had been a material misdirection in law or error of  fact.
    A judge did not specifically have to refer to a  judgment  by  name  in
    order to deal with the principles established.  What the European Court
    in Maslov was considering was the  weight  which  should  be  given  to
    lawful residence by a child, but in this case the predominant residence
    of this appellant had not been while he  was  a  child.   Further,  the
    European  Court  stressed  in  Balogun  (see  paragraph  49)  that  the
    circumstances in  Maslov,  where  all  the  offending  had  been  as  a
    juvenile, and there had been no offending in  the  seven  years  since,
    were very different from circumstances where  the  main  offending  had
    been committed as an adult, as in this case.

19.  Further,  the  judge  did  consider  the  significance   of   whatever
    connections the appellant had, because she noted at paragraph  22  that
    "understandably he is frightened of returning to  a  country  which  he
    left when he was 11 years of age and has no contacts", but  nonetheless
    found first that he was "a fit young man with the benefit of  education
    in the UK" and further, that "he does have family here who  may  choose
    to offer him at least financial support if he returns".  And, the judge
    found (at paragraph 22), that "in any event there is no evidence before
    me to suggest the appellant would be unable to find work and  care  for
    himself on return".

20. In reply Mr Lay accepted that the error that he relied upon could  best
    be categorised as a failure to take account of relevant considerations.
     Also, the judge should not have taken judicial notice that English  is
    spoken in the DRC.

Discussion and Findings

21. It is in my judgment  clear  that  the  judge  did  consider  what  the
    appellant's prospects would be on return to the DRC.  She found (and as
    I have noted there is no challenge to this finding) that the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return such that his Article 3 rights would  be
    engaged.  As noted immediately above, at paragraph 22 of  her  Decision
    she set out the factors which showed that this appellant would be  able
    to integrate back into the DRC.  These were that he was a fit young man
    with an English education, that he may have financial support from  his
    family who are here, and that in any event he would  be  able  to  find
    work and care for himself on return  (because  there  was  no  evidence
    before her to suggest that he would not).

22. When one then goes on to consider the huge  number  of  offences  which
    this appellant has committed, a large number  as  an  adult,  and  that
    these are offences involving violence, the judge was entirely  entitled
    to consider that there were not "very compelling reasons" why he should
    not be deported.  The reliance on the European decision  in  Maslov  is
    misplaced.  This appellant  is  not  someone  who  spent  most  of  his
    childhood in this country and whose offending was committed  whilst  he
    was a juvenile; rather, his offending was committed in  the  most  part
    after he was an adult, and certainly the index offences were  committed
    when he was around 19 years old.  Further, he did not spend the bulk of
    his childhood in this country; his first twelve years had been spent in
    the DRC.

23. With regard to the suggestion that the appellant should be  treated  as
    having spent "most" of his life in the UK, such that the  judge  should
    have considered whether there would be "very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration" back into the DRC (within paragraph 399A of the Rules,
    which mirrors what is now within Section 117C(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) this is, in my  judgment,  unarguable.
    Before either Exception 1 (as set out within Section 117C of  the  2002
    Act) applies, or 399A of the Rules, it is necessary for an applicant to
    have lawfully resided in the UK "for most of  his  life".   That  means
    that he must have been in this country for a longer period than he  has
    been out of it.  That is what "most" means.  There is no arguable basis
    for concluding that this word has any other meaning.

24. Moreover, even if this submission was arguable, it would still have  to
    be  established  that  the  appellant  was  "socially  and   culturally
    integrated in the UK" and further that there would be "very significant
    obstacles" to his reintegration back into  the  DRC.  I  note  that  at
    paragraph 18 the judge rejected the argument advanced on behalf of  the
    respondent before her that the appellant's criminal convictions were in
    themselves evidence that he was not integrated in the UK, "particularly
    given the length of time that he has lived here, his ability  to  speak
    English fluently  and  the  fact  that  he  has  been  educated  here".
    However, the judge was not persuaded that he had any significant family
    life in this country, for reasons which she gave at paragraph  19,  and
    in particular that he had not indicated "that he would return  to  live
    with his family if released from detention" which the judge  found  was
    "further evidence of a lack of a strong  familial  relationship".   For
    these reasons she was "not persuaded that strong ties exist, and  I  am
    not satisfied that family life exists for  the  purpose  of  Article  8
    ECHR".

25. With regard to "very significant obstacles" I consider that  the  judge
    would have been bound to find that there were not significant obstacles
    to the appellant's reintegration back into the  DRC  in  light  of  her
    other findings, particularly  at  paragraph  22  of  her  Decision,  as
    already referred to above.  It is notable  that  the  judge  also  took
    account of  the  appellant's  speech  difficulties,  but  had  in  mind
    evidence given by the appellant to his speech  and  language  therapist
    that "in Africa stammering is accepted as being the way  a  person  is"
    before reaching her conclusion that "this in itself would [not] present
    him with any particular problems in  the  DRC".   She  also  took  into
    account that although in the Criminal Justice Social Work Report  dated
    10 November 2014 there was mention of concern regarding the appellant's
    mental health, he had not accessed any mental health services  at  that
    time and that his last contact had been in 2012, such that there was no
    evidence that this would present a significant concern on return to the
    DRC.

26. In my judgment the judge was entitled to reach the findings she did, in
    particular that this appellant lacked family ties in this  country  and
    that there would not be any (let alone any very) significant  obstacles
    preventing his reintegration within the DRC.  On the facts of this case
    it is hard to see how any judge could have found that there  were  very
    compelling reasons why the return of this appellant, who is  clearly  a
    persistent offender who commits  serious  violent  offences,  would  be
    disproportionate.

27. I accordingly find that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it  follows  that  this  appeal
    must be dismissed.

Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 November 2016

