
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/02929/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 January 2019                   |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    A C A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr N Robb, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born in 1977.  She has  been  in
    the UK since arriving as a visitor  in  2009.   She  was  detained  for
    removal on 14 and sought asylum on 26 July 2014, on  the  grounds  that
    she would be at risk of persecution in Nigeria as a lesbian.

 2. The respondent refused that claim by a decision dated 24 November 2014.
     FtT Judge Lea dismissed her appeal by a  decision  promulgated  on  23
    January 2015, giving various reasons for finding her an unreliable  and
    inconsistent witness, and declining to accept that she is a gay woman.

 3. The appellant made a further claim, which the respondent refused  by  a
    letter dated 15 February 2018, along these lines:

         [10 - 15], Devaseelan applied;

         [18 -  31],  evidence  from  a  female  partner,  other  supporting
         witnesses, and  LGBT  groups  considered,  but  found  to  disclose
         inconsistencies, and not to show that the appellant is  "a  genuine
         homosexual woman";

         claim rejected also in terms of articles 2 and 3 ECHR,  family  and
         private life, and exceptional circumstances -  evidence  of  mental
         health issues short of qualifying for protection.

 4. The appellant appealed again to the FtT.  Her grounds  were  brief  and
    generic, referring only to risk on return due to her sexuality.

 5. FtT  Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 April 2018.  The decision sums up at [91] on page 22:

         "The appellant is an intelligent, educated, resourceful  woman.   I
         find that she travelled to the UK with the intention  of  remaining
         despite obtaining a visa only to visit.  She made plans as  to  how
         to remain some years after her arrival based on a sham marriage  to
         an EEA national.  When that failed,  she  did  nothing  else  until
         detained and when about to be removed made a false claim  that  she
         was a lesbian."

 6. The appellant had been legally represented in the FtT.  She applied  to
    the FtT for permission to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  grounds  apparently
    prepared by herself.  The FtT refused  permission  on  27  April  2018,
    because the grounds were only re-argument and an unfounded  attempt  to
    introduce new evidence.

 7.  On  23  May  2018,  the  appellant   applied   through   her   current
    representatives to the UT for permission, on grounds which  in  summary
    are as follows:

         (1).      Failure  properly  to  consider  evidence  from  an   art
         psychotherapist, being a medical professional, on  the  appellant's
         mental health condition, and  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  not
         accepting that assessment.

         (2).      Failure  to  consider  evidence   which   supported   the
         conclusions of a psychologist;  statements  about  the  appellant's
         reticence and non-disclosure are quoted.

         (3).     Failure to consider and  give  adequate  reasons  about  a
         volume of email evidence showing the claimed  relationship  between
         the appellant and her partner to be genuine.

         (4).     Above grounds show failure to "give proper reasons".

 8. Mr Robb's submitted further to the grounds, thus:

         (1).     The  letter  from  the  art  psychotherapist,  of  Glasgow
         Psychological Trauma Service, dated 30 October  2017,  was  in  the
         respondent's bundle at item  F.   This  confirmed  the  appellant's
         diagnosis of complex PTSD, which had not  been  challenged  by  the
         respondent.  The judge went wrong  in  her  understanding  of  that
         evidence at paragraphs 19, 87, and 88, by referring to  a  "claimed
         diagnosis" and finding that the appellant failed to establish  that
         it could be relied upon.  It  was  a  material  error  to  give  no
         adequate reasons for not accepting a professional diagnosis.

         (2).     The judge at paragraphs 23 - 33 selected negative elements
         from statements supplied for the appellant and overlooked  positive
         elements which corroborated her as to her  mental  health  and  her
         sexuality.  Taken along with ground (1), this showed that the judge
         had  substituted  her   own   views   and   effectively   "trumped"
         professional opinion, for no good reason.

         (3).     The judge misinterpreted the email exchanges  between  the
         appellant and her partner.  The examples cited in the ground showed
         that the relationship went two ways,  and  was  not  all  from  the
         appellant's side.

         (4).     The case should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT  for  a  fresh
         hearing.

 9. Mr Govan submitted as follows.  The appellant had been found  following
    hearings in two appeals to  be  an  unreliable  witness.   The  medical
    evidence did not include the primary diagnosis, but only a  second-hand
    record of a diagnosis.  The judge was not  bound  by  anything  in  the
    medical evidence.  It was for her to consider all the evidence  in  the
    round, which  she  did.   There  were  multiple  reasons  to  find  the
    appellant unreliable.  The letter  from  the  art  psychotherapist  was
    written on the assumption of allegations by the  appellant  which  were
    not, for good reasons, similarly accepted by the FtT.  There was strong
    support for the view that the appellant presented very  differently  to
    medical professionals than when giving evidence.   The  judge  did  not
    have to mention every item in evidence.   All  the  main  aspects  were
    plainly considered.  The judge was entitled  to  find  that  the  email
    evidence was at  best  ambiguous  about  any  meaningful  relationship,
    particularly in the context that the alleged partner had  not  attended
    to give oral evidence.

10. Having considered the decision, grounds, submissions, and the  evidence
    to which reference was made, I find that the appellant  has  not  shown
    that the decision of the FtT should be set aside  for  having  involved
    the making of any error on a point of law.

11. The appellant's grounds take her best points from the FtT, but that  is
    insistence and selective disagreement, rather than a  demonstration  of
    error in the FtT's resolution of the case.

12. The submissions for the  respondent,  as  summarised  above,  are  well
    founded.

13. Although the appellant did  not  produce  her  primary  diagnosis,  the
    letter founded upon was, on its face, adequate confirmation of it.  The
    credibility of the underlying assertions, however, was for the judge to
    decide, taking professional opinion into account with the rest  of  the
    evidence.

14. Even if the diagnosis was to be supported, that was not a matter which,
    without more, gave the appellant a right to remain in the UK.

15. The FtT's finding at 88 is carefully worded,  "...  the  appellant  has
    failed to establish that the diagnosis of complex PTSD for the  reasons
    she claims can be relied upon or that she  is  a  vulnerable  witness".
    That does not seek to usurp the functions of any medical expert.

16. The email exchanges are not shown to contain any  obviously  convincing
    evidence  of  the  appellant's  sexual  orientation   which   the   FtT
    overlooked; and the witness was notably absent.

17. The essential finding is that what the appellant says is not  reliable.
    That  is  reached  for  a  host   of   unchallenged   (and   apparently
    unimpeachable) reasons set  out  in  a  detailed  and  plainly  careful
    decision.  The appellant advances no analysis by which  that  decision,
    read fairly and as a whole, might be  held  to  be  less  than  legally
    adequate.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. The anonymity order made by the UT on 13 December 2018 is maintained.

      [pic]

      Dated 1 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




