
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02363/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st November 2018                          |12th November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  (born  11th  October  1980),
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge H Clark) dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision of 6th February 2018 refusing his protection claim.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim to protection is that  he  fears  to
    return to Bangladesh due to his political activity as a member  of  the
    Bangladesh National Party (BNP) which opposes the ruling  Awami  League
    Party.  He claims that he would be arrested and detained on  return  to
    Bangladesh as a result of politically motivated prosecution and further
    his political activity whilst in the UK would also expose him to risk.

 3. The Respondent, whilst accepting that the  Appellant  is  a  Bangladesh
    national, rejected his  claimed  membership  of  the  BNP  and  related
    political affiliations.  The Appellant appealed that decision.

 4. In a well-constructed decision, the  FtTJ  considered  the  documentary
    evidence and noted that it included arrest warrants, letters of support
    and  photographs.  The  Appellant's  oral  evidence   was   noted   and
    consideration was given to a Section 8 issue.  There was an eight  year
    delay, from the Appellant first entering the UK in 2009 to August  2017
    when his claim to asylum was made.

 5. The judge noted in particular the Appellant's poor immigration  history
    - he had submitted a false passport to the UK authorities  in  2011  to
    support an application for naturalisation.

 6. In assessing the Appellant's credibility the FtTJ noted inconsistencies
    in his various accounts.  He  disbelieved  the  explanation  given  for
    failure to claim asylum promptly on arrival in the UK.   Findings  were
    made that  the  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  the  claim  was
    unreliable.  Reasons were given for this.  On reviewing the evidence as
    a whole the judge dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

 7. Permission to appeal the FtTJ's decision was refused initially  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It was noted that the grounds seeking  permission
    took issue with the FtTJ's findings,  asserting  amongst  other  things
    that appropriate weight  had  not  been  attached  to  the  documentary
    evidence, and there was a lack of clarity on whether a finding had been
    made concerning the Appellant's membership of the  BNP.   It  was  also
    asserted in the grounds that the  FtTJ  incorrectly  applied  paragraph
    399L of the Rules in that the Appellant's reasons for his late claim to
    asylum were credible and should have  been  accepted.  Finally  it  was
    asserted that the Article 8 ECHR assessment was flawed as the FtTJ  had
    given  "insufficient  weight"  to  whether  there   were   "exceptional
    circumstances" in relation to a return to Bangladesh.

 8. As outlined above permission to appeal was refused by the FtT.  However
    it was granted on a renewed application by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grant of permission reads as follows.

         "I believe that:

          a. by dealing first with Section 8 issues before considering  the
             credibility of the claim; and

          b. failing to make a finding on whether or not the appellant  was
             a member of BNP;

         the First-tier Tribunal Judge may erred in law (sic)."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains such error of law that it needs to  be
    set aside and remade."

Error of Law Hearing

 9. Before me Mr Mahmood  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  Ms
    Isherwood for the Respondent.  I heard submissions from  both  parties.
    Mr Mahmood began  his  submissions  by  handing  up  two  cases,  SM  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKAIT  00116  and  RT
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38.

10. The main thrust of his submissions relied on the two matters set out in
    the grant of permission.  He said firstly that the FtT's  decision  was
    improperly constructed in that the FtTJ had impermissibly  started  his
    consideration of the Appellant's credibility by looking at the  Section
    8 issue first and making findings on that matter before considering the
    rest of the case.  Therefore he had failed  to  look  at  the  evidence
    holistically because a Section 8 issue had been used  as  the  starting
    point in the credibility assessment.

11. The second strand to Mr Mahmood's submissions centred on  an  assertion
    that the FtTJ had erred by failing to make an  appropriate  finding  on
    whether or not the Appellant was a member  of  the  BNP.   He  drew  my
    attention to the documentary  evidence  which  had  been  submitted  in
    support of the Appellant's claim and said that the FtTJ had erroneously
    failed to attach appropriate weight to those documents.  In  turn  this
    failure had meant that the FtTJ had failed to consider the  Appellant's
    position in the BNP and thus failed to consider  whether  there  was  a
    risk on return to Bangladesh.

12. Ms Isherwood defended the decision  briefly  but  robustly.   She  drew
    particular attention to [47] and [48].  In  [47]  the  judge  says  the
    following, "I do not consider it reasonably likely that  the  appellant
    was active or prominent the BNP (sic) as he  claims,  or  that  he  was
    attacked by Awami League supporters in 2005, or that he faces arrest or
    prosecution in Bangladesh as a  result  of  two  politically  motivated
    cases."

13. Ms Isherwood continued that in [48] the judge deals with  the  evidence
    of diaspora activities and gives full  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant is not at risk on return. The grounds amount to no more  than
    a disagreement with the FtTJ's clear and reasoned findings.

14. At the end of submissions I announced my decision that I was  satisfied
    that there was no error on the part of the  FtTJ  and  I  now  give  my
    reasons for this finding.

Consideration

15. I find that this application is without merit.  It is abundantly  clear
    from a reading of the decision as a whole that the FtTJ comprehensively
    disbelieved  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  on  return   to
    Bangladesh.  In a careful and well-constructed decision the FtTJ spends
    several lengthy paragraphs setting out his reasons for so finding.

16. It is correct to say that the FtTJ starts his credibility  analysis  by
    looking at the Section 8 issue. However I find that this is not a  case
    where the judge has made a decision by reference to the Section 8 issue
    only  and  thus  closed  his  mind  to  the  other  available  evidence
    available.  It seems to me appropriate that he starts with the  Section
    8 issue. The reason for this is that the  appellant  took  eight  years
    before making a claim to asylum.  Part of the Appellant's case is  that
    he was unaware of the system and did not have the opportunity  to  tell
    the Respondent about his asylum claim.  Significantly  a  deal  of  the
    evidence put forward to support  his  claim  referred  to  events  that
    occurred during this eight-year period.  The judge  had  to  deal  with
    this evidence and it therefore makes sense that the Section 8 issue was
    dealt with  initially.  It  is  clear  that  the  Section  8  issue  is
    interwoven with the evidence of the claim as a whole.  I find that this
    is not a case where the  FtTJ  has  failed  to  look  at  the  evidence
    holistically.  On the contrary the entirety of the  evidence  has  been
    considered with care.

17. So far as the second point in the grant is  concerned,  [47]  makes  it
    perfectly clear that the judge assessed the  risk  on  return  to  this
    Appellant by reference to the evidence as a whole.  In  [47]  and  [48}
    the judge sets out that there are a number of  documents  from  various
    sources which purport to corroborate the Appellant's claim.  The  judge
    deals with those documents on the basis that this is an  Appellant  who
    submitted a false passport in the UK, in order to make  an  application
    for naturalisation.  The FtTJ was perfectly  at  liberty  to  place  no
    reliance on the documents which the Appellant had sent to  support  his
    claim.  As Ms Isherwood pointed out, he then said the following:

         "I do not consider it is reasonably likely that the  appellant  was
         active or prominent the BNP (sic) as he  claims,  or  that  he  was
         attacked by Awami League Supporters  in  2005,  or  that  he  faces
         arrest or prosecution in Bangladesh as a result of two  politically
         motivated cases.  The timing of the appellant's  claim  for  asylum
         suggests that the appellant was making an attempt to remain in  the
         UK when other means to do so had failed."

18. I find that the  reader  can  be  left  in  no  doubt  that  the  judge
    disbelieved the Appellant's core claim and thus assessed that there was
    no real risk on return to Bangladesh.

19. I find that the grounds seeking permission and the  application  before
    me amount to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  comprehensive
    decision made by the FtTJ.  It  follows  therefore  that  the  decision
    contains no error requiring it to be set aside  and  that  this  appeal
    therefore fails.






Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant his  protection
claim therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made. I was not asked to make one, and I  find  it
is not necessary.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
