
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02281/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th May 2019                     |On 06th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HOA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M Mohzam, Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity  direction  was  not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction
    is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the
    appellant is granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This
    direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with
    this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is an Iraqi  national  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT")  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  7th
    February 2018 refusing his claim for asylum.  His appeal was  dismissed
    for the reasons set out in  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Gurung-Thapa
    promulgated on 23rd January 2019.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph [2] of  the
    decision.  At paragraphs [9] to [14] of the decision,  the  Judge  sets
    out  the  background  to  the  appellant's  claim   for   international
    protection, and the events that he claims occurred  that  lead  to  his
    departure from Iraq.  At paragraphs [31] to [90] of her  decision,  the
    Judge sets out her findings and conclusions.


 4. In support of his claim, the appellant relied upon a report dated  11th
    October 2018 prepared by Dr R K  Sinha.  Dr  Sinha  was  instructed  by
    Burton and Burton Solicitors to prepare his report  and  he  identifies
    the documents that he read before completing his report.  No  criticism
    was made of Dr Sinha's specialist expertise and experience in giving  a
    professional opinion.


 5. At paragraph [60] and [62] of his report, Dr Sinha concludes  that  the
    appellant shows symptoms of "severe depressive disorder" and meets  the
    criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD.  His opinion, set  out  in  paragraph
    [73] of the report is that the appellant has  a  "cluster  of  symptoms
    indicating  a  severe  depressive  disorder"  and,  at  [74]  that  the
    "diagnosis of depressive disorder is  clinically  compatible  with  the
    appellant's history of mistreatment and having to flee the  country  in
    fear of being killed in Iraq". He observes that the clinical picture is
    that his level of depression is "severe."  Under the  heading  "Fitness
    to give evidence", at paragraph [97], Dr Sinha  expresses  the  opinion
    that the appellant is fit to give evidence and he recommends  that  the
    appellant be questioned in a gentle,  non-confrontational  manner.   Dr
    Sinha expresses the opinion that the appellant should be regarded as  a
    vulnerable witness and additional measures should therefore be  put  in
    place to safeguard his well-being as outlined in the joint presidential
    guidance. He suggests that particular consideration should be given  to
    control the manner of questioning, ensuring adequate breaks are  given,
    and he recommends that the appellant be closely monitored for signs  of
    escalating distress.


 6. As set out at paragraph [34] of her decision, the FtT Judge was invited
    to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness in view  of  his  mental
    health.  The FtT Judge referred to the report of Dr Sinha  and  stated,
    at [34] and [35]:


         "34. ... From the medico-legal report, it stated that the appellant
         reported psychological symptoms and the conclusion reached by Dr  R
         K Sinha after observations the appellant's mental health indicate a
         diagnosis of severe depressive episode and PTSD. He stated that the
         appellant is fit to give evidence and would recommend  that  he  be
         questioned in a gentle-non-confrontational  manner  and  should  be
         regarded as a vulnerable witness.


         35.  I have duly treated the appellant as a vulnerable  witness.  I
         find that the appellant was able to answer questions put to him  in
         cross-examination which was in my view  non-confrontational.  There
         were no signs of distress.


 7. The FtT Judge summarises her conclusion as  to  the  appellant's  claim
    regarding the events that lead to the appellant's departure  from  Iraq
    at paragraph [36] of her decision, before  setting  out  at  paragraphs
    [37] to [59], the reasons for her decision.   At  paragraph  [36],  the
    Judge states:


         "Having  considered  the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  reject  the
         appellant's claim that he was kidnapped and held for  ransom  by  a
         group linked to ISIS. I also reject  his  further  claim  that  his
         father was killed by the group in revenge for the  killing  of  the
         two members of the group and the grenade incident. I find that  the
         appellant has invented his claim in order to bolster his claim  for
         asylum."


 8. Having found the appellant's account of events not to be credible,  the
    FtT Judge went on to consider the risk upon return. She noted, at [61],
    that the appellant's home area is Kirkuk, and that the appellant claims
    that in light of the Country Guidance decision in AA  (Iraq)  -v-  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, it is still not safe for him to return to his home
    area.


 9. The respondent referred the  FtT  Judge  to  the  respondent's  Country
    Policy Information Note  ("CPIN"),  'Iraq:  Security  and  humanitarian
    situation' of November 2018 and the decision of Sir  Ross  Cranston  in
    Amin -v- SSHD [2017] EWHC 2417  (Admin).   The  respondent  relied,  in
    particular, upon the conclusion that Kirkuk was no longer  a  contested
    area, and the SSHD had been entitled  to  take  the  realities  of  the
    position in Iraq into account.  Sir Ross  Cranston  had  accepted  that
    insofar as the position in Kirkuk is concerned,  the  country  guidance
    cases must give way to the realities.   He  noted  that  the  objective
    material establishes that there are apparently still dangers there, but
    nothing like the position when AA was decided.


10. The FtT Judge found, at [64], that from the background material  before
    her, Kirkuk is no longer a contested area and it is therefore  feasible
    for the appellant to return to  Kirkuk.   The  FtT  Judge  went  on  to
    consider the ID documentation that would be available to the  appellant
    and considered the appellant's evidence that his national ID  card  was
    in Iraq and his Iraqi passport had been lost in Iraq.  At [66], the FtT
    Judge rejected the claim by the appellant  that  his  family  home  was
    burnt down and his ID card was destroyed. She also rejected  his  claim
    that he has lost his Iraqi passport.   The  FtT  Judge  considered  the
    country guidance in AA, as amended by the  Court  of  Appeal,  and  the
    guidance set out in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation  relocation)
    Iraq CG UKUT 00212 that sets  out  the  factors  are  relevant  to  the
    ability of an individual to obtain a CSID.


11. For the reasons set out at paragraphs [71] to [75] of the decision, the
    FtT Judge found  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  the
    necessary documentation including his CSID with the assistance  of  his
    maternal uncle.  The Judge found, for the reasons set out at paragraphs
    [79] to [83] that the appellant could in any event, internally relocate
    to the IKR.


The appeal before me


12. Permission to appeal was granted on 25th February  2019  by  FtT  Judge
    O'Callaghan, who noted that it is 'arguable' that the FtT  Judge  erred
    by failing to treat the report of Dr. Sinha as  part  of  the  holistic
    assessment that is required, in light of the appellant's vulnerability.
     The matter comes before me to determine whether the  decision  of  the
    FtT contains a material  error  of  law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
    decision.


13. The appellant raises three grounds of  appeal.   First,  the  appellant
    refers to the decision in AM (Afghanistan) -v-  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1123 and claims that the  FtT  Judge  erred  by  simply  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim and made adverse credibility findings, without giving
    proper consideration to be mental health of the appellant as set out in
    the report of Dr. Sinha, and without having any proper  regard  to  the
    vulnerability of the appellant. The appellant claims that the FtT Judge
    failed to consider whether the discrepancies in the appellants account,
    and particularly his recollection of dates, are explained by his mental
    health. The appellant claims that the appellant's account of events was
    supported by the report of Dr Sinha, and FtT Judge failed to  undertake
    a holistic assessment of the evidence before rejecting the  appellant's
    claim, and finding that his account has been invented  to  bolster  his
    claim for asylum.  Mr  Mohzam  submits  that  although  the  FtT  Judge
    accepted that the appellant is a vulnerable witness, the FtT Judge  did
    not have proper regard to the guidance provided  in  AM  (Afghanistan).
    He submits that the FtT Judge was required  to  look  at  the  evidence
    holistically, and in considering that evidence, should have had  regard
    to the fact that the appellant suffers from depression and he has  been
    diagnosed as having suffered a severe depressive episode, and PTSD.  He
    submits that in reaching her decision, the FtT  Judge  failed  to  have
    adequate regard to the appellant's vulnerability and  appears  to  have
    reached a conclusion that the appellant  is  not  a  credible  witness,
    before considering the medical evidence and whether that was capable of
    lending support to his claim.


14. Second, the FtT Judge erred in her conclusion that Kirkuk is no  longer
    a contested area, and placed undue reliance upon the  decision  of  Sir
    Ross Cranston in Amin -v- SSHD, without  considering  the  considerable
    evidence that was in the appellant's bundle, to  show  that  Kirkuk  is
    still a contested area and unsafe.  Mr Mohzam submits that there was no
    cogent evidence before the FtT capable of establishing that the country
    guidance is set out in AA, should not be followed.


15. Third, the FtT Judge failed to properly consider the  guidance  in  AAH
    and failed to consider whether the appellant would be able to obtain  a
    CSID within a reasonable time, noting that even if the appellant is  in
    contact with his maternal uncle, that may not be sufficient  to  obtain
    his CSID within a reasonable time.  Mr Mohzam submits that it would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant to internally relocate to the IKR.


Discussion


16. In AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    EWCA Civ  1123  guidance  was  provided  by  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals. In that case, an expert medical report relating to a 15-year-
    old asylum seeker indicated that he  suffered  from  moderate  learning
    difficulties. It outlined the ground rules which should be  adopted  at
    the hearing to  ensure  procedural  fairness.  The  Judge  ignored  the
    advice, and  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  asylum
    seeker. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal also ignored the medical  report,
    finding that the FtT Judge had  taken  full  account  of  the  learning
    difficulties, and had been entitled to its view. By  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the Court of Appeal, it was common ground that there had
    been fundamental procedural unfairness, and that  the  case  should  be
    remitted.


17. As to procedural  fairness,  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals noted that the strict rules of evidence do not apply  in  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Chamber,  like  they  do  in  the  courts.  The
    Tribunal Rules make clear that there is flexibility and a wide range of
    specialist expertise, which a Tribunal can utilise to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.  The Court of Appeal gave guidance  on  the  general
    approach to be adopted in law and practice, by the FtT  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal where claims for  asylum  are  made  by  children,  and  young
    people, or indeed  other  incapacitated  or  vulnerable  persons  whose
    ability to participate effectively in proceedings might be limited. The
    guidance is designed to ensure that  such  persons  have  an  effective
    right of access to the Tribunal and a voice in the proceedings, so that
    their claims are fairly determined.  At paragraphs [21] and  [22],  Sir
    Ernest Ryder stated:


         "21. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  agreed
         basis  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  merits  reflects   core
         principles  of  asylum  law  and  practice  which  have  particular
         importance in claims from children  and  other  vulnerable  persons
         namely:


             a.   given the gravity of the consequences of  a  decision  on
             asylum and the accepted inherent difficulties in  establishing
             the facts of the claim as well as future  risks,  there  is  a
             lower standard of proof, expressed as 'a  reasonable  chance',
             'substantial grounds for thinking' or 'a serious possibility';


             b.   while an assessment of  personal  credibility  may  be  a
             critical aspect of some claims, particularly in the absence of
             independent supporting evidence, it is not an end in itself or
             a substitute for the application of the criteria  for  refugee
             status which must be holistically assessed;


             c.   the findings of medical experts must be treated  as  part
             of the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated  as  an
             'add-on' and rejected as a result of  an  adverse  credibility
             assessment or finding made prior to and without regard to  the
             medical evidence;


             d.   expert medical evidence  can  be  critical  in  providing
             explanation  for  difficulties  in  giving  a   coherent   and
             consistent account of past  events  and  for  identifying  any
             relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities that  can
             lead  to  disadvantage  in  the  determination  process,   for
             example, in the ability to give oral testimony and under  what
             conditions (see  the  Guidance  Note  below  and JL  (medical
             reports - credibility) (China) [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC),  at
             [26] to [27]);


             e.   an appellant's account  of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
             assessment of an appellant's credibility must also  be  judged
             in the  context  of  the  known  objective  circumstances  and
             practices of the state in question and a failure to do so  can
             constitute an error of law; and


             f.   in making asylum  decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
             procedural fairness are required.


         22.  Although I agree  with  these  submissions  I  would  like  to
         emphasise that these principles are not an exhaustive or  immutable
         checklist. That said, the principles were not applied  properly  or
         at all in the determination of this appellant's  claim  for  asylum
         either by the FtT or the UT. I recognise that this marks a  failure
         of the system to provide sufficient and adequate protection in  the
         asylum process for the particular requirements, needs and interests
         arising out of the disadvantages that the appellant has as a highly
         vulnerable child. There is a consensus  that  the  critical  errors
         arose from the focus on the credibility of the appellant's  account
         and the failure to properly have regard to the  objective  evidence
         and to give it priority  over  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
         provide oral testimony."


18. The FtT Judge here, had regard to the appellant's vulnerability as  set
    out in the report of Dr Sinha.  At paragraphs [34] and  [35],  the  FtT
    Judge noted Dr Sinha's opinion  that  the  appellant  is  fit  to  give
    evidence, and if he does give evidence, he should be  questioned  in  a
    gentle non-confrontational manner.  The safeguards  recommended  by  Dr
    Sinha were that the manner in which the appellant is questioned  should
    be controlled, there should be adequate breaks, and that the  appellant
    should be closely monitored for  signs  of  escalating  distress.   The
    appellant does not claim in the grounds of appeal, and  Mr  Mozham  did
    not submit at the hearing before me, that the safeguards recommended by
    Dr Sinha were not provided for.   At  paragraph  [35],  the  FtT  Judge
    confirms that she treated the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness,  but
    noted also that the appellant was able to answer questions put  to  him
    in cross-examination, and there were no signs of distress.


19. The findings of a medical  expert  must  be  treated  as  part  of  the
    holistic assessment and medical evidence can be critical  in  providing
    an explanation for difficulties in giving  a  coherent  and  consistent
    account of past events.  Here, Mr Mohzam acknowledges  that  there  was
    inconsistent dates given by the appellant as to the events that were at
    the heart of the claim,  but  he  submits,  the  FtT  Judge  failed  to
    consider  whether  those  discrepancies  could  be  explained  by   the
    vulnerability of the appellant and his mental health.


20. I have carefully read  the  report  of  Dr  Sinha,  who  sets  out  the
    background and history of the appellant's claim at  paragraphs  [1]  to
    [27] of his report.  In fact, Dr Sinha states at paragraph [41] of  his
    report that the appellant "..was oriented to time, place and person and
    his memory for recent and remote  events  was  good.   His  speech  was
    coherent and spontaneous, with no formal thought disorder (disorganised
    speech)  evident.".   The  appellant's  presentation  before  Dr  Sinha
    appears to accord with the observation recorded by  the  FtT  Judge  at
    paragraph [35] of her decision that the appellant was  able  to  answer
    the questions put to him in cross examination, and that there  were  no
    signs of distress.


21. Although it is right that at paragraph [36] of the decision, the  Judge
    notes that she rejects the claim  advanced  by  the  appellant,  before
    setting out her assessment of the evidence, that is not to say that the
    Judge reached a decision before carrying out a careful  examination  of
    the evidence.  Paragraph [36] is in fact a summary  of  the  conclusion
    reached by the Judge, before  she  sets  out  in  the  paragraphs  that
    follow, her reasons for reaching that conclusion.  The Judge  expressly
    states, at [36], that she reaches her conclusion "Having considered the
    evidence in the round...", and there is nothing in the paragraphs  that
    follow, that indicate that she did not do so.  Having made that  clear,
    there is no reason for me to  believe  that  she  did  not  adopt  that
    approach.  In fact, having then set out her reasons at paragraphs  [37]
    to [59], the Judge concludes at paragraph  [60]  by  stating  "For  the
    reasons set out above, I do not find  the  appellant's  account  to  be
    credible ...".


22. It is clear that the ingredients of the  story,  and  the  story  as  a
    whole, have to be considered against the  available  country  evidence,
    and any reliable expert evidence, and other familiar factors,  such  as
    consistency with what the appellant has said  before,  and  with  other
    evidence relied upon.  The  assessment  of  an  asylum  claim  and  the
    credibility of an appellant is always a  highly  fact  sensitive  task.
    The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence  as  a  whole.   In
    assessing the credibility of the appellant and the  claim  advanced  by
    him, the Judge was required to consider  a  number  of  factors.   They
    include, whether the account given by the appellant was  of  sufficient
    detail, whether the account is  internally  consistent  and  consistent
    with any relevant specific and general country information.


23. Here, the medical evidence did  not  suggest  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to give evidence, that  his  ability  to  recollect  events  was
    compromised by his mental health, or that there was some  other  reason
    why the appellant might be unable to provide a coherent account of  the
    events that he claims, occurred.   The  Judge  confirms  that  she  has
    considered the evidence in the round, and it is clear  from  what  then
    follows at paragraphs [37] to [59], that the Judge considered  all  the
    material relied upon by the appellant including the report of Dr  Sinha
    and other documents that were provided by the appellant to support  his
    claim.


24. In reaching her decision, the Judge noted, at [47], the evidence of  Dr
    Sinha regarding the scars, and considered the opinion of Dr Sinha  that
    the scars are highly consistent/consistent with the attributed  causes,
    but considered that opinion against the account of events  relied  upon
    by the appellant as to how and when the injuries  were  sustained,  and
    other evidence relied upon by the appellant, including a medical report
    from the Azadi Hospital dated 31st August 2015.  In that report it  was
    claimed by Dr Mouamen Hassan Mohammed that he had conducted a  forensic
    medical examination of the appellant at the Azadi General  Hospital  on
    31st August 2015 as requested by the  police,  and  on  examination  he
    found that the appellant had "..four toes cut from the  right  foot..",
    and that the appellant was inter alia in an unstable  condition,  in  a
    persistent state of fear and anxiety with an inability to  concentrate.
    Having noted the evidence set out in the report of Dr Sinha, the  Judge
    considered his opinion and conclusions, in light of the evidence of the
    appellant, and other documents relied upon by the appellant.  The Judge
    had the opportunity of hearing the appellant and  having  his  evidence
    tested, and to consider the evidence of Dr  Sinha  in  the  context  of
    other documents relied  upon  by  the  appellant.  The  Judge  did  not
    consider irrelevant factors, and the weight that  he  attached  to  the
    evidence was a matter for her.  The Judge carefully considered  all  of
    the evidence before her in the round and it was in my judgement open to
    the Judge, following a holistic examination of all of the evidence,  to
    conclude that the appellant's account of events and how he received his
    injuries, is not credible.


25. As to the Judge's assessment of the risk upon  return,  it  is  correct
    that AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as  amended  by
    the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944,  confirmed  that
    there is a state of internal armed conflict in certain parts  of  Iraq,
    involving government security forces, militias of  various  kinds,  and
    the Islamist group known as ISIL. The intensity of this armed  conflict
    in the so-called "contested areas", comprising inter  alia  Kirkuk,  is
    such that, as a general  matter,  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that any civilian returned there, solely on account of his or
    her  presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being   subjected   to
    indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the  scope  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


26. The Judge here, considered the background material relied upon, and  in
    particular, the respondent's November 2018 CPIN, and found that  Kirkuk
    is no longer a contested area and it  is  therefore  feasible  for  the
    appellant to return to Kirkuk.  I accept that cogent  reasons  must  be
    given for a departure from Country Guidance.  However,  the  FtT  Judge
    considered  whether  there  was  fresh  evidence  to  justify  such   a
    departure. The evidence relied on was  a  CPIN  which  itself  drew  on
    multiple sources of background  material  and  country  information  to
    found its conclusion that Kirkuk is no longer afflicted by high  levels
    of violence such as to make return there a  general  risk  contrary  to
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. That CPIN made clear that
    ISIS was no longer  in  control  and  that  there  were  only  sporadic
    incidents of violence. The Judge noted that in Amin -v- SSHD, Sir  Ross
    Cranston had found that Kirkuk is no longer a contested area, and  that
    although there are apparently still dangers there, that is nothing like
    the position as when AA was decided.  I also note that Court of  Appeal
    has very recently noted in KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172,  that  a
    FtT judge had not erred  in  her  approach  when  concluding  that  new
    evidence,  including  a  Country  Information  and   Guidance   report,
    justified a departure  from  an  earlier  country  guidance  case  when
    assessing the risks of returning an asylum seeker  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Court of Appeal confirmed that the Judge was not required to go through
    each section of the report in her determination, or to set out  a  list
    of positive and negative factors from it.


27. In my judgement it was open to the FtT Judge to conclude that Kirkuk is
    no longer a contested area and that it is feasible for the appellant to
    return to Kirkuk.  Having considered the relevant factors identified in
    the country guidance decisions in AA and AAH, was it my judgement as to
    the Judge to conclude that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  the
    necessary documentation including in the CSID with  the  assistance  of
    his maternal uncle.  In reaching  that  decision,  the  FtT  Judge  was
    entitled to note that the appellant's uncle has  been  able  to  obtain
    copies of investigation documents, and that the appellant has failed to
    establish that he would not be able to obtain a  replacement  Iraqi  ID
    card and/or CSID within a reasonable time, if returned to Iraq.  It was
    also open to the Judge to conclude that in any event, the appellant has
    the choice  of  internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  and  that  although
    relocation there will be challenging, it would not be duly  harsh.   In
    reaching her decision the FtT Judge again had  careful  regard  to  the
    matters set out in AAH, including the support that may be available  to
    the appellant, and also the high unemployment rate.


28. Having carefully considered the appellant's grounds  of  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that the  FtT  Judge  carried  out  a  careful  and  holistic
    examination of the appellant's claim, before reaching conclusions  that
    were open to her.  In my judgement, there is no material error  in  the
    decision of the FtT Judge.  It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed.


19. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date          21st June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          21st June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
