


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/02426/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 19 September 2019          |
|Prepared on 13 September 2019                |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


        1. The Appellant entered the  UK  illegally  in  2007  and  made  a
           protection claim. That was refused, and his appeal  against  the
           refusal and decision to remove him  to  Iraq  was  dismissed  by
           decision of Immigration Judge Duff  promulgated  on  7  December
           2009.
        2. Although his appeal rights were exhausted the Appellant was  not
           removed  from  the  UK.  In  April  2017  he  advanced   further
           representations which  the  Respondent  accepted  constituted  a
           fresh protection claim. However this fresh claim was refused  by
           decision of 30 January 2018. The Appellant's appeal against that
           refusal was dismissed by decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Arullendran of 23 March 2018.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal that decision  to
           the Upper Tribunal, and in due course his challenge came  before
           Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Appleyard  who,  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 6 April 2019 found a material error of law,  and,
           remitted the appeal to the FtT. As  explored  below  in  detail,
           although he referred to a hearing de novo he sought to  preserve
           adverse findings of fact, and to limit the scope of the remitted
           appeal [6].
        4. The  remitted  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Gumsley who dismissed it in a decision promulgated  on  19  June
           2019. The  Appellant  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  this
           decision by Designated Judge Shaerf  because  he  considered  it
           arguable that the limited scope of the appeal had been exceeded.
        5. No Rule 24 Notice had been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      Material findings of fact
        6. Judge Duff noted in 2009 that the Appellant's  evidence  was  so
           inconsistent and contradictory that his account of  why  he  had
           left  Iraq  in  2007  was  not  credible.  He  also  noted   the
           inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning  his
           uncle's dealings with the agents who had facilitated his  travel
           to the UK, and the monies paid. He noted that the Appellant  had
           also been inconsistent upon the simple issue of whether  he  had
           left his Iraqi passport with  his  family  before  leaving,  or,
           whether he had used his own Iraqi passport to  gain  a  visa  to
           leave Iraq and to enter Turkey. He noted that the Appellant  had
           produced at the hearing some untranslated copy  documents  which
           were said to have been sent to him from Iraq the  previous  day,
           but concluded that he could place no weight upon them, and  that
           they did not assist his assessment of the weight that  could  be
           given to the Appellant's evidence. He did not record  what  they
           were said to be.
        7. Judge Arullendran  noted  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  had
           enjoyed no contact with his family since he left  Iraq  in  2007
           [37]. She rejected this, and in doing so noted  his  ability  to
           produce identity documents to Judge Duff at the hearing  of  his
           appeal in 2009 which were said to  have  been  provided  to  him
           immediately prior to that  hearing.  She  also  noted  that  the
           Appellant's NHS notes recorded a telephone call  being  received
           from the Appellant's mother on 1  March  2016  by  the  hospital
           staff treating him following a road traffic accident, about  his
           pain relief, and, that when he was discharged from  hospital  he
           was said to be living at the home of a cousin. She  rejected  as
           untrue the explanations he offered to her for these  entries  in
           his NHS notes [43, 44, 72].
        8. Judge Arullendran found that the Appellant had been issued  with
           an Iraqi  passport  [63].  She  noted  his  ability  to  produce
           identity documents to judge Duff in  2009,  and  found  that  he
           still had in his possession his CSID [70]. She concluded that he
           was still in contact with his family in Iraq [71]. If he  needed
           to do so, she found that he could obtain a replacement  passport
           and CSID through the Iraqi Embassy  in  the  UK,  or,  with  the
           assistance of his family or a proxy in Iraq.
        9. The decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard notes  the
           parties were agreed before him that Judge Arullendran's  finding
           that the Appellant could  obtain  identity  documents  with  the
           assistance of his family was materially flawed in the  light  of
           the guidance  to  be  found  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
           relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212. It is not however clear  from  the
           decision why this was considered to be a material  error,  since
           no challenge was offered to the Judge's conclusion  either  that
           he actually had his CSID in his possession, or, that he was able
           to acquire a replacement passport if he needed to from the Iraqi
           Embassy in the UK. (With respect to this latter finding  I  note
           that on the Judge's findings he was able to approach the Embassy
           to seek a replacement passport in the event  that  his  own  had
           expired, or was lost, armed with the biographical details  about
           himself that he knew, his fingerprints and either a copy or  his
           original CSID).
       10. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard appears to  have  disposed
           of the appeal by consent. He did so in the following terms;
           In the circumstances the appeal will be remitted to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal to be heard de novo, solely  in  relation  to  the
           narrow issue identified in paragraph 5 of Deputy Upper  Tribunal
           Judge Chapman's decision [the grant of  permission  to  appeal].
           The balance of [Judge Arullendran's] findings are preserved.
       11.  When  the  remitted  appeal  came  before  Judge  Gumsley,  the
           representatives of both parties (neither of  whom  had  appeared
           previously) were agreed that there was some ambiguity over  what
           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard had intended the scope  of
           the remitted appeal to be. It was agreed that Judge  Arullendran
           had found that;
            "the Appellant can obtain a CSID plus  a  replacement  passport
           from the Iraqi embassy or through the assistance of  his  family
           or proxy in Iraq" [70],
           "I am not satisfied that the Appellant has lost touch  with  his
           family  in  Iraq  because  he  was  able  to  obtain  his  Iraqi
           identification documents and work certificate in 2009, some  two
           years after he had......claimed to  have  lost  touch  with  his
           family" [71], and, that he had his old CSID  in  his  possession
           [70].
       12. It was further agreed by both parties before Judge Gumsley  that
           if Deputy Judge Appleyard had preserved the adverse finding that
           the Appellant had his old CSID in his possession (as he appeared
           to have done), then the question of whether the Appellant  could
           contact his family, or  use  a  proxy,  in  order  to  obtain  a
           replacement was irrelevant. Consequently it was agreed  that  it
           must have been Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard's intention
           when remitting the appeal to the  FtT  that  the  scope  of  the
           appeal should extend to a consideration of whether the Appellant
           had, or could be expected to obtain, the relevant  documentation
           needed to make a life for himself in Iraq. Thus the evidence  on
           these issues was considered again by  Judge  Gumsley,  with  the
           consent of the Appellant.
       13.  Having  reviewed  the  evidence  before   Judge   Duff,   Judge
           Arullendran, and produced to him, Judge Gumsley also  found  the
           Appellant's  evidence  to  be  unreliable  and  inconsistent  in
           material  respects.  Judge  Gumsley  also  concluded  that   the
           Appellant had not lost contact with his family as claimed,  that
           he had in his possession at least a copy of his CSID,  and  that
           he knew both his family book and  page  number  [39].  Thus  the
           remitted appeal was dismissed.


      Error of Law?
       14. Although Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal on
           the basis it was arguable that Judge Gumsley  had  exceeded  the
           scope of the remitted appeal, it is plain from his decision that
           the  Appellant's  representative  (an  experienced   immigration
           solicitor) had agreed that Judge  Gumsley  should  do  precisely
           what he proceeded to do. There has  never  been  any  suggestion
           that she acted without the Appellant's authority  in  doing  so.
           Moreover,  as  both  representatives  had  agreed  before  Judge
           Gumsley, if the finding either that the Appellant was indeed  in
           contact with his family,  or,  in  possession  of  his  identity
           documents (or copies of them) were preserved, then there was  no
           purpose to the remittal of the appeal to the FtT. Whether  taken
           separately, or together, those points  are  in  my  judgement  a
           complete answer to the suggestion that Judge Gumsley went beyond
           the scope of the remitted appeal.
       15. In any event, for the reasons identified by Judge  Gumsley,  and
           agreed by the parties, I  am  satisfied  that  the  approach  he
           adopted was the only way by which the FtT could  make  sense  of
           the terms in which the appeal had been remitted to  the  FtT  by
           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard.
       16. Having reviewed Judge Gumsley's decision I am satisfied that  it
           is  a  thorough   examination   of   the   Appellant's   general
           credibility.  The  adverse  points   made   are   serious,   and
           demonstrate, as was concluded, that the Appellant has materially
           changed his account from time to time in a way that he would not
           have done were he a witness of truth.
       17. On the key issue of contact with his family it is plain that the
           Appellant has no credibility remaining. The conclusion that  the
           Appellant is in truth  in  contact  with  his  family,  and,  in
           possession of either his original passport or  his  CSID,  or  a
           copy of them, was in my judgement not only adequately  reasoned,
           but inevitable.
       18. Indeed the only aspect of the evidence that I  can  identify  as
           not having been dealt with in  the  course  of  Judge  Gumsley's
           review, are the entries in the Appellant's  NHS  records,  which
           record a telephone call  being  received  from  the  Appellant's
           mother on 1 March 2016,  and,  his  being  discharged  from  in-
           patient care into the care of a cousin.  Judge  Arullendran  had
           considered both pointed to the  Appellant  continuing  to  enjoy
           contact with his family.  These  records  did  not  support  the
           Appellant's claim to have lost all contact with his family,  and
           perhaps this is why the Appellant makes no complaint about Judge
           Gumsley's apparent failure to include them within his review  of
           the relevant evidence. It is difficult to see any error in Judge
           Arullendran's approach to this  evidence,  or,  the  Appellant's
           protestations that NHS employees had  mistaken  what  they  were
           told. Thus  if  Judge  Gumsley  had  taken  this  material  into
           account, I conclude that it  would  simply  have  fortified  his
           conclusions.
       19. Judge Gumsley's adverse findings  of  fact  follow  the  correct
           application of the burden and standard of proof to the evidence,
           reflect the proper application of the principles  in  Devaseelan
           [2002] UKIAT 702, they  are  thoroughly  reasoned,  and,  in  my
           judgement, they were well open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  The
           decision speaks for itself, but suffice it to  say  the  glaring
           inconsistencies identified in the Appellant's evidence  did  him
           no credit.
       20. Although the grant of permission to appeal  does  not  refer  to
           this, the brief grounds of appeal advance  only  one  complaint;
           namely that Judge Gumsley had erred in considering a matter that
           was not material, and in relying upon it in the  course  of  his
           assessment of the Appellant's overall credibility.  Specifically
           the grounds assert that Judge Gumsey wrongly made  reference  to
           documents in which it was asserted the Appellant was Kurdish  in
           the course of his assessment of the  evidence,  and  took  their
           existence into  account  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
           findings. The grounds assert that this was a matter addressed at
           the hearing before Judge Arullendran, when it is claimed, it had
           been confirmed on behalf of the Appellant that references to his
           being of Kurdish ethnicity were a mistake on  the  part  of  his
           representative.
       21.  The  first  point  to  note  is  that  the  decision  of  Judge
           Arullendran makes no reference either to these documents, or, to
           any such agreement between the parties.
       22. Second, there is no suggestion that  the  Appellant's  solicitor
           drew to Judge Gumsley's attention at the hearing that there  was
           an agreement between the parties to the effect that any  of  the
           references to his being of Kurdish  ethnicity  resulted  from  a
           simple error on the part of his solicitors. I am satisfied  that
           there was no such agreement, and that  there  could  never  have
           been such an agreement, because the  Appellant's  solicitor  had
           not been responsible for one of the two documents in which  such
           an assertion had been made. One was created and submitted to the
           Respondent by the Appellant himself, albeit he claimed  that  he
           had been helped by a friend who had made a series of mistakes in
           the course of recording the Appellant's instructions.
       23. Third, Judge Gumsley noted the Respondent's acceptance that  the
           Appellant was a  Sunni  Arab  from  Mosul,  and  approached  the
           remitted appeal on the basis that this was agreed [10].
       24. In my judgement that is the proper context in which to  consider
           the complaint raised in the grounds.
       25. The Appellant submitted to the  Respondent  an  application  for
           leave to remain in July 218, in which he had claimed that he and
           his parents were of Kurdish ethnicity,  and,  that  he  received
           financial  support  from  relatives.   He   also   appeared   to
           acknowledge that although his father was now  dead,  his  mother
           was still living in Mosul with his siblings. His solicitors were
           not responsible for this document, and it was not suggested they
           had any hand in its preparation.
       26. The Appellant's solicitors had however submitted representations
           to the Respondent in March 2017 asserting  they  amounted  to  a
           fresh protection  claim,  in  which  they  had  represented  the
           Appellant to be of Kurdish  ethnicity,  and  to  have  formed  a
           strong "private life"  in  the  UK  through  the  local  Kurdish
           community.
       27. Judge Gumsley made reference to the content  of  the  July  2018
           application, as he was  bound  to  do,  in  the  course  of  his
           consideration of the veracity of the claim  that  the  Appellant
           had lost contact with his family,  because  the  claim  to  have
           enjoyed the financial support of relatives whilst living in  the
           UK was quite inconsistent with the denial of  any  contact  with
           his  family  since   2007.   He   considered   the   Appellant's
           explanations for the content of this document, and in  doing  so
           considered the content of the March 2017 submissions  that  were
           made on his behalf by his solicitors. He  was  in  my  judgement
           perfectly entitled to do so.
       28. There is no suggestion within the decision  that  Judge  Gumsley
           went behind the Respondent's acceptance that the Appellant was a
           Sunni Arab. The relevant document was the July 2018  application
           because its content indicated that the Appellant was not telling
           the truth about his contact with his family - not because within
           it the Appellant had claimed to be of Kurdish ethnicity.
       29. The issue of whether the Appellant could relocate from Mosul  as
           a Sunni Arab, in order to avoid the risks faced by civilians  in
           that city from indiscriminate violence arising in the course  of
           internal  armed  conflict,  had  been  dealt   with   by   Judge
           Arullendran, who had concluded he could relocate to  Baghdad  in
           the light of the guidance to be found in BA (Returns to Baghdad)
           Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18.
       30. The grounds do not suggest that even if Judge Gumsley's findings
           upon contact with family, and possession of  identity  documents
           should stand there was nevertheless a material error of  law  in
           his dismissal  of  the  appeal,  because  such  an  outcome  was
           necessarily inconsistent with the guidance to be  found  in  BA.
           Consequently that argument is in my judgement one  that  is  not
           open to the Appellant. That was not the challenge raised  before
           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Appleyard,  and  it  has  not  been
           raised subsequently. Moreover,  given  the  adverse  credibility
           findings  now  made  against  the  Appellant   following   three
           different judicial examinations of his evidence, the  conclusion
           that internal relocation to Baghdad is open to him is  the  only
           sensible one open to the Tribunal, even  in  the  light  of  the
           guidance to be found in BA.
       31. As a single male Sunni Arab, in possession of his  passport  and
           CSID, and in contact with his family, who have provided him with
           financial support in the past and could be expected therefore to
           be able and willing to  continue  to  do  so,  it  is  perfectly
           reasonable to expect the Appellant to  relocate  to  Baghdad  to
           avoid the Article 15(c) risks that he would otherwise face if he
           returned to his home area of Mosul. The Appellant has never come
           to the adverse attention of the Iraqi  authorities.  He  has  no
           adverse profile with any Shia militia. He  has  spent  the  last
           twelve years outside Iraq, and may be perceived upon  return  as
           having done so. There may as a result be some risk  within  Iraq
           generally of kidnap for ransom because of perceived wealth,  but
           the evidence (and the guidance of BA) does not suggest that this
           would be a material risk for him within Baghdad itself.
       32. In the circumstances the Appellant has failed to  establish  any
           material error of law that requires me to set aside the decision
           of Judge Gumsley, and I  decline  to  do  so.  The  decision  to
           dismiss the Appellant's appeal is accordingly confirmed.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 19
   June 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision to  dismiss
   the Appellant's protection appeal on all grounds, and that  decision  is
   accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 13 September 2019


