
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02914/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th November 2016                     |On 21st November 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  miss L.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Sheikh, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Cameroon (date of  birth  28th  May  1984),
    appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of a
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) dismissing her appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision making a  deportation  order  against  her  as  a
    foreign criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment of twelve  months.



Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 2nd August 2014 using a false  entry
    document.  On 22nd September 2014 she was convicted at Canterbury Crown
    Court of an offence of possessing an identity document with  intent  to
    deceive by circumventing border controls.  She was sentenced to  twelve
    months imprisonment.

 3. On 2nd October 2014 the Respondent notified  her  of  an  intention  to
    deport her under Section 32 of the Borders Act 2007.

 4. On 18th November 2014 the Appellant notified the  Respondent  that  any
    decision to deport her, would result  in  a  breach  of  her  protected
    rights under the Refugee Convention and Articles 2,  3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 5. On 15th January 2015 the Appellant was interviewed on her asylum claim.
     On 23rd June 2015 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  asylum/human
    rights claim and she became the subject of a signed deportation  order.
    She appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  this
    appeal which forms the basis of the present appeal.

The FtT Hearing

 6. When the appeal came before the  FtT  the  judge  had  before  him  the
    Appellant's interview record together with  the  respondent's  decision
    letter.  He noted that the Appellant's claim to asylum as at  the  date
    of the interview amounted to the following.  She said she  lived  in  a
    village with her mother and they worked farming the land.   Her  father
    had died but had left land to her and her mother.  She said  she  could
    not return to Cameroon because of fear of four uncles who also lived in
    the village and who were intent on forcing her to marry an  80-year-old
    man who already had ten wives. Money had already been given for her.

 7. When she refused to comply with her uncles' wishes, she and her  mother
    were beaten.  Her claim was that her uncles had been  trying  to  force
    her into marriage since she was around 18 years of age.   She  was  now
    around 30 years old.  She arranged to sell some of  her  father's  land
    and consequently fled the village living for a time in the city  whilst
    she arranged to leave Cameroon, with the help of  an  agent.  She  also
    claimed that prior to any marriage taking place, she would  be  subject
    to FGM.

 8. By the time of the hearing before the FtT, the  Appellant  submitted  a
    witness statement.  The judge noted that the Appellant's original claim
    had now expanded. She now claimed additionally, that she is  a  lesbian
    and she feared returning to Cameroon also  on  account  of  her  sexual
    orientation. The judge noted that this was the first indication of this
    part of her claim. There was no mention made of her sexual  orientation
    either in the Home Office interview nor  in  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal. He noted that the Appellant had  been  legally  represented  at
    this time.

 9. The FtT judge assessed the  evidence  before  him  and  found  that  he
    comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant account, both on her original
    claim and on her additional claim concerning  her  sexual  orientation.
    He dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

10. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the  sole  ground  that
    the FtT had made unreasonable adverse credibility findings against  the
    Appellant in respect of her late claim relating to her sexuality.

11. Permission to appeal was refused initially in the FtT; but allowed on a
    renewed application before the Upper Tribunal.  The grant of permission
    is set out here;

         "The First-tier Tribunal has arguably erred in law in  finding  the
         Appellant's explanation that she  did  not  wish  to  disclose  her
         sexuality earlier (para  63)  to  be  incredible  without  adequate
         reasoning.

         All grounds are arguable".

    Thus the matter came before me to decide  whether  the  FtT's  decision
    disclosed a material error requiring the decision to be set aside.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Miss Sheikh appeared for the Appellant; Mr Harrison  for  the
    Respondent.

13. Miss Sheikh's submissions followed the lines  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  She handed in the ECJ judgment entitled ECJ December 2014,
    A, B and C.  She acknowledged that this had not been placed before  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge, but submitted  the  principle  therein  held
    good. This judgment provided that adverse credibility  findings  cannot
    be made merely because a  claimant  did  not  raise  issues  of  sexual
    orientation on the first occasion in which  they  claimed  asylum.  She
    pointed to the following part of the judgment which says;

         "In the fourth place, as  regards  the  option  for  the  competent
         authorities finding a lack of credibility when, in particular,  the
         applicant did not rely on his declared sexual  orientation  on  the
         first occasion he was given to set out the grounds for persecution,
         it must be held as follows.

         It is clear from Article 4(1)  of  Directive  2004/83  that  member
         states may consider it the duty of the applicant to submit 'as soon
         as possible' all elements needed to  substantiate  the  application
         for international protection.

         However, having regard to the sensitive nature of question relating
         to a person's personal identity and, in particular, his  sexuality,
         it  cannot  be  concluded  that  the   declared   sexuality   lacks
         credibility simply because,  due  to  his  reticence  in  revealing
         intimate aspects of his life,  that  person  did  not  declare  his
         homosexuality at the outset".

14. In these circumstances, Miss Sheikh submitted, the FtT had erred by not
    following the correct approach as set out in ECJ December 2014 above.

15. Mr Harrison on behalf of the Respondent submitted a Rule  24  response.
    He said that the judge's findings were proper findings reasonably  open
    to him after a full and  careful  consideration  of  all  the  evidence
    before him. The Appellant's submissions amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement.

Error of law / Consideration

16. Miss Sheikh submits that the FtT did not tackle  the  question  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality correctly on account of its approach,  which  was
    she said contrary to the approach set out  in  the  ECJ  December  2014
    judgment above.  Furthermore she said that the approach  taken  by  the
    FtT was contrary to the Respondent's own published  policy  on  dealing
    with LGBT asylum claims. Such claims had to be dealt  with  sensitively
    and the Respondent recognised this in her own policy.

17. I find I disagree with  Miss  Sheikh's  submissions  and  now  give  my
    reasons for so doing.  Miss Sheikh relies upon the reasoning set out in
    paragraph 13 above in particular the part which says;

         "However having regard to the sensitive nature of question relating
         to a person's personal identity and in particular his sexuality  it
         cannot be concluded that the declared sexuality  lacks  credibility
         simply because, due to his reticence in revealing intimate  aspects
         of his life that person did not declare his  homosexuality  at  the
         outset."

18. In fact, I find that a full reading of the FtT's  judgment  shows  that
    the judge has  not  simply  based  his  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    declared sexuality lacks credibility, merely because of  her  reticence
    in not declaring her sexuality at the outset.  The judge in fact begins
    his consideration of the Appellant's declared sexuality  at  [62],  and
    says;

         "The Appellant's claim that she is a lesbian requires an assessment
         of the evidence which she has produced and of her credibility."

    That is precisely the task which is before the judge.

19. I find therefore that [63] has  to  be  read  in  the  context  of  the
    decision as a whole.  After starting his assessment at [62] it is clear
    that the judge correctly directs himself  that  the  Appellant's  claim
    that she is a lesbian has to be looked at, and required  an  assessment
    of the evidence before him. When assessing the evidence of the claim he
    was entitled to keep in mind  the  fact  that  he  could  place  little
    reliance on the Appellant's credibility. This  is  because,  with  good
    reason, he found he disbelieved her account of why she had entered  the
    UK. He went on therefore to assess  her  claim  in  the  light  of  the
    further evidence she produced. He looked at this in the context of  the
    overall evidence which led him to conclude, with good reason,  that  he
    disbelieved the Appellant's claim.

20. He assessed the Appellant's explanation  that  she  had  been  reticent
    about explaining her sexuality until now because she felt that this was
    private  information  deep  within  herself.   Having   assessed   that
    explanation, the judge found he could not accept it as a  credible  one
    and in [64] onwards gives cogent reasons as to why  not.   He  assessed
    the evidence put before him over several paragraphs and found he  could
    place little reliance upon it. He gave  reasons  for  showing  why  the
    Appellant had failed to make out her case and those reasons in [65]  to
    [71] are ones which were open to him on the evidence put forward.

21. I find therefore that contrary to what is said by  the  Appellant,  the
    judge has adopted the correct approach by giving careful  consideration
    to the issue of her claimed  sexuality.   He  has  reached  conclusions
    which are neither perverse nor irrational.  For the  foregoing  reasons
    therefore the Appellant's appeal fails and  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The decision of  the  FtT  promulgated
on 8th August 2016 stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     19 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

