


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02123/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At: Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|Centre                                 |                                    |
|On: 7th October 2019                   |On: 05th November 2019              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     A M
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed by Howells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Ethiopia born in 2001. He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Maxwell)  to
    dismiss his asylum appeal.








 2. The matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
    Appellant was entitled to refugee status. That turned in large  measure
    on whether  he  could  show  that  his  historical  account  of  family
    association with the Oromo Liberation Front and consequent  persecution
    by the Ethiopian state was true. Because of his young age the  Tribunal
    was also asked to consider whether there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to establish contact with his  family,  who
    are believed to remain in Ethiopia.


 3. The Tribunal found against the Appellant on  all  material  issues  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. On the 12th March 2019 the Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal
    to this Tribunal.

 5. On the 24th May 2019 the matter came before me.   At  that  hearing  Mr
    Holmes of Counsel  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
    decision of Judge Maxwell must be set  aside  for  error  of  law.  His
    primary complaint was that Judge Maxwell  had  failed  to  examine  the
    Appellant's case with 'anxious scrutiny'. In the context of a claim for
    international protection, that is a  public  law  error  fatal  to  the
    determination: Bugdaycay v Secretary of State [1987] AC 514, R  (YH)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ  116.   The
    particulars of the Appellant's challenge were  that  the  determination
    contains the following references entirely unrelated to this claim:

        i) At paragraph 29 the Tribunal summarises the Appellant's case  as
           follows: "his case is that he is a debtor who cannot  repay  his
           debt and will be killed or seriously injured by his creditors. I
           have considered whether this could amount to him being part of a
           social group". The following paragraph consists of consideration
           of the guidance on social groups given in Shah and Islam  [1999]
           INLR 144.  The facts described played no part in the Appellant's
           case. The Appellant is  not  a  debtor  and  he  does  not  fear
           creditors. Nor is his case based on membership of  a  particular
           social group.


       ii) At paragraph 36 the determination evaluates  the  likelihood  of
           the Eritrean authorities showing any interest in the  Appellant.
           The Appellant is not Eritrean, has never claimed to be, and fear
           of the Eritrean authorities played no part in his case.

      iii) At the same paragraph the Tribunal rejects as "highly  unlikely"
           the evidence that the [Ethiopian] "authorities would regard a 14
           year old boy as someone  actively  creating  a  new  OLF  group,
           seemingly singling him out from the 26,000  people  arrested  at
           this time". Again, the Tribunal appears  to  have  misunderstood
           the Appellant's case. He never claimed to be a ringleader, or to
           have been accused of such. His case was that he had been rounded
           up, and subjected to the same level of interrogation, as a great
           many others.


       iv) At paragraph 12 the Tribunal records that the Appellant  adopted
           as  his  evidence  in  chief  the  transcript  of   his   asylum
           interviews. This did not occur.


 6. The Appellant's second ground of appeal was that the  determination  is
    flawed for a lack of reasons. Again paragraph 36 comes in for criticism
    in that  the  Judge  rejects  without  reason  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was interrogated. Mr Holmes asked me to note the finding that
    it is "implausible" that the Appellant would have been  afraid  to  try
    and contact his family: no explanation is offered as to why that  might
    be the case. Mr Holmes submits that in the context of  a  teenager  who
    has been arrested and interrogated, and who  is  justifiably  concerned
    about his family's safety, it would be  impermissible  to  characterise
    his subjective fear as  "implausible":  reliance  is  placed  on  HK  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037.
    Three  reasons  are  given  for  rejecting  the  account  overall:  the
    Appellant's failure to try and trace his family, his failure to give  a
    credible account of his journey through Europe, and the  aforementioned
    implausibility of his fear of trying to contact  his  parents.   In  Mr
    Holmes' submissions that was simply not enough. These were all  matters
    peripheral to the core account and could  not  legitimately  be  relied
    upon to reject the actual basis of the claim.

 7. The Secretary of State did not oppose the Appellant's appeal. Appearing
    for the Secretary of State Senior Presenting Officer Mr Bates  accepted
    that the determination did contain significant factual errors. Although
    these may well have arisen from 'cut and paste' mistakes,  he  accepted
    that the Appellant, upon reading the judgment, may be left feeling that
    the Judge did not give his claim the level of scrutiny that it properly
    required. Furthermore the Secretary of State accepted that the  reasons
    given by Judge Maxwell for rejecting the claim did not go to  the  core
    of the claim and as such are unsustainable.

 8. That being the agreement of the parties, I set the  decision  of  Judge
    Maxwell aside.

 9. On the 5th July 2019 the matter resumed before me so that the  decision
    in the appeal could be 're-made'. At that hearing I heard oral evidence
    from  the  Appellant,  and  submissions  on  the  credibility  thereof.
    Having heard those matters I indicated that (for the  reasons  set  out
    below) I was satisfied that the Appellant  had  told  the  truth  about
    events in Ethiopia.   I was not however able to  justly  determine  the
    appeal. That was because at that  hearing,  for  the  first  time,  the
    Secretary of State produced evidence which,  it  was  submitted,  would
    justify departure from the extant country guidance, i.e.  the  decision
    in MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 (IAC).   That
    evidence was produced in small bundle comprising a Human  Rights  Watch
    (HRW) report dated  January  2019,  and  two  news  reports,  one  from
    December 2018 and one from May 2019.   Mr Holmes strongly  objected  to
    the inclusion of such evidence. He submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been given no notice that the court would be asked to depart  from  the
    guidance given in MB, and that in  the  circumstances  his  instructing
    solicitors had been entitled to prepare the case on the basis that  the
    prevailing law would be applied.


10. I determined that it was important, applying the Sivakumaran principle,
    that more recent country background evidence was admitted: my  task  is
    to  determine  whether  the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear   of
    persecution as of today's date. It  was  a  matter  for  me  whether  I
    accepted that MB should no longer be followed, but it  was  appropriate
    that the Secretary of State be given an opportunity to make that  case.
    In the circumstances I adjourned the  matter  part-heard  so  that  the
    Appellant's representatives be given an opportunity to address the  new
    submissions raised by the Secretary of State.   Those submissions  were
    supplemented, on the 22nd August 2019, by publication and submission of
    a new Country Policy Information and Guidance Note dated  August  2019:
    Ethiopia: Opposition to the Government ('the CPIN').


11. The hearing resumed  before  me  on  the  7th  October  2019.  I  heard
    submissions from both sides on  the  prevailing  country  situation.  I
    reserved my judgment.



    The Appellant

12. The Appellant's account is set out in the following documents:


              i) 'Welfare' questionnaire dated the 23rd August 2017
             ii) Witness statement dated 19th December 2017
            iii) Statement of Evidence form dated 19th December 2017
             iv) Asylum Interview record dated the 18th January 2018
              v) Witness statement dated 7th March 2018


13. That account is, in essence, as follows.


14. The Appellant is from Bordode, in the Oromia region of Ethiopia. He  is
    the eldest of five siblings and at the time that he left Ethiopia  both
    of his parents were alive.  He completed primary school and had started
    at high school before he left Ethiopia.

15. The  Appellant  and  his  family  were  all  supporters  of  the  Oromo
    Liberation  Front  (OLF),  a  group  fighting  for  human  rights   and
    independence from Ethiopia.   He grew up with that  political  sympathy
    and believes that his father was an actual  member  of  the  OLF.   His
    father was arrested on many occasions: when the Appellant was small his
    father was in prison for 2 years.  His father would take him to rallies
    and meetings, and so influenced him to also  support  this  cause.  The
    Appellant came to understand that the Oromo people have been suppressed
    by the government in Ethiopia for many years  and  that  they  need  to
    stand up for their rights.   He knew of people  who  were  engaging  in
    peaceful demonstrations who were arrested and put in jail. He knew many
    Oromo activists who were detained  even  though  they  never  held  any
    weapons. Accordingly he came to understand that you need to be  careful
    about any action supporting the OLF.

16. In 2015 there were a series of protests relating to land rights of  the
    Oromo people.  The Appellant and his family were at  one  such  protest
    when the security services opened fire on the crowd. The Appellant  and
    his family members were separated  in  the  chaos.  The  Appellant  was
    arrested. He was held with many other demonstrators, first in a  police
    station in Borode, and then after five days he  was  transferred  to  a
    prison in Mieso. He spent 15 days in that  prison.  He  was  questioned
    about his support for the OLF and why he  was  on  that  demonstration.
    He was released following the intervention of his  paternal  uncle  who
    bribed an officer to get him out. This uncle  collected  the  Appellant
    and brought him directly to Addis Ababa where he remained in hiding for
    approximately 3 weeks. The Appellant's uncle arranged for  him  to  get
    out of the country. The Appellant was at that point 14 years old.

17. It is not in dispute that  2015  saw  an  upsurge  in  Oromo  political
    activism, and a corresponding clampdown  by  the  authorities.  In  his
    November 2017 CPIN Ethiopia: Oromos including the 'Oromo Protests'  the
    Respondent draws on numerous sources to give the following summary:

         2.2.5 Following plans  announced  by  the  government  in  2014  to
         substantially  expand   Addis   Ababa   (aka   'the   Addis   Ababa
         Masterplan'), which would have reportedly  incorporated  around  30
         towns and villages in the Oromia region and displaced thousands  of
         farmers from their land without adequate compensation,  there  were
         protests across the  Oromia  region  in  April-May  2014  and  from
         November 2015 to October 2016.


         2.2.6 Whilst initially and primarily a series of  protests  against
         the perceived injustice of - and the lack of consultation on -  the
         Masterplan, the protests also triggered  and  raised  long-standing
         grievances  of  the  Oromo   people   in   relation   to   economic
         marginalisation and subsequently  in  reaction  to  state  violence
         towards earlier demonstrators.


         2.2.7 The protests were initially led by  students  but  they  soon
         were joined  by  farmers,  workers  and  others  across  the  Oromo
         community. The  protests  developed  frequently  into  riots  which
         targeted businesses, particularly foreign owned businesses seen  as
         benefiting from the government's distribution of land.


         2.2.8 In response, the government deployed the police, paramilitary
         police and the army to quell  the  protests.  The  security  forces
         reportedly often used force  to  do  so  and,  on  occasions,  live
         ammunition when firing into crowds resulting in the deaths of  some
         protestors. Some estimates put the figure killed in the protests at
         1,200. There were also reports of tens of  thousands  of  arbitrary
         arrests,  some  of  which  resulted  in  people  being  beaten  and
         tortured, and kept in prolonged detention...


         ...


         2.2.10 The protests, in particular those in 2015/16, appear  to  be
         largely spontaneous, lacking proper organisation and organisers. It
         is estimated that tens of thousands of people were arrested  during
         the protests and the first few months of the  state  of  emergency.
         Arrests and detentions were not limited to protest organisers,  but
         large numbers of mostly lower profile 'grass roots' protesters were
         released following  a  're-education'  programme,  and  those  that
         remain  in  detention  (estimated  to  be  between  two  and  seven
         thousand)   tend   to   be   suspected   protest    leaders    (see
         Arrests/detention during and following the 2015/16 protests).


         2.2.11 Where state violence was aimed at the crowds, it appeared to
         have been on a largely arbitrary basis. Given the number  and  size
         of protests and their wide geographical spread it is unlikely  that
         the authorities were able to identify or have an interest  in  each
         person involved. Therefore simply having taken part in the protests
         is unlikely to bring a person to ongoing adverse attention  of  the
         authorities such that it would result in a real risk of persecution
         or serious harm on return.


         2.2.12 People with who took part  in  the  protests  but  were  not
         arrested and do not have an outstanding warrant are unlikely to  be
         identified or sought and  therefore  unlikely  to  be  at  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm on return.


         2.2.13 People with who took part in the protests and were  arrested
         but subsequently released are unlikely to be of continuing interest
         to the authorities purely  because  of  their  participation  at  a
         protest, and the onus will be on the person to show that because of
         their activities and circumstances that they will  be  at  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm on return.

18. I am satisfied that the Appellant's account  is  consistent  with  that
    country background material.  This lends weight to his claim.


19. I  have  considered  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  that  the
    Appellant's account has not been consistent.  In his  cross-examination
    Mr Tan demonstrated that the  Appellant  is  unable  to  give  a  clear
    timeline of the dates between  his  departure  from  Ethiopia  and  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  In view  of  his  young  age,  and  the
    uncontested fact that during that period he undertook a perilous and no
    doubt traumatic journey  through  at  least  four  countries  including
    Libya, it is to  my  mind  wholly  unsurprising  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence as  to  the  dates  is  vague.   In  his  refusal  letter  the
    Respondent seeks to draw a  contrast  between  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant gave during a 'welfare' interview  -  that  he  was  targeted
    because he 'took part in an Oromo protest' - with  his  later  evidence
    that it was because of his 'allegiance to the OLF'. Apart from the fact
    that the welfare interview transcript should never have  been  produced
    (to which see 'postscript' below), there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in
    that evidence. The Respondent asks me to place weight on the fact  that
    the Appellant has sometimes referred to himself as a 'supporter' of the
    OLF and at other times a 'member'. I decline to do so. That a  14-year-
    old was unclear about the distinction - if indeed there is one - is  of
    no consequence.  Similarly nothing turns on the  Appellant's  inability
    to clearly articulate whether he went to  those  protests  of  his  own
    accord or because his Dad wanted him to. It is perfectly possible  that
    both are true.

20. I am satisfied, having regard to  the  Appellant's  age  and  level  of
    understanding about political  issues,  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    consistent in his claim.    This lends weight to his testimony.

21. The Appellant's account is further given some support  by  two  letters
    submitted from the Oromo Liberation Front representative in the  United
    Kingdom, Dr Bersisa Berri. Materially, in his second  letter  Dr  Berri
    confirms that he has made enquiries with the OLF in Bordode and it  has
    been confirmed to him that the Appellant's father  is  indeed  a  local
    member involved in "clandestine activities". Dr Berri was further  told
    that the Appellant himself had  attended  meetings  and  demonstrations
    during 2015.   This corroborative evidence lends support to the claim.

22. Having considered all of the evidence, and applying the lower  standard
    of proof, I am satisfied that the Appellant has told  the  truth  about
    his experiences.  I find as fact that:

              i) The Appellant's father was a long-standing  member  of  the
                 OLF;
             ii) That  the  Appellant  had  embarked  upon  his  own  Oromia
                 activism;
            iii)  That  he  was  arrested  and   held   in   detention   for
                 approximately 3 weeks in 2015;
             iv) That he escaped detention upon payment of a bribe;
              v) That the Appellant continues to support the OLF cause.


    Risk Assessment


23. The current country guidance is set out in MB  (OLF  and  MTA  -  risk)
    Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030. Since the parties are in  agreement  as
    to its effect I need do no more than set out the relevant part  of  the
    headnote:


         (1)  As at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia is  such  that,
         in general:-


                  (a)  Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;


                  (b)  persons perceived to be OLF members or  sympathisers;
         and


                  (c)  members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;


           will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within  the  scope
           of paragraph (2) or (3) below.

       (2)  OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically perceived by
         the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in  general
         be at real risk if they have been previously arrested  or  detained
         on suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too  will  those  who  have  a
         significant history, known to the authorities, of OLF membership or
         sympathy.  Whether  any  such  persons  are  to  be  excluded  from
         recognition  as  refugees  or  from  the  grant   of   humanitarian
         protection by reason of armed activities may need to  be  addressed
         in particular cases.


24. The Appellant has demonstrated, to the lower standard of proof, that he
    meets the requirement set out in (1)(a) of that headnote: he is an  OLF
    member/sympathiser. I have further accepted that he  falls  within  the
    risk category identified at paragraph (2), since he is someone who  has
    previously been arrested or detained on suspicion of  OLF  involvement.
    Applying that guidance, the appeal should be allowed.


25. Not so fast, says the Secretary of State. The evidence in MB is  now  a
    decade old, and the Secretary of State submits that  the  situation  in
    Ethiopia has markedly improved for persons in the Appellant's position.
    Before I evaluate that submission, it  is  appropriate  that  I  remind
    myself of the test to be applied when  considering  whether  to  depart
    from country guidance.

26. In SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 940 Lord Justice Stanley Burnton said this:
         1. There are simply not the resources for a detailed  and  reliable
            determination of conditions in foreign countries to be  made  on
            an individual basis on  each  decision  on  the  application  or
            appeal of persons seeking protection. There  are  far  too  many
            such cases, as is demonstrated by the Secretary of  State's  use
            of charter flights to accommodate the large numbers of returnees
            to  countries  such  as  Afghanistan  and  Iraq.  Neither  those
            representing those seeking protection nor the Secretary of State
            herself have the resources for the detailed, lengthy and  costly
            investigation of conditions on return that is appropriate, given
            the potential risk to the returnees, in every case. Even if  the
            resources were available, it would be wasteful to have  such  an
            investigation, involving much the same evidence, in every  case.
            There  would  also  be  a  risk  of  inconsistent  decisions,  a
            consideration that is  particularly  important  in  the  present
            context since  it  follows  from  a  decision  that  one  person
            requires protection, if correct,  that  a  person  in  the  same
            situation who has been returned may have risked or suffered  ill
            treatment or worse.
         1.  The  system  of   Country   Guidance   determinations   enables
            appropriate resources, in terms of the  representations  of  the
            parties to the  Country  Guidance  appeal,  expert  and  factual
            evidence and the personnel and  time  of  the  Tribunal,  to  be
            applied to the determination of conditions in, and therefore the
            risks of return for  persons  such  as  the  appellants  in  the
            Country  Guidance  appeal  to,  the  country  in  question.  The
            procedure is aimed at arriving at a reliable (in  the  sense  of
            accurate) determination.
         1. It is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
            consistency,  that  decision  makers  and  tribunal  judges  are
            required to take Country Guidance determinations  into  account,
            and to follow them  unless  very  strong  grounds  supported  by
            cogent evidence, are adduced justifying their not doing so.
27. The Upper Tribunal elaborated upon this test in the subsequent decision
    in CM  (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG [2013]  UKUT
    00059(IAC) [at �72]:


            [We] recognise that where a previous assessment has resulted  in
            the conclusion that the population generally or certain sections
            of  it  may  be  at  risk,  any  assessment  that  the  material
            circumstances have changed would need to demonstrate  that  such
            changes are well established evidentially and durable.


28. Against that legal backdrop I now turn to assess the  evidence  adduced
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.  Since the  CPIN  post-dates,  and
    incorporates, the press articles  and  HRW,  I  start  with  that,  and
    specifically to the passages relied upon by Mr Tan.   The  highlighting
    is my own.


29. At section 2 the CPIN addresses the evidence about  'former  designated
    terrorist organisations':

         2.4.12  Members,  or  perceived  members,  of  one  of  the   three
         opposition groups designated as  terrorist  organisations  in  2011
         (the OLF, ONLF or Ginbot 7/AGUDM) have historically been  subjected
         to surveillance, harassment, arrest and imprisonment,  torture  and
         ill-treatment - including during the most recent State of Emergency
         (February - June 2018). This treatment also sometimes  extended  to
         supporters and family members of supporters or those  perceived  to
         be affiliated with OLF, ONLF or Ginbot 7/AGUDM.


         ...




         2.4.15 Since the country guidance determination in MB, the  country
         situation has improved. During  2018,  Prime  Minister  Abiy  Ahmed
         removed the designation of the OLF,  ONLF  and  Ginbot  7/AGUDM  as
         terrorist organisations and welcomed high profile leaders  back  to
         Ethiopia, where they can register as  political  parties  (although
         there  is  no  indication  this  has  yet  happened).  Hundreds  of
         thousands of people gathered in Addis Ababa  to  welcome  back  OLF
         leaders which is reported to have passed without incident. A number
         of high profile prisoners have also been released and /or pardoned,
         including deputy leader of Ginbot 7 who  had  been  detained  since
         2014.


         2.4.16 Armed members of the OLF, the Oromo Liberation  Army  (OLA),
         returned to Ethiopia  and  committed  to  laying  down  arms,  with
         sources indicating that up to 1000 members had  entered  government
         rehabilitation camps. However, there were  reports  of  attacks  in
         early  2019,  including  airstrikes,  by  the  authorities  on  OLA
         training camps (see OLF militants / Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) and
         Former designated terrorist organisations).


         2.4.17 The  situation  for  high  profile  leaders  of  the  former
         designated terrorist organisation has, generally, improved. Besides
         allegations made by the OLF website of a number of arrests  and  by
         other sources of airstrikes on OLA positions in early  2019,  there
         have been no further recent reports in  the  sources  consulted  of
         targeting  of  members,  sympathisers  or  family  members  of  the
         previously terrorist-designated groups.


         2.4.18 In general, the country information indicates that there has
         been  cogent  and  durable  change  in  regard  to  the  opposition
         generally and  former  and  current  armed  groups  in  particular.
         Therefore  there  are  very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
         evidence to depart from UT's findings in MB.  In the context of the
         significant and fundamental reform that has  occurred  since  April
         2018, the onus is on the person to demonstrate that, based on their
         profile,  political  activities,  past  experiences  including  any
         arrests (and the timing of those arrests), they will be at risk  of
         persecution or serious harm on return.

30. I interpolate two observations about these passages. First, it must  be
    recalled that a CPIN is meant to convey Home Office policy as  much  as
    objective information. The conclusion at 2.4.18 "there are very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart" from MB must be read in
    that light: it is in fact for the Tribunal, and the Tribunal alone,  to
    determine whether that is the case.   Second, the statement at the  end
    of that passage in respect of the burden of proof  is  misleading.  The
    country guidance presently indicates that the  Appellant  does  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution. The onus is on the Secretary of State
    to demonstrate that this is no longer in fact correct.


31. Mr Tan further referred me to [3.1.4] which states that President  Abiy
    Ahmed, elected in April 2018, is himself of Oromo ethnicity, and to the
    whole of section [3.2]. Although  I  have  read  that  section  in  its
    entirety I do not find it necessary to set it  all  out.  Headed  'Abiy
    Ahmed's agenda and early  actions'  the  section  summarises  the  view
    expressed by observers including ACLED, the Danish Immigration  Service
    and the US state department, that the election of Abiy Ahmed represents
    a 'watershed' in Ethiopian politics. The early indications were that he
    intended to demonstrate a tolerance for political dissent, a  more  co-
    operative approach to Eritrea and that he would make  positive  changes
    by generally respecting human  rights.   The  State  of  Emergency  was
    lifted  in  June  2018,  and  thousands  of  political  prisoners  were
    released.  The head  of  the  prison  service  was  sacked  because  of
    repeated  allegations  of  widespread  torture  in  jails,  and  groups
    including the OLF were de-proscribed.

32. Section [4.3] discusses political participation. Sources such as the US
    State Department are  again  cited  to  point  out  that  although  the
    constitution and law have long provided citizens with the right to vote
    by secret ballot, in practice the ruling party the EPRDF have  numerous
    advantages over other parties, such that they have been continually  in
    power for decades.   They won every seat at  the  last  election.   The
    CPIN cites sources predicting that the changes introduced by Abiy Ahmed
    will  mean  that  opposition  groups  will  be  able  to   meaningfully
    participate  in  the  elections  in  2020.    Despite   the   generally
    optimistic tone of section [4.3] I do note that  the  OLF  had,  as  of
    March 2019, still not been able to register with the National  Election
    Board [at 4.3.9]:

         'Dawud [OLF leader] told Ethiopia Insight in January that  OLF  was
         asked by NEBE to submit a document  signed  by  founders.  This  is
         impossible as OLF was established in 1973  and  the  founders  have
         left or are dead, Dawud said. He added that the  recently  approved
         Administrative Boundaries and Identity  Issues  and  Reconciliation
         and Peace commissions excluded OLF, while its ideological opponents
         are present, as is Leenco.'


33. Section [6] sets out the history of the OLF and confirms that  its  aim
    is self-determination for the Oromo people.   Section [10] states  that
    since  the  organisation  was  unbanned  the  authorities  have  lifted
    restrictions on access to supportive television stations and  websites.
    It is reported that when exiled leaders returned to Addis they were met
    by jubilant crowds.


34. For the Appellant Mr Holmes reminded me that my starting point must  be
    the country guidance. He accepted that there has been  something  of  a
    change in circumstances in that Abiy  Ahmed  has  made  positive  steps
    towards resolving the Oromo issue, but submitted that it was too  early
    to tell whether any of his measures will have an impact on  the  ground
    in terms of the human rights situation for ordinary OLF supporters.  He
    emphasised the following matters.

35. First, that human rights abuses persist under the  government  of  Abiy
    Ahmed.  Although  commentators  applaud  the  legalisation  of  various
    organisations, and the closing down of  a  notorious  prison,  concerns
    remain that repressive laws, in place to stifle dissent, are  still  in
    place, and are still being used.  Yohannes Gedamu, an academic cited in
    the CPIN [at 6.6.5] opines in a piece dated 11th  September  2019  that
    "Abiy's administration typically delivers mixed results" when it  comes
    to the implementation of reforms. He noted that the Head of  Ethiopia's
    human rights commission had recently decried the continuing use of anti-
    terror laws.  Human Rights Watch,  the  US  State  Department  and  NGO
    'Civicus' confirm that arbitrary detention is still being  deployed  in
    Oromia as a tactic to suppress  dissent.  Ill-treatment,  lack  of  due
    process and  impunity  for  security  personnel  remain  a  significant
    problem. The Human Rights League of the Horn of Africa declared in  May
    of this year that "arbitrary  arrests,  killings  and  harassment  have
    widely continued unabated in the Oromia Regional State".  They  believe
    that since Abiy Ahmed came to power in April 2018 at least  140  Oromia
    (mainly youth) have been killed, and 383 have been imprisoned.

36. Second, that the announced reforms are precarious, and do not amount to
    durable change such that would  be  required  to  depart  from  country
    guidance. To this end Mr Holmes took me to a July 2019 briefing by  the
    International Crisis Group which notes that the  transition  to  multi-
    party democracy has already  been  marred  by  violence,  and  that  as
    Ahmed's authority is challenged by various competing factions there  is
    a risk of aggravating "deadly unrest". This  inter-ethic  violence  has
    already killed thousands and displaced 2.9 million people  since  Ahmed
    came to office.  In their most recent report Human Rights Watch, whilst
    commending Abiy Ahmed for the positive steps he has taken, put it  like
    this:

         "Ethiopia has become a dangerous place. As political space  opened,
         Ethiopians were finally able to voice historic grievances that they
         bottled up for decades under an authoritarian government.  Many  of
         these  grievances  are  related  to  access  to  land  and  complex
         questions of identity and governance. Many Ethiopians have  settled
         these scores, often  along  ethnic  lines,  including  by  forcibly
         displacing people from land or engaging in  violent  conflict  with
         rival groups. This has occurred across many parts  of  the  country
         amidst a serious security breakdown and vacuum in local governance"

37. Mr Holmes submitted that this evidence illustrated  the  need  to  read
    positive reports with caution, and  balance.  For  instance,  the  CPIN
    reports that returning exiled  politicians  were  greeted  by  jubilant
    crowds in Addis, and that these meetings passed off "without incident":
    in fact the instability  that  this  gatherings  created  ended  up  in
    violence with the security forces killing  at  least  23  demonstrators
    with live rounds.


38. I have considered all of the evidence to which I  have  been  referred.
    The salient facts, personal to the Appellant are that he has previously
    been arrested by the Ethiopian authorities upon suspicion  of  being  a
    supporter of the OLF. He was held for three weeks and managed to secure
    his release by payment of  a  bribe.   On  these  facts,  applying  the
    country guidance, his appeal should be allowed.


39. I have considered  whether,  having  had  regard  to  the  evidence  of
    developments in Ethiopia since Abiy Ahmed came to  power  in  April  of
    last year, there is before me cogent evidence of a  durable  change  on
    the ground such that this Appellant would no longer be at  risk.  I  am
    unable to find that to the case.   The fact  that  the  OLF  have  been
    unbanned, and its leaders permitted to return from exile, is of  course
    significant.  Ethiopia is heading for multi-party  elections.  Measures
    have been taken to put an  end  to  the  systemic  use  of  torture  in
    detention.  I have taken those matters into account.   I  have  however
    before me recent and unchallenged reports  by  reputable  organisations
    such as the ICG  and  HRW  indicating  that  extreme  caution  must  be
    exercised when evaluating Abiy Ahmed's achievements so far. It  remains
    the case that in Oromia  the  government  have  continued  to  suppress
    dissent  by  the  use  of  detention  and  ill-treatment,  shooting  at
    demonstrators and even airstrikes against believed OLF  targets.  These
    abuses continue against the backdrop of widespread ethnic  tension  and
    instability. In such a climate there would be no reason to suppose that
    central government would be willing to loosen its grip on what  is,  in
    essence, a secessionist movement.  I am not  therefore  persuaded  that
    the facts relied upon by the Respondent are of sufficiently strength or
    cogency to justify departure from the facts in MB. It follows that  the
    appeal must be allowed.




    Post-Script


40. At the close of his submissions Mr Holmes asked that I  record,  in  my
    determination, observations that I had made in  open  court  about  the
    Respondent's  reliance  on   a   document   entitled   'Welfare   Form:
    Unaccompanied Children'.


41.  The  preface  of  the  document  indicates  that  it  is  a  pro-forma
    questionnaire to be completed inter alia in the case  of  unaccompanied
    children who have been trafficked or who have no one to care for  them.
    The first set of questions clearly go to establishing the child's state
    of health. This Appellant was asked when he last had a  proper  night's
    sleep, to which he replied: "not slept properly in the last 4  months".
    He also told the officer that he had not eaten in two days and that  he
    was feeling stressed.

42. The next set of questions go  to  establishing  the  child's  identity.
    There is then  this  question:  "Why  have  you  left  your  country?".
    Instructions to the interviewer in parenthesis  state:  "brief  details
    only do not expand or question anything said". The  same  box  includes
    this script, presumably to be read to the child before the question  is
    asked:


         "(If a claim for asylum has been made)  The  questions  I  will  be
         asking you here will not relate to the reasons why you  might  fear
         returning to your home country.  Questions  about  that  will  take
         place at another time. The answers you give to me here will not  be
         used later as part of your asylum claim"


43. Given that clear indication it is therefore extremely surprising to see
    that the decision maker in this case relied directly  upon  the  answer
    the Appellant gave to that question to impugn his credibility.   It  is
    to my mind wholly unfair and inappropriate that the answers given by  a
    child in a 'welfare' interview are then used against them.   This is in
    part because of the physical and emotional  state  that  the  child  is
    likely to be in, but more importantly it  is  because  of  the  express
    assurance given by the Secretary of State that this will not happen.




    Anonymity

44. The Appellant is a minor seeking international protection. As such I am
    satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders,  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to make an order in accordance with Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions


45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and it is set aside.


46. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    'the appeal is allowed on protection grounds"


47. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                      7th
                                October 2019








