
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02618/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2018                            |On 5 December 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    S K B
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Clifton Law
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse  him  international  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, a  Hindu
   by religion and a former member of the British Armed Forces.

Background

2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
   Migrant in September 2009, and remained here on that  basis,  then  as  a
   Highly Skilled Post-Study Migrant until 9 October 2012,  when  he  became
   exempt from immigration control  as  a  member  of  Her  Majesty's  Armed
   Forces.  He was discharged from the army after 9 months, on 4 July  2013,
   following an injury during  training,  as  he  was  then  unsuitable  for
   service.

3. On 23 July 2013, the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human
   rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended),  which
   was refused.  An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  dismissed.  On  2
   March 2015, he applied for leave to remain on  family  and  private  life
   grounds under the 10-year route which was unsuccessful.  The respondent's
   refusal gave the appellant an in-country right of appeal,  which  he  did
   not exercise.

The 2014 determination

4. The decision of First-tier Judge NMK Lawrence in September  2014  is  the
   Devaseelan starting point.  That Judge found  that  the  appellant  is  a
   qualified veterinarian born in Bangladesh in December  1981,  making  him
   now almost 38 years old. His father was said to have been a civil servant
   in Bangladesh, and the appellant had access to education  and  employment
   while in Bangladesh.

5. The First-tier Judge held that as the appellant  had  never  seen  active
   service, but was discharged after just 9 months of  training,  the  Armed
   Forces Covenant for support after service was not applicable to him.  The
   appellant asserted that as a discharged British Armed Forces recruit,  he
   would be at risk on return from extremists in  Bangladesh,  and  that  he
   would be subject to discrimination there as a Hindu.

6. The Judge dismissed  the  claims,  but  without  making  any  credibility
   findings. He did not assess the appeal under Article 8 ECHR and  made  no
   anonymity direction.

Refusal letter on protection claim

7. On 2 September 2016, the appellant made  the  present  protection  claim,
   which was rejected in a refusal letter of 2 March 2017.  The  appellant's
   account was that following his discharge  from  the  army  in  2013,  the
   appellant's family had been threatened in Bangladesh by a local gangster,
   cousin to the Ward Councillor, telling the family to pack  up  and  leave
   Bangladesh and calling them traitors because he had  joined  the  British
   Armed Forces (Royal Army Medical Corps). The appellant feared return both
   on that basis, and because he was a Hindu.

8. The appellant asserted that the  gangster  wanted  the  family  home  and
   land, as part of a plan of ethnic and religious cleansing  of  the  area,
   and that his parents were told that if the appellant returned he would be
   targeted and killed.

9. Three further attacks on family members were asserted, the first  between
   July and October 2014, when he said that his father and family  had  been
   ejected from the family home and land, on fear of execution of the  whole
   family, and one or two more attacks, on either or both of 10 May 2016 and
   November 2016.  The account of what happened in May  2015  was  that  the
   family home was forcibly entered, his father  was  kicked  and  hit  with
   sticks and the home vandalised.  Photographs produced  by  the  appellant
   were rejected 'due to previous inconsistencies' and because they were not
   originals.  A photocopy of a press release  from  the  Bangladesh  Hindu,
   Buddha and Christian Unity Council (BHBCUC) with a certified  translation
   was also rejected because it was not an original  document  and  had  the
   wrong logo on the letterhead. Other documents were rejected  for  similar
   reason.  The fourth threat was considered to be  internally  inconsistent
   with the other accounts and the documents produced.

10. The respondent noted that there were  internal  inconsistencies  in  the
   appellant's account, in particular that the appellant's father  was  said
   to be both a  'civil  servant'  and  a  person  who  worked  in  the  tax
   department.   The respondent adopted the argument that the appellant  had
   never 'served' in the British Army because he had not completed training.
    He considered other aspects of the appellant's account to be  vague  and
   inconsistent, in particular his pride in joining the army and that of his
   family, and that he had told family  and  friends  who  might  have  told
   others.

11. The  appellant's  religion  was  also  rejected  for  lack  of  detailed
   knowledge of the religion.  The  only  accepted  fact  was  the  Facebook
   threat.  The respondent concluded that the appellant was not a Hindu, nor
   a former serving member of the British Armed Forces and  therefore  would
   not be perceived as such.  There was no risk to him in the home area  and
   even if there were, there was a sufficiency of protection, despite issues
   of corruption in the Bangladeshi police set out at length in the  refusal
   letter.

12. The appellant then claimed to have received a threat on Facebook  saying
   that he would be killed because he was a servant of the British army.  He
   had blocked the  sender,  who  was  not  known  to  him:  the  respondent
   considered this a one-off comment by a stranger unlikely to lead  to  any
   further trouble.

13. Further,  the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant's  fear  was
   limited to his home area and that the people he feared would not be  able
   to locate him elsewhere in Bangladesh.  The appellant  was  an  educated,
   healthy man who could reasonably be expected to re-establish  himself  in
   another part of Bangladesh and exercise his internal relocation option.

14. Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR were also rejected. That is the decision  under
   appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

15. The First-tier Judge made an anonymity direction, which I continue.   He
   found that the appellant was at risk in the home area:

         "32. The issue of protection in this case arises first in  relation
         to the appellant returning to his family home where I find that his
         family members have been attacked in relation to land appropriation
         from a Hindu family and a threat made  against  the  appellant  for
         joining the British army.  As stated above, there has been  a  rise
         in  the  number  of  such  extremist  attacks   against   religious
         minorities and it is said that 'the authorities have visibly failed
         to ensure the protection of those targeted'.  It is said  that  the
         appellant's family have complained to the police but  not  received
         any assistance and this is referred to in the  recent  letter  from
         the Buddhist Christian Unity Council.  Taking  these  factors  into
         account, I find on the lower standard of proof that  the  appellant
         is unlikely to be provided with sufficiency of protection on return
         to his home area."

16. However, the Judge found that the appellant  had  lived  away  from  his
   home area, in  another  part  of  Bangladesh,  for  5  years  during  his
   veterinary studies, and a further 5 years before  coming  to  the  United
   Kingdom.  He had a married sister in Sylhet who could help him  resettle,
   and would have the benefit of having learned English and  worked  in  the
   United Kingdom.  His sister had not had any problems with the  actors  of
   persecution, suggesting that their reach was geographically limited.

17. The Judge rejected the account of risk from  the  Facebook  threat:  the
   appellant had added the person as a Facebook friend when asked to do  so,
   and had blocked him after the threatening remark. In so  doing,  he  went
   behind a concession made by the respondent that the Facebook  threat  had
   occurred, albeit the concession was limited  to  the  existence  of  such
   threat,  and that 'this was a one-off event by a stranger  and  that  the
   appellant had had no further trouble with this individual since  blocking
   him'. The appellant had not been identified on  social  media  by  anyone
   else for such threats.

18. The Ward Councillor from his home area had not been shown  to  have  the
   reach, or the inclination, to pursue the appellant  away  from  his  home
   area.  The appellant could access sufficiency of protection  by  internal
   relocation and the appellant had not  shown  that  there  would  be  very
   significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Bangladesh,  nor  any
   exceptional or compelling circumstances for which leave to remain  should
   be given outside the Rules.

19. The appeal was  dismissed  and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

20. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  First-
   tier Judge had erred in going behind the respondent's concession that the
   Facebook threat occurred; and that his assessment of  the  reasonableness
   of internal relocation did not take account of the general risk to Hindus
   set out at [32], which was occurring across the nation.

21. Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

22. There was no Rule 24 Reply. That is the basis on which this appeal  came
   before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. The appellant's solicitors filed a skeleton argument  expanding  on  the
   two grounds of appeal set out above.  The appellant claimed that  he  was
   at increased risk because there was a significant rise in attacks against
   religious minorities, including Hindus, throughout Bangladesh, and  would
   be at additional risk because of his brief service  as  a  member  of  HM
   Armed Forces, which would become known, wherever he went. As regards  the
   concession, given the general credibility  finding  in  relation  to  the
   appellant, it ought to have been accepted (see Kalidas  (agreed  facts  -
   best practice) [2012] UKUT 327 (IAC) at [35]).

24. In oral submissions, Mr Hoshi covered the same ground.

25. For the respondent,  Mr  Clarke  accepted  that  the  originals  of  the
   newspapers had been produced at the hearing and that the accounts therein
   were found to be reliable, but it was a local not a  national  newspaper.
   He accepted that going behind the concession on the Facebook threat was a
   plain error of law but that contended the person from  whom  the  threats
   emanated had been a stranger and once blocked, had never been heard  from
   again.  There was nothing to suggest that  the  Facebook  aggressor  knew
   where to find the appellant in real life.

26. The 2017 threats on Facebook were also accepted but it was  questionable
   how the 2013 Facebook threat  could  undermine  the  internal  relocation
   findings in relation to the threat in  the  home  area.   The  aggressors
   appeared to have a very limited reach.

27. For the appellant, Mr Hoshi responded that the newspaper  might  have  a
   limited, or a wider circulation and that should have  been  weighed  when
   considering internal relocation.  The first and second  Facebook  threats
   could not be separated and  should  be  regarded  as  a  continuing  risk
   throughout Bangladesh: as the  second  group  of  threats  had  not  been
   properly weighed, there was a material error of law in  relation  to  the
   assessment of risk throughout Bangladesh.

28. I reserved my decision.

Analysis

29. It is common ground that there is an error of law  in  relation  to  the
   concession on the 2013 Facebook threats.  I have examined the copy of the
   appellant's Facebook page which has a picture of him with  all  his  army
   buddies, in uniform, as the profile picture, and another picture  of  him
   in uniform appears to have been posted recently.  His schools  have  been
   set out, including that he studied veterinary medicine in Sylhet.  I note
   that Sylhet has  a  population  of  over  500,000  people,  according  to
   Wikipedia, and 800,000 in the metropolitan area.   It  was  open  to  the
   First-tier Judge to find that Sylhet was an  internal  relocation  option
   for this appellant, and there are,  of  course,  other  large  cities  in
   Bangladesh if the appellant is fearful there.

30. The appellant has blocked the person who made the threats  in  2013  and
   they have not recurred. He can do the same  with  relation  to  the  2017
   threats.  It also remains open to him to remove the  army  pictures  from
   his Facebook page or even to take down the page itself.  I  do  not  find
   that the error made by the  Judge  in  going  behind  the  concession  is
   material, on the evidence.

31. As regards the generalised risk to Hindus in Bangladesh, the  First-tier
   Judge  was  entitled  to  prefer  the  most  recent  country  of   origin
   information  as  summarised  in  the  respondent's  Country  Policy   and
   Information Note Bangladesh: background information including  actors  of
   protection and internal relocation [January 2018]  to  the  2016  reports
   relied upon, and to decide that there was sufficiency of  protection  for
   the appellant elsewhere in Bangladesh (see [33] in the decision).

32. There is no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, which I uphold.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         30 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
