
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02635/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 18 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  SAIEM [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 7 May 1988 and is a male citizen of Pakistan.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 7 February 2018 refusing his  application  for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 October 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  At  the  initial  hearing  at  Bradford  on   11   March   2019,   the
    representatives for both parties agreed that the decision of the  judge
    should be set aside. The appellant  had  produced  in  support  of  his
    appeal a number of photographs showing him purportedly taking  part  in
    sur place activities in the United Kingdom. At [45],  the  judge  wrote
    that 'none of the photos are dated or contemporaneously annotated.'  In
    fact, the photographs  in  question  did  bear  manuscript  annotations
    indicating the activity taking place in the photograph and the date  in
    each case. It appears that an administrative error led to the judge not
    having sight of annotations which were before both the  representatives
    for both parties.

 3. In the light of the agreement reached by both parties, I set aside  the
    decision of the judge. None of the findings of fact shall stand.  There
    will need to be a new fact-finding hearing which is better conducted in
    the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Bradshaw) for that tribunal to remake the decision.




Signed                              Date 13 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


