
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02587/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2019                  |On 13 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     E L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Kaprata, AG Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born  on  14  April  1994.   She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 7 February 2018  to
    refuse her claim for asylum and humanitarian protection  on  the  basis
    that she is a trafficked woman at risk of re-trafficking in Albania.

 2. Her appeal was  initially  heard  before  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.   In  a  decision   and   reasons
    promulgated on 26 October 2018, the appellant's appeal was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough.  The matter came before the  Upper
    Tribunal on 1 March 2019 which, in a decision and  reasons  promulgated
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker on 18 March 2019, found that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and set it aside.

Factual background

 3. The Competent Authority had accepted the appellant to be  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  The deputy judge found that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider the appellant's risk of re-trafficking at the  hands
    of those the respondent accepted had trafficked  her  from  Albania  to
    other parts of Europe, before her arrival in this country.

 4. The deputy judge gave directions that the matter be  re-heard  in  this
    Tribunal, in order for the issue of risk on return to  be  re-assessed.
    He directed that the appellant  was  to  serve  whatever  evidence  she
    sought to rely on in order to substantiate her claimed risk of being re-
    trafficked.  This she did on 17 September 2019 by the provision  of  an
    expert report from a Mr Steve Harvey, an  independent  law  enforcement
    consultant.  It is not necessary to go into that report in detail.   It
    concluded that the appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked by those the Secretary of State  had  already  accepted  had
    trafficked her out of the country.

 5. In light of Mr Harvey's report, the respondent  informed  the  Tribunal
    that she was content for the appeal to be allowed.  In a  letter  dated
    30 October 2019 the Specialist Appeals Team of the Secretary  of  State
    wrote to the Tribunal in these terms:

         "Having carefully considered the preserved findings of the FTT - in
         light of the narrow risks from [X]  and  the  Albanian  traffickers
         that remain outstanding -  the  appellant's  profile,  the  further
         expert evidence and the case of TD and  AD  (trafficked  women)  CG
         [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC), the Secretary of State  accepts  that  the
         appellant would be at risk  from  her  traffickers  should  she  be
         returned to Albania.  As a  consequence  of  this  concession,  the
         Tribunal is respectfully invited to allow the appellant's appeal on
         asylum grounds."

    I was invited by those representing the appellant to allow the appeal.

 6. At the brief hearing before me, there was some discussion of whether it
    would be appropriate for me to allow the appeal without  the  provision
    of written reasons pursuant to Rule 40(3)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Although both parties were content for me
    to allow the  appeal  without  the  provision  of  written  reasons,  I
    considered that it was in the interests of justice  and  of  furthering
    overriding objective of the Tribunal's Procedure Rules, that I provided
    brief written reasons.  This is to enable my decision to function as  a
    stand-alone decision without it  having  to  be  read  alongside  other
    documents.

 7. I accept, as do the parties, that Mr Harvey's report demonstrates  that
    the appellant would be at risk of being re-trafficked upon  her  return
    to Albania.  I find that the appellant is a person who has a real  risk
    of being persecuted in Albania on account  of  her  membership  of  the
    particular social group of women at risk of re-trafficking.

 8. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                       Date 11 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and therefore I make no fee award.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 11 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

