
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: PA/02160/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 November 2019                  |on 28 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    M A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Ethnic
Minorities Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd, born in August 1994.  He sought  asylum
    in the UK, claiming to be at risk of "honour killing"  arising  from  a
    relationship with a woman whose family disapproved.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by a letter dated  15  February  2019,
    declining to accept the appellant's account as  credible,  and  holding
    that alternatively the appellant could relocate.

 3. FtT Judge Farrelly dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 August 2019.  He found the  appellant's  evidence  not
    credible, and at [61], in the alternative, that he could relocate.

 4. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 17 September 2019, in summary as follows:

    [1]    inadequate reasons:

         (i), at [53] regarding Iraqi culture and the  claimed  relationship
         between the appellant and his girlfriend;

         (ii), at [55  -  56],  absence  of  reasoning  on  the  appellant's
         girlfriend staying with her cousin and  going  to  the  appellant's
         house without a chaperone, on their having  sexual  intercourse  on
         the cusp of their planned elopement, and on the rapid deterioration
         of her health thereafter;

         (iii), applying the tribunal's own perception of reasonability;

         (iv), no support for the decision in the country information.

    [2]    inherent implausibility:

         the wrong approach at [55] to whether  the  girlfriend  might  stay
         with her cousin,  who  for  example  might  have  agreed  with  the
         relationship; at [56], "the girlfriend may have said she was  raped
         to save any  harm  coming  to  her";  at  [57],  use  of  the  word
         "convincing" indicates the wrong approach; the appellant making  no
         enquiries "may simply be an exercise in self-preservation".

    [3]    operating on misapprehension / misunderstanding:

         at [53], no evidence girlfriend's brother aware of the relationship
         over its  several  years;  at  [57],  no  evidence  girlfriend  was
         pregnant.

    [4]    internal flight:

         error at [61-62] (accepted as dependent  on  risk  in  home  area);
         respondent's CPIN on returns "referred to at [16]" shows a  new  ID
         card coming into place, which requires the appellant to  return  to
         his home area to apply personally; failure to take account of  that
         evidence,  and  to  consider  whether   internal   relocation   was
         reasonable without such a card.

 5. Permission was granted on 23 September 2019.

 6. The SSHD responded to the grant of permission on 14 October  2019  that
    the FtT was entitled to find as it did;  a  reference  in  error  to  a
    "pregnancy" at [57] was immaterial;  documentary  obstacles  to  return
    were not argued in detail to the FtT; that ground was (as the appellant
    accepts) contingent upon risk in the appellant's  home  area;  and  the
    grounds were only a disagreement.

 7. Although subject to strictures of the Courts, tribunals often  use  the
    terms "plausible" and "credible" loosely, as if interchangeable.   Some
    evidence may be implausible, or unlikely, at  first  sight,  yet  true.
    Whether evidence is credible depends on  all  relevant  considerations,
    not on plausibility.

 8. The judge at [53] does appear to muddle plausibility  and  credibility.
    That is not only a semantic point.  The credibility conclusion is over-
    dependent on plausibility, and as Mr Winter pointed out,  surreptitious
    relationships do take place, and do give rise to "honour killings".   I
    note that at [59] the judge did  observe  that  such  things,  although
    contrary to cultural norms, do occur; but there is some force in ground
    [1 i].

 9. Ground [1 ii] is not of similar force.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    find this chapter of events not only unlikely but  incredible,  and  he
    gave reasons.  The health of  the  appellant's  girlfriend  might  have
    deteriorated rapidly, but the absence of any apparent reason  for  that
    to happen was obviously unhelpful  to  the  coherence  of  the  account
    given.

10.  Grounds  [1  iii  -  iv]  are  vague,  and  do  not  add  anything  of
    significance.

11. The first point in ground [2] overlaps  with  [1  ii].   To  offer  the
    interpretation that the appellant's cousin may  have  approved  of  the
    relationship seems to be speculation; however, Mr  Winter  demonstrated
    during submissions that there was evidence to that effect.  I  find  it
    obscure what is meant by the reference to  the  appellant's  girlfriend
    claiming  to  have  been  raped.   The  point  was  not  developed   in
    submissions, there appears to have been no evidence to that effect, and
    the judge does not mention it.  There is no error in using  terms  such
    as "convincing", as long as the correct standard of proof is applied in
    the overall decision.

12. The last point in ground 2 is not a good one.  There is nothing to show
    that to preserve himself the appellant in the  UK  would  refrain  from
    finding out the fate of his girlfriend, which if his  account  is  true
    would be a matter of acute anxiety to him. This is the point which  the
    judge found "most damaging", and it is plainly a strong one, indicative
    of invention.

13. Unfortunately, the point is bound up with the  reference  to  her  fate
    "and the pregnancy".  It was common ground that the  evidence  made  no
    reference to a pregnancy.

14. Ground 3 discloses a misapprehension  of  the  period  over  which  the
    brother of the appellant's girlfriend was aware  of  the  relationship,
    which was not several years.  It is not shown, however,  that  anything
    turned on whether he knew for about a year, or for several years.

15. Ground 1 -3 I find somewhat muddled on what the evidence  was,  and  on
    where the judge went wrong.  The decision was  also  somewhat  muddled.
    The grounds disclose some elision of plausibility and credibility,  and
    slips on whether there was an alleged pregnancy, and on the period over
    which  the  brother  of  the  appellant's  girlfriend   knew   of   the
    relationship.  They do not show error in  the  point  which  the  judge
    found most telling.

16. Ground 4 is based on the respondent's CPIN, "Iraq: internal relocation,
    civil documentation and returns", version 9.0, February 2019,  produced
    by Mr Govan at the hearing. This ground discloses no error,  for  these
    reasons:

      i) contrary to  the  suggestion  in  the  grounds,  this  is  not  the
         background material referred to at [16] of the decision;

     ii) the CPIN was not before the FtT;

    iii) this is not material in a category of which the  FtT  is  bound  to
         take notice, if not prompted to do so;

     iv) as the decision records at [62],  the  "practicalities  of  return"
         were "not argued in any detail";

      v) the appellant placed a written submission  before  the  FtT,  which
         does not mention this line of argument;

     vi) the CIPIN says at 5.6.9 that an applicant must "make an appointment
         at the local status office" -  it  does  not  say,  as  the  ground
         optimistically glosses the matter, that he "has to  return  to  his
         home area to apply personally"; and

    vii) it appears from the CIPIN, as Mr  Govan  submitted,  that  the  new
         scheme  is  being  rolled  out  gradually,  former  documents   are
         recognised in the meantime, and cards will (from some future  date)
         be available from Embassies abroad.

17. The grounds do not show  that  the  FtT  made  any  error  on  internal
    relocation.  The appellant has not alleged anything by which risk might
    have been more than local, so that was the end of his case.

18. Even if the line of argument in ground 3 had been before the judge,  it
    does not establish that internal relocation  would  involve  any  undue
    harshness.

19. Grounds 1 - 3 disclose some shortcomings in the findings on local  risk
    of "honour killing", but not in all aspects of the reasoning,  and  not
    in the most significant reason.   The  case  failed  in  any  event  on
    internal relocation.  It has accordingly not been shown that the making
    of the FtT's decision involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law, such that it ought to be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

20. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  This decision is anonymised.

      [pic]

      22 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman

