

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02250/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 May 2017                         |On 1 June 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Halow Abdul-rahman
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M J Azmi, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Ferguson   that   was
    promulgated on 18 October 2016.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and there is
    no reason to make such an order now.

 3. Mr Mills admitted that he was somewhat  perplexed  by  the  grounds  of
    application because although the author of the grounds  referred  to  a
    grandmother, there is no mention of a grandmother in the decision.   In
    addition, Mr Mills noted that the paragraphs cited in the  grounds  did
    not properly cross-reference Judge Ferguson's decision.

 4. Despite these limitations, which Mr Mills attributed to the  author  of
    the grounds getting two case  muddled,  Mr  Mills  argued  the  grounds
    revealed two errors of law in the decision and reasons statement.

 5. First, the judge failed to make any finding on whether Mr  Abdul-Rahman
    had any relatives in Iraq.  The judge made a finding at  [17]  that  Mr
    Abdul-Rahman had no relatives in Baghdad, but considering  the  country
    guideline case, AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2016] UKUT 00544 (IAC),  it
    was necessary to make a finding  as  to  whether  Mr  Abdul-Rahman  had
    relatives anywhere in Iraq.

 6. Second, the judge failed to make any finding on  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect Mr Abdul-Rahman to  relocate  to  the  Independent
    Kurdish Region (IKR).  At [15], Judge Ferguson found that the appellant
    would not be returned to that part of Iraq and then said he "could  not
    relocate there because there is no evidence that he has any  connection
    to that area to be permitted entry or residence."  The head notes to AA
    clearly indicated that a Kurdish person did not face a barrier to entry
    or residence merely because of having no connection to the IKR.

 7. Mr Azmi submitted that Judge Ferguson made no legal  errors.   At  [4],
    the judge recorded evidence from Mr Abdul-Rahman about  losing  contact
    with his mother and sister, and details about other relatives in  Iraq.
    Although the judge had found Mr Abdul-Rahman had not been  targeted  by
    ISIS, that finding did not  undermine  the  evidence  given  about  his
    relatives.  Therefore, it was open to Judge Ferguson  to  say  at  [17]
    that Mr Abdul-Rahman had "no  family  or  other  support  available  to
    assist him in Baghdad."  Mr Azmi suggested this should be understood to
    mean there were no relatives anywhere in Iraq who could assist Mr Abdul-
    Rahman and not limited to having no relatives in Baghdad.

 8. Mr Azmi also argued that  the  findings  at  [15]  were  sufficient  to
    identify that Judge Ferguson considered it unreasonable  to  expect  Mr
    Abdul-Rahman to relocate to the IKR.  Mr Azmi reminded me that at [171]
    of AA, the Upper Tribunal indicated that the issue of reasonableness is
    fact sensitive.  The judge's comments should be read, he suggested,  as
    indicating that he found the lack of support  available  to  Mr  Abdul-
    Rahman in the IKR to make his relocation there unreasonable.

 9. Despite Mr Azmi's valiant attempts to  encourage  me  to  uphold  Judge
    Ferguson's decision, as I announced at the end of the hearing, I cannot
    do so.  I find his decision to be undermined by  his  failure  to  make
    findings as to the  reasonableness  of  expecting  Mr  Abdul-Rahman  to
    relocate to the IKR, and about what relatives he might have in Iraq and
    whether they could offer any assistance.

10. In relation to the former, the finding that  the  appellant  could  not
    move to the IKR is contrary to the country situation found  by  AA  and
    there is no evidential basis to indicate why the  judge  departed  from
    that guidance.  In relation to the former, although I acknowledge  that
    Judge Ferguson recorded at [4] Mr  Abdul-Rahman's  evidence  about  his
    relatives, the judge made no findings as to whether that  evidence  was
    accepted.  Because the judge found Mr  Abdul-Rahman  had  not  given  a
    credible account on this, it is not possible to infer the account about
    his relatives was accepted.

11. Findings on either or both these matters could change  the  outcome  of
    the appeal and therefore the omissions are material.  It follows that I
    must set aside the decision.

12. I discussed with Mr Mills and Mr Azmi whether  this  appeal  should  be
    remitted de novo to the First-tier Tribunal.  I indicated that it would
    be necessary to obtain evidence from Mr  Abdul-Rahman  on  both  issues
    because no evidence was  recorded  in  Judge  Ferguson's  decision  and
    reasons statement.  In addition,  Mr  Mills  indicated  that  the  Home
    Office's position regarding the Province of Diyala has changed as  ISIS
    has retreated.  The Home Office position is that it is open to Mr Abdul-
    Rahman to return to Baghdad and from there to travel to his  home  area
    because the internal  armed  conflict  no  longer  affects  that  area.
    Because the next judge will have to consider the facts as at  the  date
    they hear the appeal,  this  significant  change  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal, requires the decision to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

13. It follows that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade.  Nothing is preserved from  the
    decision and reasons of Judge Ferguson.

14. I direct that the remitted hearing can be heard by any judge other than
    Judge Ferguson.  I record that Mr Mills  handed  Mr  Azmi  some  recent
    background country information but I did not  admit  them  in  evidence
    because it is appropriate they are  properly  filed  for  the  remitted
    appeal.  Both parties are expected to prepare fresh bundles of evidence
    for the remitted hearing and all documents on which they seek  to  rely
    must be received by the First-tier Tribunal  at  least  seven  calendar
    days before the remitted hearing.

15. It is open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  amend  or  make  additional
    directions.



Decision

The decision of FtT Judge Ferguson contains legal errors and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision,  in
accordance with my decision and directions at paragraphs 13 and 14 above.



       Signed                           Date     23 May 2017


       Judge McCarthy
       Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
