
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02259/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2018                            |On 19 December 2018            |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 ANTHONY [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P. Solanki, Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Shri Lanka who was  born  on  17  May
        1972. He appeals against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge D. P. Herbert OBE promulgated on 7 September 2018.

     2. In the course of the hearing before  me,  Ms  Solanki  accepted  as
        accurate the judge's recital of the appellant's claim  set  out  in
        paragraphs 8 to 17 of the determination. I need only summarise  the
        material parts. The appellant is a Tamil who spent some  six  years
        in India between the years 1998 and 2004. He returned to Sri  Lanka
        in April 2004. In December 2004 two members of the LTTE came to his
        home and instructed him to attend the local camp.  He  did  so  the
        following day and  between  January  2005  and  March  2006  (14-15
        months) he carried out  tasks  on  the  LTTE's  behalf  by  passing
        information to them about the  location  of  government  camps  and
        alerted members of the LTTE of those locations.  I  take  no  issue
        with this but it is, perhaps, somewhat surprising that this was the
        task allotted to him. Normally, the location  of  government  camps
        would be a matter of common knowledge in the area and there  is  no
        suggestion that he had a greater ability than anyone else to locate
        these camps. He was never a supporter or a member of the  LTTE  and
        did not willingly assist them. On any view, this was assistance  at
        the lowest level. He was not a combatant and did not train as such.
        The passing-on of local information to members  of  the  LTTE  does
        not, on its face, mark the appellant  out  in  such  a  way  as  to
        differentiate him significantly from other  members  of  the  Tamil
        community who were perforce required to assist the group.

     3. He left Sri Lanka on 10 May 2011 in fear, so he claimed,  that  his
        activities would become known to the authorities.  The  centrepiece
        of his claim was that he feared that if returned to  Sri  Lanka  he
        would be arrested as a result of his previous involvement with  the
        LTTE and because he escaped from the EPDP in 1998.

     4. On arrival in the UK on 18 May 2011, he waited until 18  June  2011
        to claim asylum. By a decision made on 13 July 2011, the respondent
        rejected his claim to be at risk. It was a significant part of  the
        decision-making that the appellant had stopped working for the LTTE
        in March 2006 and had not had any further  contact  with  them.  In
        paragraph 20 of the decision letter, notwithstanding the  rejection
        of the claim as not credible, the decision-maker stated:

    "In the alternative, even if it were accepted that you worked  for  the
    LTTE between January 2005 and March 2006, which it is not, by your  own
    admission, following your decision to stop working for the LTTE you did
    not experience any further problems either from the  LTTE,  Sri  Lankan
    authorities or the EPDP after this time, "I was living happily with  my
    family" (AIR Q.85). It is therefore not accepted that you  are  of  any
    significant or ongoing interest to the LTTE, Sri Lankan authorities  or
    EPDP on return to Sri Lanka."

     5. Pausing there, it is easy to discern in the  refusal  letter  that,
        quite apart from any adverse credibility  findings,  the  principal
        reasons for refusing the claim were the low level  of  activity  on
        the part of the appellant, the absence of any history of arrest  or
        detention and the passage  of  time  between  March  2006  and  the
        decision in 2017.  These were substantial hurdles the appellant had
        to meet.

     6. The appellant did  not  appeal  the  respondent's  refusal  to  the
        Tribunal.

     7. According to the respondent's asylum pro-forma, the appellant  lost
        contact with the authorities. He then lodged further submissions on
        1 March 2017 which  were  considered  as  a  second  asylum  claim.
        Following an interview, the claim was rejected in a letter dated 30
        January 2018 in which the Secretary  of  State  considered  various
        documentation submitted by the appellant including a letter from an
        attorney in  Columbo  dated  13  March  2016  and  an  exchange  of
        correspondence between the appellant's  solicitors  and  that  same
        attorney.

     8. The letter from the attorney was the subject of a detailed critique
        by the respondent in the  decision  letter  of  January  2018.  The
        decision-maker  recited  the  appellant's  wife's  claim  that  CID
        officers were visiting the home  in  search  of  the  appellant  to
        ascertain his whereabouts. The attorney claims that he  was  unable
        to  obtain  any  evidence  in  the  way  of   warrants   or   court
        documentation. The letter, of course, comes many  years  after  the
        appellant's alleged involvement with the LTTE and many years  after
        the appellant had left should Sri Lanka. Nevertheless, it  is  said
        that  the  police  had  been  frequently  searching  the  home  and
        questioning the appellant's wife. One can  only  infer  that  these
        events had not been witnessed by the attorney  and  can  only  have
        been based upon the  instructions  of  the  appellant's  wife.  The
        Secretary of State reasonably questioned why,  if  the  appellant's
        arrest had been sanctioned by the authorities, that this could  not
        be the subject of  supporting  documentation.  The  refusal  letter
        continued:

    "It does not make sense why the CID would not state  why  a  person  is
    wanted. [The attorney] has also made  an  assumption  of  why  you  are
    wanted. He states that he doesn't know  why  the  authorities  want  to
    arrest you, but then states he is aware of the special monitoring  unit
    that collect's information on people involved in  aiding  and  abetting
    Tamil separatists. If he does  not  know  the  reason  for  the  arrest
    warrant, then it is not explained why he has jumped to  the  conclusion
    that you are wanted for separatist activities."

     9. These were trenchant criticisms made of the attorney's letter which
        go to the root of whether reliance can properly be placed upon  it.
        The letter was written in 2016 and there has been ample opportunity
        in what is now almost 2 �  years  since  it  was  written  to  seek
        answers to the reasonable critique provided  by  the  Secretary  of
        State in the refusal decision. The limitations upon  this  evidence
        were apparent from the time it was written.  It had been  expressly
        raised by the Secretary of State  in  January  2018  in  more  than
        sufficient time to seek and obtain answers before  the  hearing  in
        August 2018. None had been provided.  More significant still,  none
        has been provided to me.

    10. It now falls to me to make my own assessment of the weight that can
        properly be attached to this letter in order to assess whether  the
        First-tier Judge's assessment of it was properly open to him.

    11. I am satisfied that the letter from the lawyer  poses  far  greater
        difficulties then it purports to answer. In simple terms it reduces
        itself to the unanswered question: why, if the legal process in Sri
        Lanka has proceeded to the stage where a formal warrant  of  arrest
        has been issued by a court, that process is not within  the  public
        domain such that the documentation  in  support  of  it  cannot  be
        accessed on request? The claim by the lawyer that an officer of the
        CID can give a tantalising suggestion of serious wrongdoing but yet
        is unable to say anything more is simply  nonsensical.  Either  the
        investigation has not reached the stage  where  it  is  within  the
        public domain and must remain confidential (at which stage it would
        be entirely speculative to  claim  that  any  risk  arises  to  the
        appellant from it) or by reason  of  a  court  procedure  based  on
        evidence and witness statements (what  evidence  and  what  witness
        statements?) such there that there is evidence  capable  of  belief
        that the appellant has been (presumably) involved in  (undisclosed)
        terrorist activity in the past. If the  latter,  there  can  be  no
        truth in  the  attorney's  assertion  that  this  material  is  not
        accessible.

    12. Judge Herbert took very much the same view.  In  the  third  bullet
        point of paragraph 40 in support of his overall conclusion that the
        appellant's claim  lacked  credibility,  he,  too,  considered  the
        letter to be vague and lacking in detail. The advocate did not give
        the name of the CID officers to whom he spoke, nor the name of  the
        court where the warrant was supposed to have been issued,  nor  the
        serial number of the warrant, nor when it  was  issued.  The  judge
        recited the oft-repeated claim that  letters  apparently  emanating
        from qualified lawyers cannot always  be  relied  upon.  The  judge
        accepted that the document before him  was  the  original  one  but
        clearly emanated from  instructions  provided  by  the  appellant's
        wife. Tellingly, the judge notes  there  was  nothing  more  recent
        before him  to  suggest  any  current  interest.  Once  again,  the
        appellant or his representatives could and should have treated this
        as an alarm-call to the appellant to adduce  further  evidence  for
        the appeal before me.

    13. Quite apart from this,  there  is  the  undeniable  fact  that  the
        appellant's  purported  work  for  the  LTTE  (described  only   as
        informing the organisation of the  location  of  government  camps)
        ended 12 years ago. The judge said:

    "It is hardly likely that the appellant would be of any interest to the
    authorities given his low level of activities  for  the  LTTE  some  12
    years ago."

    14. I entirely agree with that sentiment. However, it does  not  matter
        whether I agree with it or not. The fact  is  that  it  is  plainly
        sensible,  rational   and   compelling.   It   cannot,   therefore,
        conceivably be classed as unlawful or not properly open to him.

    15. It is further supported by paragraph 41 of the judge's reasoning in
        which he recites the appellant's evidence that the authorities  had
        attended the appellant's home on several occasions to enquire as to
        his whereabouts. As the judge properly said, this made little sense
        since they have known from the first that he was living abroad and,
        if his name is on  the  stop-list  preventing  his  return  to  the
        country without its coming to the  attention  of  the  authorities,
        then as late as 2018 they would not need to make enquiries  of  his
        wife as to his current whereabouts.

    16. This then leaves the only available point to be  made  against  the
        judge's reasoning in paragraph 40 of the determination.  The  judge
        recited that the  appellant's  claim  stemmed  primarily  from  his
        original activities with the LTTE [correctly] which

    "... generally speaking took place before the appellant left for  India
    where he spent some time between 2008 and 2011 in a refugee camp before
    returning to Sri Lanka."

    17. The judge has mis-stated this chronology.  The appellant was indeed
        in India and for some time in a refugee camp  but  it  was  between
        1998 and 2004, not between 2008 and  2011.  Indeed  the  judge  had
        previously recorded the correct chronology in paragraphs 8 to 17 of
        the determination which is accepted is an accurate summary  of  his
        account. However, this obvious error makes no  material  difference
        to the substance of  the  judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
        letter.  The remaining  assessment  centred  upon  the  appellant's
        difficulty in establishing a reason for any continuing interest  in
        him after the passage of so much time. Insofar as  the  grounds  of
        appeal seek to challenge the judge's reasoning in paragraphs 40  to
        42, I am satisfied that the judge  reached  conclusions  that  were
        properly  open  to  him  and,  indeed,  could  not  reasonably   be
        challenged.

    18. In the course of the hearing before me much time was spent by  both
        parties in submitting that  the  judge  either  did,  or  did  not,
        properly apply the Country Guidance provided in GJ and others (post-
        civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC).   Any
        criticism, however, of the  judge  must,  inevitably,  be  somewhat
        muted because there is no evidence on the file that he was provided
        with a  copy  of  the  judgement.   Indeed,  nor  was  I.  It  was,
        therefore, inevitable that I rose for a  copy  to  be  obtained  in
        order to deal with the submissions  upon  it.  Perhaps  inevitably,
        once a copy had been provided, a series of  submissions  were  made
        upon the relevant passages in the judgment which  clearly  did  not
        feature in those made to the judge.

    19. I shall deal with the  principal  passages  to  which  the  parties
        referred.  The italicised words forming the headnote are  found  in
        paragraph 356 of the judgment:

    (2)    The focus of the Sri Lankan  government's  concern  has  changed
    since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself is
    a spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since the  end
    of the civil war.


    (3)     The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify   Tamil
    activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and  to
    destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to
    the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which prohibits the 'violation  of
    territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on  preventing  both
    (a) the  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil  separatist
    organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.


    (4)    If a person is detained by  the  Sri  Lankan  security  services
    there  remains  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or   harm   requiring
    international protection.


    (5)     Internal relocation is not an option within  Sri  Lanka  for  a
    person at  real  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
    government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are  required
    to return to a named address after passing through the airport.


    (6)    There are no detention facilities at the  airport.   Only  those
    whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the  airport.
    Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
    interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in  their  home
    area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police  within
    a few days.


    (7)    The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:


         (a)      Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,  or
         are perceived to have a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
         conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka.


         (b)      Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human
         rights activists, who, in either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri
         Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or  who
         are  associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         government.


         (c)      Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned
         and Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri  Lankan  security
         forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged  war
         crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war crimes  during  the
         conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those
         who have already identified  themselves  by  giving  such  evidence
         would be known to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  therefore  only
         they are at real risk of adverse attention or persecution on return
         as potential or actual war crimes witnesses.


         (d)      A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant.


    (8)    The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri Lankan  Tamils
    travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone  in  the
    Northern Province had some level of involvement with  the  LTTE  during
    the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
    history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the
    Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.


    (9)    The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-led "watch"
    list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not  reasonably
    likely to be detained at the airport  but  will  be  monitored  by  the
    security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does  not
    indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict, the
    individual in question is not, in  general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
    detained by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
    each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such  an
    individual.

    20. Reliance was also placed upon the UNHCR guidelines which  were  set
        out in the judge's decision:

    UNHCR guidelines


    288.   Revised UNHCR Guidelines issued on 21 December 2012 reflect  the
    post-conflict changes in Sri Lanka now and,  in  common  with  our  own
    country guidance, have not been reviewed since very soon after the  end
    of the conflict.  The previous UNHCR Guidelines  were  issued  in  July
    2010.  The Preamble to the present document sets out the need  for  new
    guidelines:


         "These Guidelines ...  are  issued  against  the  backdrop  of  the
         current situation in The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
         (hereafter Sri Lanka), where  ongoing  human  rights  concerns  are
         reported, including in particular with regard to reports  of  post-
         conflict  justice,  torture   and   mistreatment,   disappearances,
         arbitrary detention and freedom of expression.


         UNHCR's recommendations,  as  set  out  in  these  Guidelines,  are
         summarized below.


         All claims lodged by Sri  Lankan  asylum-seekers,  whether  on  the
         basis of the refugee criteria contained in the 1951 Convention,  or
         complementary  forms  of   protection   based   on   human   rights
         obligations, need to be considered on their own merits according to
         fair and efficient status determination procedures  and  up-to-date
         and relevant country of origin information. More specifically,  the
         possible risks facing individuals with the profiles outlined  below
         require particularly  careful  examination.  UNHCR  considers  that
         individuals  with  these  profiles  -  though  this  list  is   not
         exhaustive - may be, and in some cases are likely to be in need  of
         international  refugee  protection,  depending  on  the  individual
         circumstances of their case."


    289.   The list of groups requiring 'particularly careful  examination'
    who  may  be,  and  in  some  cases  are  likely  to  be,  in  need  of
    international protection was as follows:


         "(i)     persons suspected of certain  links  with  the  Liberation
             Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE);


          (ii)    certain opposition politicians and political activists;


         (iii)    certain journalists and other media professionals;


         (iv)     certain human rights activists;


         (v)      certain witnesses of human rights violations  and  victims
             of human rights violations seeking justice;


         (vi)     women in certain circumstances;


         (vii)    children in certain circumstances; and


         (viii)   lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and  intersex  (LGBTI)
             individuals in certain circumstances."

    21. It should be noted that the Secretary of State had conceded  in  GJ
        and others that those who were detained  were  likely  to  be  ill-
        treated.  However, the Tribunal rejected  (at  paragraph  290)  the
        appellant's submission that the UNHCR Guidelines  established  that
        any former links with the  LTTE  was  determinative  of  an  asylum
        claim.  Instead, the Tribunal noted page 26 of the Guidelines:

    "A. Risk Profiles


    A.1 Persons Suspected of Certain Links with the  Liberation  Tigers  of
    Tamil Eelam (LTTE)


    At the height of its influence in Sri  Lanka  in  2000-2001,  the  LTTE
    controlled and administered 76%  of  what  are  now  the  Northern  and
    Eastern Provinces. Therefore, all persons living in those areas, and at
    the outer fringes of the areas  under  LTTE  control,  necessarily  had
    contact with the LTTE and its civilian administration  in  their  daily
    lives. Originating from an area that was previously controlled  by  the
    LTTE does not in itself result in  a  need  for  international  refugee
    protection in the sense of the 1951 Convention and its 1967 Protocol.


    However, previous (real  or  perceived)  links  that  go  beyond  prior
    residency within an area controlled by  the  LTTE  continue  to  expose
    individuals  to  treatment  which  may  give  rise  to   a   need   for
    international refugee protection, depending on  the  specifics  of  the
    individual case. The nature of these more elaborate links to  the  LTTE
    can vary, but may include people with the following profiles:


         1) Persons who held senior positions with considerable authority in
         the LTTE civilian administration, when the LTTE was in  control  of
         large parts of what are now the Northern and Eastern Provinces;


         2) Former LTTE combatants or "cadres";


         3) Former LTTE combatants or "cadres" who, due to injury  or  other
         reason,  were  employed  by  the  LTTE  in  functions  within   the
         administration, intelligence, "computer branch" or media (newspaper
         and radio);


         4) Former LTTE supporters who may  never  have  undergone  military
         training, but were involved  in  sheltering  or  transporting  LTTE
         personnel, or the supply and transport of goods for the LTTE;


         5) LTTE fundraisers and propaganda activists  and  those  with,  or
         perceived as having had, links to  the  Sri  Lankan  diaspora  that
         provided funding and other support to the LTTE;


         6) Persons with family links or who are dependent on  or  otherwise
         closely related to persons with the above profiles.

    22. In paragraph 311 of  GJ  and  others,  the  Tribunal  made  express
        reference to the self-evident position of the general populace  who
        were caught up  in  the  conflict  and  remained  living  in  areas
        effectively controlled by the LTTE.  The  LTTE  was  the  de  facto
        government of large areas of Sri Lanka during the conflict and  all
        residents of those areas at times of  LTTE  governance  would  have
        LTTE connections. The majority of the examples  of  those  who  had
        been ill-treated on return, were of persons who had had significant
        LTTE links (whether direct or  familial).  Thus,  the  government's
        concern was not and is not with past membership  or  sympathy,  but
        with whether a person is a destabilising  threat  in  post-conflict
        Sri Lanka.

    23. It is  inevitable  that  with  such  a  large-scale  conflict,  the
        government of Sri Lanka as the victors of the  conflict  could  not
        continue to treat large sectors  of  the  Tamil  community  as  its
        enemies. Thus, as the Tribunal noted in paragraph 342, some  11,000
        former LTTE cadres had been through a  rehabilitation  process  and
        only a handful had relapsed into ordinary crime, not terrorism.  It
        was for this reason that the Tribunal found that the risk  of  LTTE
        resurgence did not come from within Sri Lanka now.

    24. It would be wrong to paint  an  over-positive  picture  of  present
        conditions.  There  is  a  dearth  of  jobs  for  Tamils  who  were
        internally displaced and economic conditions are hard. Furthermore,
        as the Tribunal referred to in paragraph 343 of the decision in  GJ
        and others, there are some worrying features such as  a  number  of
        'white van' disappearances in Colombo and  the  Northern  Province:
        some individuals had turned up in TID hands,  some  were  held  for
        ransom, and many had not turned up at all.  Worse still, the number
        of such disappearances was increasing during the  period  when  the
        Tribunal was  reporting  in  2013,  rather  than  decreasing.   The
        standing army of Sri Lanka was then, and I assume  is  now,  larger
        than that of the United Kingdom.

    25. It was to the activities of the diaspora that  the  government  had
        turned its attention. There was no evidence that the appellant  had
        involved himself in any such  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.
        Indeed, it was part of his case that he had distanced himself  from
        any LTTE activity since the time he carried out surveillance duties
        in 2006 (or in 2007/8 as the judge noted in  paragraph  26  of  the
        determination).  Notwithstanding  the   Sri   Lankan   government's
        sophisticated intelligence gathering, the effect is to  distinguish
        between those who are actively involved in seeking  to  assist  and
        fund the separatist movement within the diaspora and those who have
        no such interest. Even those who occasionally attend demonstrations
        will not be assumed to be  committed  Tamil  activists  seeking  to
        promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka, see paragraph 351.

    26. The material to which I have referred  makes  it  abundantly  plain
        that the authorities in Sri Lanka are pursuing  a  well-established
        course. That does not mean that the United Kingdom  authorities  or
        the Tribunal would condone the brutality that arises in the  course
        of this process. However, it  is  far  from  being  indiscriminate.
        Indeed,  its  discriminating  nature  emerges  clearly   from   the
        background material. Inevitably, distinctions are made  as  between
        those who continue to pose a risk and those  who  do  not.  Broadly
        speaking, it is not a punitive process directed towards the  entire
        Tamil population. Nor is it a punitive process  which  is  directed
        towards LTTE combatants of  the  past.  Whatever  the  feelings  of
        individuals may be, there are simply too many Tamils who were swept
        up in the war for all of them to be the subject of attention now.

    27. For the reasons I have already  provided,  the  activities  of  the
        appellant which ended in 2006 or perhaps  in  2007/8  can  only  be
        classified as activities which can no longer be treated as  causing
        the authorities to be  interested  in  him.  All  of  the  evidence
        provided by the appellant and  the  documentation  said  to  be  in
        support of it is discredited. It seeks to  establish  a  continuing
        interest on the part of the authorities  in  this  appellant  which
        does not bear  scrutiny.  It  is  a  fiction.  The  judge  properly
        rejected this part of his claim. Hence, he was required to make his
        assessment of the appellant in  light  of  the  case  law  and,  in
        particular, the country guidance set out  inGJ  and  others.  I  am
        satisfied that he did so.

    28. He made a sustainable finding of fact that the appellant was  never
        detained or arrested by the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  that  his
        profile did not fit somebody at risk on  his  return.  So  much  is
        clear from paragraph 44 of the determination. In a  clear  allusion
        to GJ and others,  he listed the categories of those who  might  be
        at risk: he had not given evidence of crimes against  humanity;  is
        not a person whose activity in London has shown any evidence of his
        being involved in fundraising; he did not jump bail or escape  from
        custody or  sign  a  confession  or  similar  document  that  would
        heighten his risk on return; he was not asked by the authorities to
        become an informer; his scarring is not a relevant factor;  he  has
        never been arrested as a suspected supporter of the LTTE; there  is
        limited evidence of his having escaped from the EPDP. These are all
        material factors which the judge sets out in paragraphs  44  to  46
        and in doing so, as is clear from  paragraph  47,  he  does  so  by
        reference to the factors set out in GJ and  others.   It  therefore
        becomes strikingly obvious that the judge's findings  are  strictly
        in accordance with background material and Country Guidance.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error on a point of law  and  his
    determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                            10 December 2018
