
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                            Appeal Number: PA/02748/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Friday 5 March 2021                        |On 18 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    UHKL
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr H Dieu, Counsel instructed by NLS solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Curtis promulgated on 12 March 2020 ("the Decision").  By the Decision,
   the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal challenging the Respondent's
   decision dated 12 March 2019 refusing her protection and human rights
   claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  She came to the UK as a
   student on 13 February 2017 with leave to 21 May 2018.  On 10 January
   2018, the Appellant gave birth to a daughter [RAM].  RAM's father is an
   Iraqi national ([MAM]).  The Appellant married [MAM] on 20 February 2018.
    The relationship has since broken down.


3. The Appellant claims that she will be at risk on return to Bangladesh as
   the mother of a child born out of wedlock.  She claims that she has been
   threatened by family members and has been disowned by her family.  She
   says it would not be safe for her to return to Bangladesh whether to
   Dhaka (her home area) or to relocate elsewhere.


4. The Judge did not accept as credible the Appellant's claim that she was
   at risk from her family.  He did not accept that threats had been made as
   she claimed nor that she had been disowned.  The reasons for his findings
   are set out at [44] of the Decision.  Although the Judge accepted that
   [RAM] was born out of wedlock and that the Appellant and [MAM] are no
   longer in a relationship, he found that the Appellant would not be at
   risk on return.  Even if she were at risk in her home area of Dhaka
   (which was not accepted), the Judge also found that the Appellant could
   relocate to another area of Bangladesh, such as Sylhet.


5. The Appellant's grounds do not take issue with the Judge's findings of
   fact.  It is accepted therefore that the Judge was entitled to find that
   the Appellant's family had not found out about [RAM]'s birth in the
   manner she claimed.  Nonetheless it is said that this was not the sole
   issue for determination as the Appellant's family will discover that she
   has a daughter if the Appellant returns.  It is asserted that the Judge
   ought to have "carried out an assessment of the Appellants family likely
   reaction to the discovery of the birth of her daughter (and the
   circumstances of that birth)" and, based on the background material
   relating to the conservatism of Bangladeshi society should have found
   that she would be at risk on return.  It is also asserted that even if
   the Appellant is only disowned, she would face destitution on return as a
   single woman without male support.  It is also said that she cannot be
   expected to return to Sylhet as she does not speak the language in that
   area.  The grounds also take issue with the Judge's assessment of [RAM]'s
   best interests given the asserted likelihood of destitution.

6. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe
   on 29 April 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:


         "... 2.  The Judge has given sustainable reasons for finding that
         the appellant had not shown that she was at real risk of being
         subjected to harm because of her personal circumstances.  The Judge
         considered relocation in the alternative and found that it was not
         unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to another urban
         area of Bangladesh such as Sylhet.  Any failure to consider the
         appellant's inability to speak Sylheti was not therefore material
         to that conclusion.  The Judge considered the appellant's personal
         circumstances and how then the appellant could avoid the
         possibility of destitution.  The Judge considered the best
         interests of the child and concluded they were to remain with her
         mother.  It is difficult to see how the Judge could have concluded
         otherwise given the findings made and the young age of the child.
         3.   The Judge's findings were guided by reference to appropriate
         country guidance and background material.  The grounds disclose no
         arguable material error of law and permission to appeal is
         refused."


7. On renewal of the application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal,
   permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith on 10 July
   2020 for the following reasons:


         "1.  It is arguable that there was no support in SA (Divorced woman
         - illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 254 (IAC) for the
         judge's distinction between an 'illegitimate child' (as in SA) and
         the appellant's situation, whereby she had separated from her
         former partner.  Her partner has been convicted, in this
         jurisdiction, of domestic violence towards the appellant.
         Arguably, there was no support in the country guidance or the
         background materials for the judge's minimisation of the
         difficulties likely to be faced by the appellant on account of her
         child, in light of the judge's own interpretation of what will be
         regarded in the deeply conservative culture in Bangladesh as
         'illegitimate', especially given the dual heritage ethnicity of the
         appellant's daughter: see [47] and [48].
         2.   It is arguable, therefore, that the judge's arguable
         importation of his or her own concept of 'illegitimacy' of the
         child tainted the judge's assessment of the appellant's family's
         likely reaction to the birth of her child upon her return, and the
         possible difficulties arising from internal relocation to Sylhet.
         3.   Arguably, as part of the 'real world' assessment the judge
         needed to conduct when determining the best interests of the
         daughter, the judge should have taken into account the arguable
         likely difficulties the appellant would experience as a single
         woman with an illegitimate daughter in Sylhet.  Arguably, the
         assessment was devoid of real substance and superficial."


8. Judge Smith gave a provisional view that the error of law issue could be
   determined on the papers.   He provided however that either party could
   seek a hearing if one were considered necessary.


9. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 reply on 23 October 2020 seeking to
   uphold the Decision and requesting an oral hearing of the error of law
   issue.  The hearing therefore proceeded as a remote hearing without
   objection from either party.  There were no major technical difficulties
   affecting the conduct of the hearing.


10. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
   an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11. I begin with the basis on which permission was granted as that seems to
   me to widen the breadth of the grounds of challenge.  Judge Smith found
   it arguable that Judge Curtis had applied his own interpretation of what
   amounts to illegitimacy and that the Judge had wrongly distinguished
   between the appellant's circumstances in SA (Divorced woman -
   illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 254 (IAC) ("SA") and those
   of the Appellant here who is separated from her former partner.


12. Mr Dieu did not seek to rely on the grant of permission on this point
   in his oral submissions.  I consider that he was right not to do so.
   Although I accept that the circumstances in SA and the present case are
   similar (both women had children born out of wedlock), there is an
   essential factual difference in this case. In SA, the child was born to a
   father who was not SA's husband and after divorce from her husband.  In
   this case, the child was born to a father who was the Appellant's
   husband, albeit they married after the birth and have since separated.
   This case is for that reason weaker than that of SA.  The Appellant might
   still face risk or at the very least discrimination if that fact were
   discovered.  However, the Judge's finding is that there is no reason why
   that fact should be discovered.  Even in SA where the factual basis for
   the illegitimacy was stronger, the Tribunal at [84] pointed out that "the
   appellant could truthfully say that she was separated from the child's
   father in the United Kingdom and there would be no reason why anyone
   should discover that he was illegitimate".


13. Judge Curtis has adopted the meaning of illegitimacy as was argued
   before him.  He understood the Appellant's case to be (as indeed did I)
   that the Appellant's child was and would always remain illegitimate if
   the facts were known because she was born out of wedlock.   I can find
   nothing in the Decision which suggests that the Judge was applying his
   own conception of what illegitimacy involves.


14. I make one further observation arising from the grant of permission
   before moving on to the Appellant's grounds, namely that the dual ethnic
   heritage ethnicity of the Appellant's daughter is of some relevance.  Mr
   Dieu made a similar submission regarding the risk of the Appellant being
   ostracised because of the shame she would bring on her family due to her
   marriage to someone of different ethnicity and without the family's
   consent.  However, upon consideration of the evidence, particularly the
   asylum interview record, he was constrained to accept that the claimed
   risk was put forward solely on the basis that the risk arose from the
   illegitimacy of the child, in other words that the child was born out of
   wedlock.  That is the claim which the Judge considered (see [24] of the
   Decision).


15. I move on then to the Appellant's grounds which were also all
   considered to be arguable.     Before I do so, however, it is necessary
   to refer to the Judge's findings of fact and to set out the reasons why
   the Judge found against the Appellant in relation to the protection
   claim.



16. As I have already noted, the Appellant claimed that she would be at
   risk on return as her family had discovered that her child was born out
   of wedlock.  She claimed that she had received threats via Facebook.  She
   also claimed that she had been disowned by her father.


17. Having directed himself to the guidance in SA, other parts of that
   decision and to background material relating to the situation of women in
   Bangladesh, the Judge set out his findings on the claim at [44] of the
   Decision.  As I have already noted, those findings are not challenged.
   They are that the Appellant's family had not found out about her daughter
   as claimed or at all, the Appellant had not been threatened as asserted
   or at all, and that the Appellant had probably not been disowned as she
   said.  The Judge accepted at [45] of the Decision that [RAM] was born out
   of wedlock and that the Appellant was separated from the child's father.
   [MAM] is the subject of a restraining order preventing contact with the
   Appellant.


18. At [46] of the Decision, the Judge accepted that women in Bangladesh
   form a particular social group.  However, he went on to point out that
   membership of that group is not of itself sufficient to be recognised as
   a refugee.  As the Judge pointed out, "[t]he Appellant has to show to the
   lower standard that she, personally, will face a real risk of persecution
   on account of her being a woman in Bangladesh".


19. The Judge then set out his reasons for rejecting the protection claim
   as follows:


         "47. For reasons relating to the credibility and implausibility (as
         outlined above), I do not accept the Appellant's evidence that she
         received threats from her father, brother or uncle.  She has not
         demonstrated to the required standard that there is a real risk of
         her being subject to harm or violence because she is a single (by
         that I mean, 'separated from her partner') mother of a child born
         out of wedlock.  The Appellant has not therefore established to the
         appropriate standard that she has a well-founded fear of being
         persecuted because of her membership of a particular social group.
         Further, on the same basis, she has not established that there are
         substantial grounds for believing that she would suffer serious
         harm on return such that she would be eligible for a grant of
         humanitarian protection.
         48.  If I am wrong about the core of the Appellant's claim, I find
         that it would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate to
         another urban area of Bangladesh, such as Sylhet.  The Appellant is
         a well-educated person having obtained a master's degree in the UK.
          It was always her intention to return to Bangladesh after her
         studies in order, no doubt, to secure a position within the
         employment market.  The degree is in financing and accounting and
         this should facilitate her securing a job that would then avoid any
         possibility of destitution.  Although she would be relocating as a
         single woman, it does not necessarily follow that people will
         perceive RAM to be an illegitimate child.  The fact that she is
         separated from MAM accounts for her being a single woman.  This
         would avoid the discrimination and social prejudice envisaged in SA
         to befall mothers of illegitimate children.
         49.  Whilst there was some evidence in SA that single women may
         encounter difficulties in finding accommodation without family
         support, the ultimate conclusion of the Upper Tribunal (and this
         was in the context of a divorced mother with an illegitimate child)
         was that a significant degree of hardship is likely to ensue but
         that some sort of accommodation would be available.  As a general
         matter the conditions that such a person would have to endure to re-
         establish him/herself would not amount to persecution or a breach
         of Article 3 rights.  I cannot accept that SA is authority for the
         submission that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to
         relocate with her child because I do not accept that a woman
         entering the employment market with a master's degree would be
         unable to secure accommodation."

20. In relation to the risk in her home area, the essence of the
   Appellant's challenge to the Decision appears at [3] to [5] of the
   grounds as follows:


         "3.  It is however a fact that the Appellant's daughter was born
         out of wedlock (to a father of differing ethnicity).  It is
         respectfully submitted the Judge erred in not considering the
         reaction of the Appellant's family to this fact, regardless of how
         it was discovered.
         4.   Even if the Judge were to have concluded that the Appellant's
         family did not know of the birth of her daughter, this would not be
         something that could remain hidden should they be returned to
         Bangladesh.
         5.   It is respectfully submitted that the Judge ought to have
         carried out an assessment of the Appellant's family likely reaction
         to the discovery of the birth of her daughter (and the
         circumstances of that birth) as based on the objective materials
         provided.  Those materials support the Appellant's view of a
         conservative society who would shun the Appellant."


21. The way in which this challenge was developed by Mr Dieu in oral
   submissions is that it was incumbent on the Judge to consider three
   scenarios:


    a) That the Appellant would return and the family would either accept
       that she has a child and was married or would not (which might put
       her at risk).
    b) That the Appellant would return without threats from her family, but
       they would seek to disown her.  In those circumstances, the Judge
       would need to consider the ability of the Appellant to survive in
       Dhaka, ostracised by her family.
    c) That the Appellant could not live in Dhaka without real risk, but
       that situation could be avoided by internal relocation, for example
       to Sylhet.


22. Mr Dieu submitted that the Judge had not undertaken that exercise. I
   disagree.  The grounds and scenarios appear to assume that the
   Appellant's family would inevitably find out that [RAM] was born out of
   wedlock.  However, as I pointed out to Mr Dieu, there is no reason why
   they should find out.  Although this is not said explicitly by the Judge
   in relation to the Appellant's family, his reasoning has to be read as a
   whole and the general tenet of the reasons why the Appellant would not
   face societal problems is said at [48] to be that members of that society
   would not necessarily know that [RAM] was illegitimate.  It may be that
   this sentence is the reason why Judge Smith thought that the Judge was
   applying his own concept of illegitimacy.  On my reading, however, what
   the Judge is there saying is there was no reason why anyone should find
   out that [RAM] was born out of wedlock.


23. Unlike the situation in SA, the Appellant has been (and as I understand
   it remains) married to the child's father (although it would not matter,
   based on what is said in SA if she were divorced).  Obviously, the
   child's birth date is unlikely to be a fact which can be or should be
   hidden.  However, whether it will be discovered that the Appellant was
   married or not at that time is information which it is for her to
   disclose or not as she chooses.  There is no reason for her to disclose
   that information.  [MAM] will not be accompanying her on return.  What
   the Appellant chooses to tell her family and others about that
   relationship is therefore up to her.  Her husband will not be there to
   gainsay her disclosure.  When I asked Mr Dieu why that was not an answer
   to the risk that she claimed, he was unable to respond.


24. That then is a complete answer to the issue of risk on return.  The
   Judge found that the Appellant's family are not aware of the birth of the
   Appellant's child or the details of that or her marriage to [MAM] and the
   breakdown of that relationship.  There is no reason why they should make
   the discovery in the future which would lead to the conclusion that [RAM]
   was born out of wedlock.  There was in any event no evidence upon which
   the Judge could make any findings as to the family's likely reaction if
   they did find out (having rejected the claim that they had made past
   threats).  As is indicated in the Respondent's Rule 24 reply therefore,
   there is no error of law made by the Judge in this regard.  He was not
   required to speculate.


25. As Ms Everett also pointed out in oral submissions, the future position
   has to be considered on the facts of this case and not solely based on
   background material.  Whilst the background evidence does show, for
   example, that there is gender-based domestic violence (as Mr Dieu
   submitted), Ms Everett pointed out that in this case, the Appellant came
   to the UK as a student supported by her father to pursue her studies
   here.  As she accepted, it would be speculative to take from this that
   the Appellant's father's attitude might be more progressive than would be
   the general position. However, she submitted, that is no more or less
   speculative than the task which the Appellant suggests the Judge should
   have undertaken.

26. The Judge's primary conclusion therefore is that there would be no risk
   to the Appellant from her family on return.  If, as I accept, the Judge
   has reached that conclusion for reasons which were open to him on the
   evidence, that is the end of the matter so far as concerns the protection
   claim.


27. However, in case I am wrong about that, I move on to consider the other
   options.  The first of those other options is scenario (b) as postulated
   by Mr Dieu which is based on [6] of the grounds as follows:


         "It is further respectfully submitted that the Appellant's family
         do not need to be physically abusive to the Appellant in order to
         place her, and her daughter at risk.  The Appellant's family need
         only disown her, something that objective materials support as
         being highly likely, to place them both at risk of destitution.
         Where single women are unlikely to be able to rent property where
         no male support exists."


28. I begin by noting that the Judge's unchallenged findings at [44]
   include a rejection of the Appellant's case that she has been disowned.
   That finding reads as follows:


         "(iv)    I was also sceptical of the Appellant's evidence in
         relation to how she received the disownment affidavit.
         Notwithstanding the likelihood of her being in possession of the
         original (or a copy) of this affidavit in time for the screening
         interview on Friday 4th May 2018 (at which it is mentioned) when it
         had only apparently been signed in Bangladesh on Friday 27th April
         2018 (and I confirm that I don't specifically take this feature
         into account as it has not been raised by the Respondent), in my
         view it would have been illogical for the Appellant (who, by
         April/May 2018, had received a number of threatening messages from
         her family, she says) to have so readily given out her address in
         the UK to a friend who was looking after her brother's studies and
         who went to their house a lot.  It would have been objectively
         foreseeable that her father and/or her brothers would have learned
         of her address in the UK which would have placed her in a
         vulnerable position had her account as to receiving threats from
         them been true.  I do not accept the veracity of the affidavit.  If
         I am wrong about that conclusion, though, in my view all the
         affidavit can usefully show is that the Appellant has been disowned
         by her father.  It doesn't support the view that her father and
         brothers have resorted to the types of threats that the Appellant
         refers to.  Furthermore, it was objectively illogical for a father
         who, according to the Appellant, wanted to kill her and her
         daughter, to seek to disinherit her.  It would serve no useful
         purpose to disinherit a person who you had serious desires of
         killing."


29. Whilst I would accept that the Judge's finding about the disowning of
   the Appellant is less categorical than his rejection of the claimed
   threats, nonetheless his primary finding is that the Appellant has not
   been disowned as she claimed.  That he goes on to consider in the
   alternative what that might mean for her on return is irrelevant on the
   grounds as pleaded as it cannot be said that the Judge does not consider
   the scenario where the Appellant is disowned.


30. Scenario (b) as put forward by Mr Dieu has in any event to be read with
   scenario (c), namely the position which the Appellant would face if she
   does not have family support whether that be in Dhaka or as the Judge
   considers in another area.  The essential question is whether the
   Appellant would, due to the lack of family support, face destitution.


31. The Judge's findings in relation to internal relocation are set out at
   [48] and [49] of the Decision as set out above.  The way in which the
   challenge to internal relocation is pleaded is at [8] of the grounds as
   follows:


         "It is respectfully submitted that the Judge errs further in
         proposing internal relocation to Sylhet as a viable option to the
         Appellant, and her daughter simply the Appellant does not speak
         Sylheti.  It is respectfully submitted that whilst this point was
         considered, the conclusion that her inability to speak the language
         is not relevant to relocation where the Appellant would need to
         find work and avoid destitution cannot be reasonable."


32. Although the pleaded challenge is narrowly confined, I permitted Mr
   Dieu to put forward a wider challenge to the internal relocation finding
   in  his oral submissions.  He submitted that the Judge, in reaching that
   finding, gave only two reasons why the Appellant could internally
   relocate.  First, he said that the Appellant would be able to find
   accommodation because she is educated.  Second, the Judge said that the
   Appellant could hide the fact of [RAM]'s illegitimacy.


33. I have dealt with the second of those reasons when looking at the
   scenarios generally and the potential of risk to the Appellant in her
   home area.


34. Turning to the first of those reasons, Mr Dieu took me to [101] of the
   decision in SA which reads as follows:


         "101.    Dr Siddiqi was asked the question whether the appellant
         would be able to provide for herself, her son and her daughter. It
         is clear that a more appropriate question would have been whether
         the appellant would be able to provide for herself and her son. Her
         view was that secure and decent employment was a difficult prospect
         for anyone without pre-existing system social economic protection
         as in the city. We note that she did not use the word "impossible".
         Secondly employment prospects were much more limited for women than
         for men because of gender norms and institutionalised
         discrimination. While it was true that employment rates increased
         at a greater rate for women rather than men in the last decade,
         this growth was concentrated in the garment export industry where
         over his 70% of the work force was female. She said the appellant
         would be over qualified for most garment work and even if she were
         able to get a job at a supervisor level she would barely earn
         enough to support herself and her two children without a steep fall
         in her standard of living. Bangladeshi garment workers were the
         lowest paid in the world and most had difficulty in meeting the
         basic needs on their monthly income. Most garment workers lived in
         the many slums and squatter settlements scattered across Dhaka. She
         said that the World Bank noted that secure shelter was a major
         challenge for Dhaka's earning poor, most of whom ended up in
         illegal settlements on precarious land.  The appellant's profile,
         single, divorced, with a child of out wedlock and disowned by her
         father, would work against her in obtaining any decent housing even
         if she could afford it.  Most landlords, drawing on long-standing
         assumptions about single women's lax sexuality, refused to rent to
         women who did not have male guardians even when money was not at
         issue."


35. In that passage, the Tribunal was setting out the expert evidence
   relied upon by the Appellant.  It is more appropriate to have regard to
   the guidance given by the Tribunal, having considered that evidence.  The
   guidance appears at (e) of the headnote as follows:


         "(e) The divorced mother of an illegitimate child without family
         support on return to Bangladesh would be likely to have to endure a
         significant degree of hardship but she may well be able to obtain
         employment in the garment trade and obtain some sort of
         accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of
         rudimentary state aid would be available to her and she would be
         able to enrol her child in a state school.  If in need of urgent
         assistance she would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a
         woman's shelter.  The conditions which she would have to endure in
         re-establishing herself in Bangladesh would not as a general matter
         amount to persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3 of
         the ECHR.  Each case, however, must be decided its own facts having
         regard to the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any of
         the woman and the child concerned. Of course if such a woman were
         fleeing persecution in her own home area the test for internal
         relocation would be that of undue harshness and not a breach of her
         article 3 rights."


36. In relation to that guidance, Mr Dieu pointed out that the Tribunal in
   SA distinguished between a breach of Article 3 rights (in relation to the
   risk of destitution generally) and the test of undue harshness which
   applies in the case of internal relocation.  Importantly though, Judge
   Curtis also recognised that there was a distinction between the two at
   [49] of the Decision.


37. At (e) of the guidance in SA, the Tribunal was considering the position
   if a woman were returning alone without family support.  That is scenario
   (b) as posited by Mr Dieu.  On that analysis, even if there were an error
   as regards internal relocation, the Judge would still have been entitled
   to reach the conclusion he did for the reasons given at [48] and [49] of
   the Decision that the Appellant could return to Bangladesh generally
   without a risk of destitution in breach of her Article 3 rights.  The
   Appellant's scenario (b) is predicated only on the Appellant's family
   disowning her and not threatening her.


38. As to internal relocation, there is a close alignment between the
   factors to be considered when looking at Article 3 ECHR and the
   reasonableness of relocation.  Mr Dieu suggested that the test of undue
   harshness is closer to the significant hardship which the Tribunal in SA
   accepted a single woman in these circumstances might face.  I do not
   consider the attempt to assimilate the two to assist.  The issue for the
   Judge is, as he recognised at [48] and [49] of the Decision, whether
   internal relocation would be unduly harsh.  In that context, he accepted,
   as indicated in SA that the Appellant might well face significant
   hardship.  However, as directed by the guidance in SA, he considered the
   situation of the Appellant.  The approach taken by the Judge at [49] of
   the Decision is strikingly similar to the approach taken to the case of
   SA on what were not dissimilar facts (see [123] of the decision in SA).

39. At [48] of the Decision, the Judge also considered the position for the
   Appellant returning to another urban area in Bangladesh.  I emphasise
   that this and the potential for the Appellant to be returning to
   Bangladesh with no family support were a fallback position, the Judge
   having found that the Appellant would be returning without risk in her
   home area and with the support of her family.  The Judge took into
   account the Appellant's educational background and possibility of
   obtaining employment as a result.  He also considered the position for
   [RAM] but, as I have already indicated, explained that the community
   would not become aware of the child's illegitimacy.  There is no
   evidential support for the point raised in the pleaded grounds
   challenging these findings as regards the Appellant's ability (or
   otherwise) to speak Sylheti.  The Appellant has studied in the UK and
   presumably had to learn English in order to do so.  There is no reason
   she could not learn another language.

40. Finally, in relation to the protection claim, I deal with Mr Dieu's
   submission (as alluded to in the grounds) that the Judge has failed to
   have regard to background evidence.  There is no merit to that
   submission.  The Judge set out the background evidence insofar as it was
   not incorporated in the SA guidance at [39] to [42] of the Decision.  He
   also set out the specific parts of the decision in SA to which he was
   referred at [43] of the Decision.


41. For the foregoing reasons, the Judge has not erred in his determination
   of the appeal on protection grounds.


42. As regards the human rights claim, the pleaded grounds take issue with
   the Judge's assessment of [RAM]'s best interests on the basis that "there
   is a failure to consider the best interests of the Appellant's daughter,
   beyond remaining with her mother which cannot be met where a risk of
   destitution arises."


43. The Judge dealt with [RAM]'s interests at [51] of the Decision as
   follows:


         "A primary consideration is the best interests of RAM.  She is not
         a British citizen and has recently turned two years of age.  She
         does not currently have contact with her father, MAM, who has been
         convicted of violence against the Appellant.  In my view her best
         interests are served by living with her mother in Bangladesh.
         Given her young age she will not have formed any friendships in the
         UK and will not have started school.  There are no unbreakable ties
         with the UK which might otherwise have been a factor in the
         determination of whether it is in her best interests to remain in
         the UK."


44.  Those findings have to be read with what precedes them as to the
   situation which the Appellant would face on return to Bangladesh, whether
   that is with or without family support.  As I have already recorded, the
   Judge did not accept that the Appellant would face destitution.  The
   Judge has considered the position of [RAM] within his findings on the
   protection claim and internal relocation, and in particular whether the
   fact of her illegitimacy would become common knowledge ([48] of the
   Decision).


45. Given her age, the Judge's finding that it would be in [RAM]'s best
   interests to remain with her mother is unsurprising.  [RAM] has no
   contact with her father as that is precluded.  She is not said to have
   any other family in the UK.  As such, what is said by the Judge at [51]
   about the child's best interests as regards her family situation could
   not possibly be impugned.  Similarly, she had not yet started school as
   the Judge observed and therefore will not have formed other
   relationships.  She is not a British citizen.  She and her mother are
   both Bangladeshi nationals.  She has no other ties with the UK.


46. There is a lack of evidence about the child in the Appellant's bundle.
   The Judge therefore considered the obviously relevant factors pertaining
   to the child in his assessment.  He has given sufficient reasons for his
   conclusions (particularly when faced with a lack of evidence on this
   issue).  There is no error of law in his assessment.


47. For all of those reasons, I conclude that there is no error of law in
   the Decision and I uphold it.


   DECISION
   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Curtis promulgated on 12 March
   2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I
   therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
   appeal remains dismissed.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 10 March 2021

