
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02721/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                         |On 21st January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [N A]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patyna (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated by IJ Abebrese, on 5th September 2018, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 20th  August  2018.   In  the  decision,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  12th
    April 1986.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    12th  October  2016,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he worked for the LTTE  in
    Sri Lanka, was arrested, detained, and interrogated  and  tortured,  so
    that if he were to be returned back to Sri Lanka, he would be  targeted
    by the authorities on his return and this would constitute a breach  of
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, and a violation of the  United  Kingdom's
    international obligations under the Refugee Convention.

The Judge's Findings

 4. A feature of this appeal before Judge Abebrese, was that there had been
    a previous decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2011,  where  the
    Appellant had not been  found  to  be  credible.   The  judge  on  this
    occasion properly began by drawing attention to this previous  decision
    under the  principles  applicable  under  Devaseelan,  and  taking  the
    previous 2011 decision as the starting point.  However,  the  Appellant
    had now submitted further evidence (see  paragraphs  9  to  11  of  the
    decision), and claimed to have been engaged in sur place activities  in
    the United Kingdom.  The judge concluded that the Appellant  could  not
    succeed, given the previous  findings  on  his  credibility,  and  also
    applying the latest country guidance case of GJ (see  paragraph  23  of
    the decision).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me on 18th December 2018, Mr  Kandola,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, began by stating  that,
    although this was not the Home Secretary's appeal,  he  would  have  to
    concede, that there was an error in the  decision  of  Judge  Abebrese.
    Permission to appeal had been granted on  23rd  October  2018,  on  the
    basis that the judge had not given proper attention to  a  letter  from
    the Appellant's attorney in Sri Lanka that had been forwarded to him by
    his mother, had failed to attach proper  weight  to  the  son's  arrest
    warrant, and had given insufficient regard to the medical  evidence  in
    failing to acknowledge that Professor  Lingam  had  sought  to  explain
    discrepancies in his report from 2011  and  in  his  dismissal  of  the
    report from Dr Ali, because he did  not  adopt  the  Istanbul  Protocol
    terminology.

 7. Mr Kandola submitted that there had been no findings on  the  Appellant
    being at risk of return and no findings in  relation  to  him  being  a
    vulnerable witness.  The judge had failed to properly engage  with  the
    additional material, having started off on the correct  basis  that  he
    had to take into account the previous 2011 decision, on  the  basis  of
    the Devaseelan principles.  Miss Patyna agreed.

Error of Law

 8. Given the agreement before me between the two parties, I  am  satisfied
    that the making of the decision by the judge involved the making of  an
    error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007), such  that  I
    should set aside the decision.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  I remake  the  decision
    as follows.  This decision is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,
    to be determined by a judge other  than  Judge  Abebrese,  pursuant  to
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

10. An anonymity direction is made.

11. The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th January 2019
