
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2017                     |On 22 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                  A.F.S.O.S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Saldanha of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Appellant, a national of Libya, appeals against the decision of
        judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burnett (the  judge),  promulgated
        on 21 June 2017, dismissing his asylum and humanitarian  protection
        appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent,  dated  10  February
        2017, refusing his protection claim.


     2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1973.  On  8  November  2013  he  was
        issued with entry clearance in order to  study  in  the  UK,  valid
        until 1 November 2014. He arrived in the UK on 9 January 2014. On 6
        February 2014 he briefly returned to Libya where he married  before
        re-entering the UK on 15 February 2014. On 14 October 2014 he  made
        an appointment to claim asylum. He claimed to hold  a  well-founded
        fear from his ex-wife's family and as a result of  his  involvement
        in an investigation into a robbery involving very significant sums.
        For the purposes of this "error of law" hearing it is not necessary
        to consider in any more detail the Appellant's account  of  why  he
        claimed to face persecution in Libya. This  is  because  the  judge
        concluded that the Appellant fabricated his claimed fear on account
        of being involved in an investigation into  the  robbery  and  that
        there was no genuine and real threat  to  him  from  his  ex-wife's
        family. Those aspects of the decision have not been challenged.


     3. The Appellant additionally claimed that his removal to Libya  would
        expose him to a serious and individual threat to his life or person
        as a result  of  indiscriminate  violence  (Article  15(c)  of  the
        Qualification Directive). In assessing whether the Appellant  would
        be exposed to such a threat the judge had  regard  to  the  country
        guidance case of FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016]  UKUT  00413
        (IAC). The headnote of this decision reads:


             1. The question of whether a person is at art 15(c) risk in
             Libya should, until further Country Guidance, be determined on
             the basis of the individual evidence in the case.

             2. This decision replaces AT and Others Libya CG [2014] UKUT
             318 (IAC) in respect of assessment of the art 15(c) risk

     4. In assessing the evidence before him the judge referred  (at  [69])
        to an expert report from Prof Joffe and a copy of the  Home  Office
        guidance note on  Libya,  both  of  which  post-dated  the  earlier
        country guidance case of AT. At [70] the judge stated,


             "I have carefully read the information which was placed before
             me. The information contained within the Home  Office  country
             information and policy note (CIPN)  of  January  2017  largely
             reflects the expert report of Prof Joffe."

     5. The judge then set out extracts from the CIPN  report  relating  to
        the deterioration in humanitarian conditions in Libya  since  2011,
        the extensive damage to civilian homes and  public  infrastructure,
        the impact on all major  towns  and  cities  in  the  country,  the
        position of internally displaced people, the  groups  that  may  be
        vulnerable, and the statistics relating to civilian casualties  (at
        [70] and [73]). At [71] the judge set out the CIPN's conclusion  on
        whether article 15(c) applied to Libya. The CIPN stated,


             'In general, although conditions in Libya are poorer, they  do
             not reach the threshold that would make removal breach article
             15 of the Qualification Directive. However,  the  humanitarian
             situation  is  variable  across  the   country.   Members   of
             vulnerable groups, particularly where humanitarian  conditions
             are poorer and humanitarian aid is  less  accessible,  are  at
             greater risk of serious harm.'


     6. Having regard to the contents and conclusions of the  CIPN  report,
        and having found, despite the inadequacy of medical evidence,  that
        the Appellant was a vulnerable individual, the judge concluded that
        Tripoli was less affected than other parts of the country  and  the
        violence less severe there and that the statistics  indicated  that
        the  chances  of  civilians  being  caught  up  in  violence   were
        relatively low. The judge also concluded that the medical  evidence
        provided on behalf of the Appellant did not establish that he would
        suffer serious harm if returned to Libya, although he might  suffer
        a degree of harm. The judge concluded that article  15(c)  was  not
        engaged and dismissed the appeal.


     7. The Grounds of Appeal were twofold. It was first contended that the
        judge failed to give adequate consideration to  the  expert  report
        from Prof Joffe which was dated 12 April 2017. Although  the  judge
        acknowledged the report and commented that the report  was  largely
        reflected in the earlier CIPN report of January  2017,  no  further
        reference was made to Prof Joffe's  assessment.  It  was  submitted
        that the judge erred in law by not having sufficient regard to  the
        expert report. The 2nd ground of appeal contended that  the  First-
        tier judge was still seized of the case until its  promulgation  on
        21 June 2017. It was argued that the judge was therefore bound by a
        new country guidance case, ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT
        00263 (IAC) which, although only promulgated on 28 June  2017,  was
        signed off by the Upper Tribunal judge on 20 June 2017. Although in
        terms  that  are   not   entirely   satisfactory   permission   was
        nevertheless granted by the First-tier Tribunal.


     8. Although initially listed as a  full  'error  of  law'  hearing  an
        amended Notice of Hearing was issued to the parties informing  them
        that the matter would be listed as a "for mention". It  is  unclear
        to me why the Notice of Hearing was amended. I enquired  from  both
        representatives at  the  hearing  whether  they  were  prepared  to
        address me on the substantive issues identified in the  Grounds  of
        Appeal. Mr Armstrong was happy to adopt  this  proposed  course  of
        action, and Mr  Saldanha  was  also  happy  provided  that  he  had
        sufficient opportunity to consider the expert report and the First-
        tier Tribunal's determination. With this in mind I put  the  matter
        back to enable Mr Saldanha to sufficiently familiarise himself with
        the material.


     9.  On  reconvening  the  hearing  Mr  Saldanha  proceeded  with   his
        submissions. He referred me to various  passages  of  Prof  Joffe's
        report which he submitted were not  considered  by  the  Judge  and
        which may have made a material difference to the  Judge's  decision
        if so considered. At paragraph 141 of his expert report Prof  Joffe
        indicated  that  the   situation   in   Libya   had   significantly
        deteriorated in recent months, particularly in  Western  Libya.  At
        paragraph 142 Prof Joffe stated that the new government  had  still
        not been able to impose itself in Tripoli and was still rejected by
        the militia coalitions.  At  paragraphs  155  and  160  the  expert
        indicated that nowhere in Libya, even the centre  of  the  capital,
        was considered to be a  secure  environment  in  light  of  renewed
        fighting between local Militias in March 2017. At paragraph 156  it
        was noted that a large part of the country was now a  closed  zone,
        and that relocation was not a realistic possibility and  there  was
        no authority capable  of  providing  protection  against  arbitrary
        arrest. It was Prof Joffe's view at  paragraph  158,  supported  by
        referenced  material,   that   violence   in   Libya   was   indeed
        'indiscriminate' and it was clear that the state  could  not  offer
        any protection against it. At paragraph 160 the expert stated  that
        Tripoli  and  its  surroundings  were  increasingly  a  region   of
        contestation between different militia coalitions.

    10. Although Mr Armstrong submitted that the judge had  considered  the
        expert report in detail  he  ultimately  accepted  that  the  judge
        failed to demonstrate that he exercised sufficient anxious scrutiny
        in respect of the long and detailed country report.


    11. Having considered  the  extracts  of  Prof  Joffe's  expert  report
        detailed above,  and  having  regard  to  the  CIPN  report,  I  am
        satisfied that the judge  failed  to  adequately  engage  with  the
        information contained in  the  expert  report.  Although  the  CIPN
        report does reflect some of the conclusions reached by Prof  Joffe,
        and  the  evidential  basis  upon  which  he   relies   for   those
        conclusions, the expert report itself went significantly further in
        detailing the deterioration in all major cities in  Libya  and  the
        concomitant risks faced by any individual on return there. Had  the
        judge fully engaged with these aspects of the expert report he  may
        have reached a different conclusion. In these  circumstances  I  am
        satisfied that the judge failed to 'get to grips' with  the  expert
        report and that, had he properly considered  the  report  with  the
        requisite anxious scrutiny, his ultimate conclusion may  have  been
        different. In these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
        materially heard law.


    12. Having found that the judge erred in his  approach  to  the  expert
        evidence it is not necessary for me to consider whether  the  judge
        should have been aware of a country guidance case that  was  signed
        off by the Upper Tribunal a day  before  the  promulgation  of  the
        judge's decision, but only promulgated 8 days later.

    13. Having identified a material error of law both parties  were  happy
        for me to immediately proceed to remake the decision having  proper
        regard to Prof Joffe's and, in particular, the new country guidance
        case of ZMM. I heard very brief submissions from Mr  Armstrong  and
        Mr Saldanha was happy for me to simply take account of ZMM.


    14. There  is  no  dispute  as  to  the  Appellant's  nationality.  The
        Secretary of State is not proposing to return the Appellant to  any
        country other than Libya. In ZMM the Upper Tribunal, consisting  of
        the President of the Upper  Tribunal  and  another  Upper  Tribunal
        judge,  considered  with  care  a  large  volume  of  very   recent
        background evidence relating to the country situation in Libya. The
        Tribunal concluded that the violence in Libya had  reached  such  a
        high level that substantial grounds were shown for believing that a
        returning civilian would, solely on account of his presence in  the
        territory of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being
        subjected to a threat to his life or person.


    15. Applying the conclusions in ZMM to the factual matrix determined by
        the First-tier Tribunal judge, I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant
        would be a returning civilian and, if returned to Libya, would face
        a real risk of being subjected to a threat to his  life  or  person
        sufficient to trigger  the  operation  of  article  15(c).  In  the
        circumstances I find that the Appellant is entitled to Humanitarian
        Protection.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               21 September 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


