
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02426/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                     |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  M S J M A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused, and he appealed and following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 23 March 2018, Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Arullendran dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. He sought permission to appeal which was initially refused.  A  renewed
    application was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chapman  on  11
    October 2018. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellant, who is a national of  Iraq,  born  on  11.4.87,
         seeks permission to appeal, out of  time,  against  a  decision  of
         First tier Tribunal  Judge  Arullendran  who,  in  a  decision  and
         reasons promulgated on 23 March  2018,  dismissed  the  Appellant's
         appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 30  January  2018
         refusing to grant him asylum or humanitarian protection.

         2.   The deadline for submitting the application was  22  May  2018
         but the application was not received until 23 May 2018 and is  thus
         1 day out of time. There is no  application  for  an  extension  of
         time. However, I noted  that  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal is dated 21 May 2018 and was sent by fax on 22 May  2018  at
         18.53 which is after the end of  the  working  day,  hence  it  was
         recorded as received on 23 May 2018. I extend time so as  to  admit
         the application in time, bearing  in  mind  the  principles  in  SS
         (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in particular that the  breach
         of  the  Rules  is  relatively  minor,  however   the   Appellant's
         solicitors should be mindful of the fact that unless an application
         is submitted before 16.00 hours it will be treated as out  of  time
         and it cannot be assumed that leave to extend time will  always  be
         forthcoming.

         3.   The grounds of appeal assert  that  the  Judge  erred  in  her
         assessment of humanitarian protection and failed to take account of
         material considerations,  given  that  the  Appellant  is  of  Arab
         ethnicity and  Sunni  religion  and  is  from  Mosul,  which  is  a
         contested area and that, following the CG  decision  in  BA  (Iraq)
         [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC)  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  as  a
         perceived collaborator and due to his extended absence from Iraq in
         the West. It was submitted that the  Judge  further  erred  in  her
         assessment of whether the Appellant has a family support network in
         light of the fact that the Appellant stated he had not had  contact
         with them since 2007 and that since that time ISIS invaded Mosul in
         2014, which was not taken into account.

         4.   The Judge was entitled to take account of the previous adverse
         credibility findings of the First tier Tribunal in respect  of  the
         Appellant's initial asylum claim. She went on to  make  sustainable
         findings at [70]-[74] as to the risk to the  Appellant  on  return,
         having found his account to have lost contact with his  family  not
         to be credible. The Upper Tribunal in BA (Iraq)  found  that  Sunni
         identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm.

         5.   However, it is arguable that, given the  Appellant's  evidence
         recorded at [35] that he was previously living with his  mother,  3
         sisters and 2 brothers (not his father) when he left  in  2007  and
         given that ISIL invaded Mosul in 2014, that in light of in light of
         the decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
         UKUT 00212 (IAC) (albeit that this Appellant is  not  a  Kurd)  the
         Judge's finding at [70] that the Appellant would be able to  obtain
         a CSID or replacement passport through the assistance of his family
         or a proxy in Iraq is materially flawed.

         6.   The grounds of appeal disclose no arguable errors  of  law  in
         the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge. However,  permission
         to appeal is granted on the narrow basis set out at [5] above."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Somewhat unusually in granting permission to appeal Deputy Judge of the
    Upper Tribunal Chapman has identified that in certain areas the Judge's
    decision is "materially flawed" (see paragraph 5 of her above-mentioned
    decision).

 5.  Both  representatives  were  accepting  that  on  this  narrow   basis
    (paragraph 5 of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman's  decision)  there
    was a material error in  relation  to  the  ability  of  the  Appellant
    following ISIL's invasion  of  Mosul  in  2014  to  obtain  a  CSID  or
    replacement passport through the assistance of family or a proxy  which
    impacts on his consequent ability to return there.

 6. In the circumstances the appeal will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard de novo, solely in relation to  the  narrow  issue
    identified in paragraph 5 of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman's
    decision. The balance of her findings are preserved.  Further  evidence
    is necessary in relation to this narrow  issue  and  both  parties  are
    directed to file any additional written evidence in relation  there  to
    no later than 5 working days prior to the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Arullendran.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 6 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
