
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02411/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 18 May 2020                |On Thursday 21 May 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Sanoojan [J]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule 34 of The  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to  directions  issued  by
   the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  sent  out  on  7  April  2020.  No
   objection was made to the decision being made on the papers  and  written
   submissions  have  been  produced  by  both  parties,  which  have   been
   considered.

2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born  on  27  January  2001.  He
   arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2013  and  claimed  asylum.  His
   claim was refused but he was granted discretionary leave  on  21  January
   2015 as an unaccompanied minor until 20 July  2017,  which  was  extended
   until 27 July 2018. He applied for further leave on 24 July 2018 but  his
   application was refused on 11 February 2019.

3. The appellant claimed to fear return to Sri Lanka  as  a  result  of  his
   father's prior membership of the LTTE, stating that he was  detained  and
   questioned about his father whilst he was in Sri Lanka and  was  required
   to report to the authorities. He also claimed to be at risk on return  to
   Sri Lanka as a result of his participation in Tamil  Diaspora  activities
   in the UK with the TGTE. The respondent did not accept that the appellant
   was at risk on either basis.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana on 13 November 2019. Judge Chana did  not
   find the appellant's account to be  credible.  She  did  not  accept  his
   account of being arrested and required to report and did not accept  that
   he was of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities.  Whilst  Judge
   Chana  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  participating  in  TGTE
   activities in the UK, she did not accept that he was at risk on return on
   that basis and concluded that he was an economic migrant who could safely
   return to Sri Lanka. She dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds,  in  a
   decision promulgated on 4 December 2019.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  by  the  appellant
   on various, lengthy grounds which I do not propose to set out since these
   have not been challenged. Permission was granted on 7  February  2020  on
   all grounds in the First-tier Tribunal.

6. The matter was listed for hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  20  April
   2020, but in light of the need to take precautions against the spread  of
   Covid-19, the hearing was vacated and the case was then reviewed  by  the
   Upper Tribunal. In a Note and Directions sent out on 7  April  2020,  the
   President of the  Upper  Tribunal  indicated  that  he  had  reached  the
   provisional view that the question of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   decision involved the making of error of law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
   decision  should  be  set  aside,  could  be  made  without  a   hearing.
   Submissions were invited from the parties.

7.  Written  submissions  have  been  received  from   both   parties.   The
   appellant's submissions rely on the grounds of appeal which challenge the
   judge's assessment of future risk and her assessment of  credibility  and
   failure to give a reasonable assessment of the psychiatric  report  which
   was submitted for the appeal. The respondent filed submissions by way  of
   a rule 24 response in which the appellant's appeal  was  not  challenged.
   The respondent accepted that Judge Chana had failed to  engage  with  the
   country  information  relating  to  events  post  GJ   (post-civil   war:
   returnees) Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319, that she had  failed  to
   incorporate the psychiatric report into her  assessment  of  credibility,
   that she had made contradictory findings on the  appellant's  efforts  to
   trace his family and that she had failed to conduct a  proper  Article  3
   and 8 assessment.

8. In light of the fact that the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  are  not
   challenged by the respondent, and for the reasons given by both  parties,
   I find there to be material errors of law in the judge's decision  and  I
   set it aside in its entirety, with no findings preserved. The appropriate
   course, as both parties agree, is for the case  to  be  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge.

DECISION

9. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law and the decision is set  aside.  The
   appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before any judge aside from
   Judge Chana.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                                  Dated: 18 May
2020
