
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02244/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2017                           |On 23rd January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    I.I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is hereby made on account of this matter being a
protection claim.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Moran,   dismissing   an   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's refusal to grant I.I.  asylum/humanitarian  protection  on
    account of his sexual orientation.

Background

 2. The Appellant, who was born  on  13th  April  1973  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  He arrived in the UK in 2009  travelling  on  a  visit  visa
    lawfully.   On  expiry  of  his  visa  however  he   remained   without
    permission.

 3. In August 2015 he was encountered  by  Police  Scotland  attempting  to
    embark on a ferry sailing to Belfast.  He was detained and served  with
    removal directions but on 3rd September 2015 he claimed asylum.

 4. The basis of his claim to  asylum  amounted  to  this.   The  Appellant
    realised when he was about 20 years of age that he was gay.  He  and  a
    friend F. engaged in a clandestine sexual relationship in Pakistan  for
    about fifteen years.  The Appellant hid his sexuality from  his  family
    and he succumbed to family  pressure,  by  entering  into  an  arranged
    marriage.

 5. In 2009 he was at home when he was seen by his wife, engaging in sexual
    activity with F. his friend with whom he had had the  relationship  for
    fifteen years.

 6. His wife informed her brothers of what had happened.  They turned up at
    the  Appellant's  home,  assaulted  him  and  informed  the   religious
    extremist authorities.  The Appellant was warned about his  conduct  by
    the religious authorities and told he must desist.  He  refused  to  do
    so.  Three weeks after being discovered, he came to the UK.

 7. The Appellant's claim is that he lost contact with  F.  but  has  since
    been told that his friend's body  has  been  found  in  a  river.   The
    Appellant considers that F. was either murdered or  that  he  committed
    suicide.

 8. The Respondent's starting point of refusal was that she did not  accept
    the credibility of the Appellant's core claim, nor did she  accept  his
    claim to be gay.  Further she did not accept the Appellant's history of
    his sexual activity in the UK.  That being so, there was no  reason  on
    the basis of his discredited claim of sexuality, for the  Appellant  to
    fear to return to  Pakistan  and  she  refused  his  application.   The
    Appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The FtT Hearing

 9. When the appeal came before the FtT, that Tribunal took  oral  evidence
    from the Appellant and other witnesses who came in support of him.   In
    addition the judge took note of a medical report which dealt  with  the
    scarring which the Appellant said he had received as a  result  of  the
    assault upon him by his brothers-in-law.

10. The judge referred to the leading case of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010]  UKSC
    31 and directed himself to the four-limb test set out in that case.  In
    [27], the judge accepted with reasons, that the Appellant is gay.   The
    judge also accepted the Appellant's evidence that he had a relationship
    with a man in Pakistan, that they were caught in the course of a sexual
    act and that the Appellant was then attacked by members of  his  wife's
    family and he then fled to the UK.  The judge also accepted  that  once
    in the UK, the Appellant had pursued a  number  of  gay  relationships,
    including an ongoing one with one of the witnesses who attended on  his
    behalf.  Those findings are not the subject of any challenge.

11. The judge then asked  himself  the  question  of  whether  gay  men  in
    Pakistan are at risk of persecution.  He said the following

         "Taken as a whole the country information proves that  a  man  that
         lives an openly gay lifestyle in Pakistan is very much at  risk  of
         persecution.  This is from  a  variety  of  sources  including  the
         community generally but also the state." [28]

12. The judge then looked at how the Appellant  would  conduct  himself  on
    return to  Pakistan.   In  looking  at  conduct  on  return  the  judge
    considered that the Appellant would not live an openly gay lifestyle if
    returned to Pakistan but would conduct himself discreetly.

13. At  [30]  the  judge  then  asked  himself  the  question  of  why  the
    Appellant's conduct would be discreet.  He  then  drew  the  conclusion
    that taking the evidence as a whole the Appellant would live discreetly
    not through fear of persecution but because of  cultural  or  religious
    reasons and a desire to keep his sexuality private (my emphasis).

14. The judge then went on to say that the Appellant would be  at  risk  of
    persecution from his  family,  his  wife's  family  and  any  religious
    extremists that they are in contact with.  In other words he  would  be
    at risk in his home area.  However it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the Appellant to relocate elsewhere in Pakistan [32].  He  found
    that relocation was viable because the Appellant would conduct  himself
    discreetly and on that basis, he dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

15. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal.

16. The grounds seeking permission are set out under two headings:

       . the FtT materially erred in law by addressing discretion on  return
         where this is now an unlawful element of an asylum claim;

       . the FtT materially erred in law in any event because  the  3rd  and
         4th limbs of HJ (Iran) were met. The judge had made an unchallenged
         finding that the Appellant would be at risk of persecution  in  his
         home area.  It follows from that the Appellant would not be able to
         relocate internally and yet live  discreetly  through  choice.   He
         would only do so from a fear of being found out by the authorities,
         particularly if he were to seek a new  partner.  The  only  way  he
         could live discreetly would be to deny his sexuality altogether.

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether  the  FtT's  decision
    contains a material error requiring it to be set aside.

The UT Hearing

17. Mr  Chelvan's  submissions  before  me  kept  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  In summary the main thrust of his argument centred on  the
    Court of Appeal decision in SSHD v MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA  Civ  715,
    handed down on 12th July 2016.This case he acknowledged was not brought
    to the attention of the FtT  judge  by  either  representative  at  the
    hearing on 16th September 2016 and clearly it should  have  been.  This
    omission had led the FtT into error by taking the wrong  approach  when
    evaluating the four limb guidance given in HJ (Iran).

18. Essentially, he submitted, the decision in HJ (Iran) was considered  by
    the Upper  Tribunal  in  MSM  (journalists;  political  opinion;  risk)
    Somalia [2015] UKUT 00413 (IAC) and affirmed by  the  Court  of  Appeal
    above. That decision contains a focused and detailed discussion of  the
    concept of forced modification  or  discreet  behaviour  of  an  asylum
    seeker on return to their country of nationality  [35-48].   The  Upper
    Tribunal's discussion also considered the CJEU's decision in the joined
    cases of C-199-201/12 X,Y and Z, where the following was said at [75];

         "It follows that the person  must  be  granted  refugee  status  in
         accordance  with  article  13  of  the  Directive,  where   it   is
         established  that  on  a  return  to  his  country  of  origin  his
         homosexuality would expose him to a  genuine  risk  of  persecution
         within the meaning of Article 9(1) thereof.  The fact that he could
         avoid that risk by exercising greater restraint than a heterosexual
         in expressing his sexual  orientation  is  not  to  be  taken  into
         account in that respect."

19. As I understood Mr Chelvan's submissions he  drew  particular  strength
    from [44] and [45] of MSM which say as follows:

         "As to the submission that the requirement to take reasonable steps
         to avoid persecution is part of the test for determining whether  a
         person will face persecution within the meaning of Article 9,  that
         was expressly rejected by Lord Dyson in HJ (Iran)  at  [120].   His
         lordship stated that 'the phrase "being persecuted" does not  refer
         to  what  the  asylum  seeker  does  in   order   to   avoid   such
         persecution'."

         "In short the possibility of conduct  entailing  the  avoidance  of
         modification of certain types of behaviour related directly to  the
         right  engaged  is  irrelevant.   Thus  the  possibility  must   be
         disregarded."

20. Therefore, Mr Chelvan submitted, the Appellant should  succeed  in  his
    appeal.  There were unchallenged findings that he had overcome limbs  1
    and 2 of the guidance in HJ (Iran).  In finding that the Appellant will
    be at  risk  in  his  home  area  (a  finding  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent)  but  would  be  able  to  relocate  internally  by  living
    discreetly, it follows that the FtT erred in law.  Having accepted that
    the Appellant will face persecution in his home area, it  would  follow
    that a modification in his conduct in the place of internal  relocation
    would be based on a fear of persecution.

21. Mr Chelvan then referred to the Respondent's own Country of Information
    Report which clearly states that homosexual acts are illegal throughout
    the whole of Pakistan.

22. Mrs Pettersen for the Respondent relied on the Rule  24  response,  the
    relevant part of which reads as follows:

         "Judge Moran has considered  all  of  the  evidence  presented  and
         concluded on lower standard of proof that  the  Appellant  is  gay.
         Thereafter the judge has meticulously followed the  guidance  given
         in HJ (Iran).  In a detailed analysis how the Appellant  is  likely
         to conduct himself in Pakistan (sic) and has given his  reasons  as
         to why the  Appellant  would  conduct  himself  discreetly.   These
         findings were of to (sic) Judge Moran on the evidence."

23. Mrs Pettersen emphasised that the Appellant had behaved  discreetly  in
    the past in Pakistan.  There was no reason  to  believe  he  would  not
    behave discreetly again if required to relocate.  The FtT decision  was
    sustainable and it should stand.

24. Mr Chelvan who responded further, submitted that the Rule  24  response
    somewhat missed the point; which was what risk would the Appellant face
    on return?  Whether or not he lived discreetly in the past was not  the
    issue.  In any event it  was  accepted  that  his  past  behaviour  had
    resulted in him being harmed by his family had resulted  in  him  being
    reported to the religious extremists and  meant  he  could  not  return
    home.  As Mr Chelvan reemphasised internal relocation was not a  viable
    option because  the  Appellant  had  already  declined  to  change  his
    behaviour and the Respondent's own CIG reported that there was  a  risk
    to gay men throughout all of Pakistan.

25. At the close of submissions both representatives  indicated  that  they
    were satisfied that I had before me sufficient unchallenged findings of
    fact such as would enable me to remake the decision if necessary.

Error of Law Consideration/ Remaking the Decision

26. I am satisfied that the FtT has misdirected itself in its  analysis  of
    what would happen to the Appellant on return to Pakistan. I find  force
    in Mr Chelvan's submission that once the first two limbs of  HJ  (Iran)
    were met then in the light of  MSM  the  Tribunal  would  not  need  to
    consider the remaining questions of HJ (Iran).  This appears to be  the
    correct approach in the  light  of  the  binding  nature  of  the  CJEU
    jurisprudence referred to  in  [19]  above  and  stated  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal panel in MSM. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  FtT
    for material error whilst preserving the unchallenged findings of  fact
    as set out in my next paragraph.

27. The FtT's evidential findings clearly set out that this Appellant is  a
    gay man. That finding is unchallenged. So far as  the  second  limb  is
    concerned the  Respondent's  own  CIG  accepts  that  homosexuality  is
    illegal in Pakistan and that gay men cannot live openly without risk of
    persecution.  This finding was set  out  by  the  FtT  judge  at  [28].
    Therefore the first two limbs of HJ (Iran) having been met I find  that
    this is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  matter  by  finding  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

28. For the sake of completeness and because Mr  Chelvan's  argued  in  the
    alternative that the Appellant could not relocate internally. I find  I
    agree with that submission. It has always  been  the  Appellant's  case
    that he would live what for him would be a normal life which  would  be
    mean that he would wish to  engage  with  other  gay  men.  This  would
    necessarily mean that he would be at risk on return. How the  Appellant
    has conducted himself in the UK is not the question to  be  asked.  The
    question is what will happen to the Appellant on return.

29. It is clear from the Appellant's own evidence that he would continue to
    seek sexual partners in Pakistan.  That would place him in at least the
    same degree of risk as the one that he has already experienced  at  the
    hands of his in-laws.  He would therefore have  to  live  with  greater
    restraints than those imposed on a heterosexual.

30. I am satisfied on the evidence (including the country guidance to which
    I have been referred) that the Appellant would feel  compelled,  rather
    than would  merely  choose,  to  live  discreetly  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution because of the risk of his sexuality being discovered.

31. For the reasons set  out  above  the  Appellant's  appeal  succeeds  on
    asylum/human rights grounds and I remake  the  decision,  allowing  his
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated  by  an  error  of  law
such that I set it aside and remake it, allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on
asylum and ECHR, Article 3 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     22 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     22 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


