

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/03657/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |      Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|Centre                                |                                     |
|On 27 November 2019                   |      On 20 December 2019            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               M A N (Vietnam)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr James Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Christopher Bates, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of M A N who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification  of  the  appellant  or  of  any  member  of  her  family  in
connection with these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

1. The appellant is a citizen of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam  born  in
   1985, now aged 34, who appeals against the decision of the respondent  to
   refuse her international protection, humanitarian protection, or leave to
   remain on human rights grounds.  The Upper Tribunal remakes the  decision
   having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her
   appeal.  If returned to Vietnam with her daughter,  born  in  the  United
   Kingdom outside her undissolved marriage, the appellant fears retribution
   from or on behalf of the traffickers, harm from her husband,  stigma  and
   disapproval from society, rejection by her parents, and re-trafficking.

2. On 29 November 2015,  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  in
   international protection decisions,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
   appellant was both a former victim of human trafficking (VOT) and  former
   victim  of  modern  slavery  (VOM),  both  of  which  she  accepted  were
   particular social groups in the context of  Article  1A  of  the  Refugee
   Convention and of Article 2(c) of  the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive
   2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004.

3. The respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  cogent  and
   coherent account of her history, but rejected two aspects of her account,
   the first that she had suffered domestic violence in her marriage  before
   leaving Vietnam, which was the reason the appellant gave for  her  father
   having sold the family home and arranged with a man from Hanoi to get her
   out of the country.  The respondent also rejected the  appellant's  worry
   that in selling their home to pay the Hanoi trafficker, her parents might
   not have discharged the very large sum  required  to  bring  her  out  of
   Vietnam.  The appellant has never said that she was sure that the  family
   owed the Hanoi trafficker money, just that she thought it probable.   The
   respondent rejected that as speculative and considered that,  taken  with
   the delay in claiming asylum, it meant  that  the  appellant's  otherwise
   credible account should be rejected on the domestic violence  aspect  and
   the debt to the trafficker.

4. The appellant benefits from a positive Conclusive Grounds  decision  made
   on 23 December 2016 by the respondent as Competent  Authority  under  the
   National  Referral  Mechanism.  The  respondent  as  Competent  Authority
   accepted, to the higher standard of balance of  probabilities,  that  the
   appellant was a victim of trafficking and modern slavery and that she had
   provided a credible and coherent account  of  the  circumstances  of  her
   leaving Vietnam and the several times she was trafficked en route, mainly
   for forced labour but for a time, in Russia and Poland, for prostitution.

5. In the light of that acceptance, and  having  heard  the  appellant  give
   evidence, I find her account to be entirely credible and I approach  this
   decision on that basis.

6. The appellant had the good fortune to be educated in Vietnam  up  to  the
   age of 18 and worked when there, sharing the care of her children between
   her husband and her parents,  who  lived  just  half  an  hour  apart  by
   motorbike.  She worked in  hairdressers  and  in  bread  shops,  but  her
   husband, who had a drug habit, took the money and used  it  for  his  own
   needs.

7. The appellant  herself  has  not  contacted  her  parents  since  leaving
   Vietnam: she was supposed to have been coming to a better job in the west
   and to be able to send them money to pay the trafficker and to repay them
   for the enormous gesture they made in selling their home to get her  away
   from her violent husband.  She fears that her subsequent trafficking into
   prostitution, and her inability to pay any money  at  all  since  leaving
   Vietnam because she herself received no money from her traffickers, would
   have so disappointed her parents  that  they  would  reject  her  on  her
   return.  She thinks that the traffickers will have told everyone that she
   was a prostitute, but that is subjective: she cannot be certain, nor  can
   she contact her family to find out if they would reject her.

8. The appellant's consistent evidence was that in the  United  Kingdom  she
   had met a woman who came from her home area and was going back there.  At
   the appellant's request, the woman went to her home village to  find  out
   her  parents'  forwarding  address.   They  were  not  there:   the  only
   information the appellant received was  that  her  parents  and  the  two
   children of her marriage were no longer in the village  and  that  nobody
   knew where they had gone.  She has not approached the Red  Cross  but  on
   those facts, it is difficult to see what they could find out.

9. The appellant's circumstances on return will be complicated by  the  fact
   that, as far as she knows, she is still married to her  abusive  husband,
   that he will have custody of her children and retain the Family  Register
   Booklets (h? kh?u), and that she has a child born to her  in  the  United
   Kingdom, now of school age, and requiring health and social care, who  is
   not her husband's child.

10. The respondent's case is that the appellant could  relocate  to  Ho  Chi
   Minh City and make a new life there.

The appellant's mental health

11. The appellant had some mental health issues  when  she  first  made  her
   asylum claim.  She was cared for by Pennine  Care  NHS  (Healthy  Minds).
   There is no evidence later than 2016 of her mental  state  but  her  case
   worker, Ms Martins, noted that she presented with anxiety and  depression
   and could be supported by a partner organisation, from City Hearts, which
   specialised in supporting asylum claimants with her issues. A letter from
   City Hearts on 26 July 2016 recorded that between September 2015 and July
   2016, the appellant  received  weekly  face-to-face  support  thereafter,
   following a meeting in October 2015 to  finalise  the  outreach  package.
   The appellant presented as lonely, very sad, suffering nightmares, having
   trouble sleeping and flashbacks.

12. Her initial needs  were  to  register  with  and  access  local  medical
   services and counselling, to obtain  a  health  visitor,  and  to  access
   Children Centre  support,  English  language  development,  and  material
   assistance, all of which had been provided.   The  appellant  now  had  a
   conditional offer for a Beauty Course at Bury  College.  Further  support
   was available if required and when the appellant ended her initial period
   of support, she would retain access to City Hearts' drop-in service.

13. That remains the  position.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  that  she
   received (but not initiated) a fortnightly call from City Hearts  to  see
   how she and her daughter were doing.  She had taken her daughter  out  of
   nursery, wanting to keep her closer, but was otherwise making no  use  of
   the support offered save for occasional practical issues.

14. There is no  further  medical  evidence  about  the  appellant's  mental
   health.  It appears that she is functioning reasonably well without  much
   medical intervention, although her decision to  keep  her  daughter  home
   rather than send  her  to  nursery  will  become  challenging,  once  her
   daughter reaches school age.  Absent any up-to-date medical  evidence,  I
   do not treat the appellant's mental health issues as likely  to  make  it
   difficult for her to reintegrate in Vietnam nor are they at a level where
   there is a risk of an Article 3 ECHR breach, were she to be returned.

Section 55 best interests

15. The refusal letter, having been written six  months  after  the  child's
   birth,  makes  no  detailed  section  55  assessment  and  no  additional
   information is before me, save the appellant's evidence that her daughter
   stays home and does not attend nursery.  There is no  evidence  of  local
   friends outside the home.

16. The appellant's United Kingdom-born daughter  is  a  Vietnamese  citizen
   and is only just of school age.  She is still at an  age  where  what  is
   best for her mother is best for her, particularly as she has stayed  home
   and not attended nursery for quite some time now.   This  case  does  not
   turn on the best interests of the child and there is no evidence  at  all
   about the two children in Vietnam, who have disappeared, along with their
   grandparents.

The issue in this appeal

17. In this decision,  I  remake  afresh  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal which dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.   I  have  heard  oral
   evidence from the appellant, and I have  her  witness  statement,  asylum
   interview, and the Conclusive Grounds decision and refusal letter.  There
   is no need to set out in detail what those say as I have  summarised  the
   account above, so  far  as  relevant.   I  am  satisfied,  to  the  lower
   standard, that there is a real risk of persecution or serious harm to the
   appellant in the home area, which I take to mean both her husband's  home
   and that of her parents, since she lived between the  two  and  they  are
   only half an hour apart.

18.  The  appellant  also  fears  going  to  Hanoi,  because  the   original
   trafficker was from there. It is accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
   appellant does have a subjective fear on return, both of the  traffickers
   and of her husband:  the respondent in effect relied on  the  possibility
   of relocation to Ho Chi Minh City.  The crucial question  for  the  Upper
   Tribunal is whether such relocation is a reasonable option for her  as  a
   vulnerable single head of household with an illegitimate daughter.   This
   case therefore turns on the effectiveness and reasonableness of  internal
   relocation to Ho Chi Minh City,  and  also  on  the  h?  kh?u  system  in
   Vietnam.

Respondent's country evidence

CPIN 2018

19. In September 2018, the respondent issued  a  CPIN  Vietnam:  Victims  of
   Trafficking.  At 5.1, profiling  VOTs,  the  United  Nations  Action  for
   Cooperation against  Trafficking  in  Persons  (UN-ACT)  is  recorded  as
   stating  that  'Vietnamese  women...subjected  to   forced   prostitution
   throughout Asia are often misled by fraudulent labour  opportunities  and
   sold to brothels on the borders of Cambodia, China,  and  Lao  PDR,  with
   some  victims  transported  to  third  destination  countries,  including
   Thailand and Malaysia'.

20. A July 2017 report published on Gov.UK by the British Embassy  in  Hanoi
   recorded the risk to young women and girls who were poor and had  limited
   access to information. They would be kidnapped or tricked  into  crossing
   neighbouring  borders  then  sold  into  forced  sex   work   or   labour
   exploitation.  Traffickers 'stand to gain huge profits from the suffering
   of their victims'.  At 5.1.6, the  report  records  the  finding  of  the
   Independent Anti-Slavery Commission that labour exploitation was the most
   common form of trafficking referred into  the  NRM,  with  2/3  of  those
   referred being men.

21.  At section 6, the report records  that  the  National  Plan  of  Action
   (NPA) in Vietnam did not recognise a link between trafficking and  labour
   migration. The  focus  was  on  those  forced  or  kidnapped  for  sexual
   trafficking, not on those who were lured by the promise of good jobs  and
   went willingly on that basis, only to be sold as VOMs or VOTs.

22. The CPIN report  records  in  detail  the  significant  efforts  by  the
   Vietnamese  government,  with  international  support,   to   deal   with
   trafficking at source by better  information,  as  it  was  difficult  to
   contain  at  a  practical  level.   However,  the  US  State   Department
   Trafficking in Persons report is quoted as stating that:

         "For the sixth consecutive year, the government did  not  prosecute
         any suspected traffickers under labor trafficking provisions of the
         2012 anti-trafficking  law.  Authorities  continued  to  develop  a
         national database on trafficking statistics for  the  fourth  year,
         but did not make demonstrable progress on  bringing  it  closer  to
         integration with law enforcement efforts or  judicial  proceedings.
         Disparate  government  bodies  continued  to   report   discrepant,
         overlapping, or incomplete data on anti-trafficking law enforcement
         and  victim  identification,  and   authorities   often   did   not
         disaggregate trafficking offenses from possible  migrant  smuggling
         cases. According to MFA, the Ministry  of  Public  Security  (MPS),
         Vietnam Border Guards (under Ministry of Defense),  and  Vietnamese
         diplomatic Missions-often in  cooperation  with  foreign  partners-
         identified 350 trafficking cases involving more  than  500  alleged
         offenders (234 and 308, respectively,  in  2016).  The  procuracies
         reported  initiating  the  prosecution  of   245   defendants   for
         trafficking offenses (295 in 2016) and the court system secured 244
         convictions (275 in 2016); sentences ranged from  less  than  three
         years to 30 years imprisonment.'...

         6.5.1 The USSD TiP Report 2018, noted:

         'A  lack  of   coordination   across   provincial-level   agencies,
         persistent  budgetary  constraints,  poor  understanding   of   the
         relevant legislation among local  officials,  and  confusion  about
         individual provinces' roles and responsibilities in the context  of
         the  national  action  plan  continued  to  hamper  effective   law
         enforcement  efforts.  Observers  noted   the   authorities   often
         prosecuted  domestic  trafficking  under  statutes  pertaining   to
         operation of an illegal business, kidnapping, or illegal detention,
         all of which carried lesser penalties. Provincial authorities often
         did not replicate central government  coordination  mechanisms  and
         activities in accordance with the national action plan,  and  there
         was no mechanism for the MPS-which led interagency anti-trafficking
         efforts-to transfer necessary funds to other government bodies  for
         anti-trafficking activities."

23. At  7.1,  the  report  noted  that  MOLISA  operated  about  400  social
   protection shelters providing assistance to members of vulnerable  groups
   including VOTs.  The shelters were run by local authorities and the level
   of training and skill level was variable.  There was one NGO  shelter  in
   Hanoi  for  female  trafficking  victims.   All  government-run  shelters
   supported a broad  range  of  vulnerable  individuals,  though  a  MOLISA
   shelter in Ho Chi Minh City  had  two  rooms  where  trafficking  victims
   transiting the City could stay for up to two  months.   Other  assistance
   was  available,  including  government-sponsored   vocational   training,
   employment opportunities and lines of credit at a reduced interest rate.

24.  At  section  8,  the  CPIN  report  deals  with  the  difficulties   of
   reintegration for former VOTs:

         "8.1.1        The  joint  VCHR  and  FIDH  report  of  2015,  noted
         'Victims of trafficking who escape and return to  Vietnam  have  no
         legal protection. Many rural women find that their  land  has  been
         confiscated during  their  absence.  If  they  have  children  born
         overseas, the children are not entitled to the obligatory residence
         permit, or "h? kh?u", and become illegal citizens, deprived of  the
         right to education  and  health  care.'"                  [Emphasis
         added]

   A link in the September 2018 CPIN to the Socialist Republic of  Vietnam's
   Ministry of Justice page for  citizenship  rights  of  children  born  to
   Vietnamese nationals outside Vietnam no longer lands in the  right  place
   and no detail is provided in the CPIN.

25. DFAT was aware of some assistance given to victims  of  sex  trafficking
   in the form of a one-off cash payment of up to  VND  1.5  million  (about
   �33), healthcare, training, legal aid and counselling, but provision  was
   variable.

26. At paragraph 8.3.1, the  CPIN  sets  out  evidence  about  women  living
   alone, having children without husbands.  The report stated  that  single
   mothers in the country still faced hardship,  discrimination  and  shame,
   but an article in Tuoi Tre News from September 2014 reported  that  there
   were mutual support groups in Ho Chi Minh City and in April 2017,  Xinhua
   reported that 'free, independent  and  open  minded'  single  women  were
   living alone and  childfree  in  cities.    Since  2003,  the  Vietnamese
   government had recognised their right to sperm donations and IVF, without
   the need for a partner or husband, but in 2018, Freedom  House's  Freedom
   in the World report noted that women continued to face discrimination  in
   wages and promotion.

27. At 8.4 the risk of retrafficking is considered.  Low skilled  women  who
   cannot obtain gainful employment remain vulnerable to  retrafficking,  as
   do children. At 8.4.1, the report says this:

         "8.4.1 ...because many  trafficking  victims  actually  know  their
         traffickers, the need for communities to reach out to their members
         is critical. [...] Because  of  official  condemnation  of  illegal
         prostitution  as  well  as  a  prohibition  on  emigrating  without
         notifying authorities, many survivors of trafficking are left  with
         few avenues to receive assistance. Often,  they  are  reluctant  to
         seek help for fear of further abuse by traffickers,  debt  bondage,
         punishment from government authorities for illegal border crossing,
         or stigma from being labelled a prostitute. This isolation and fear
         leaves them vulnerable to re-trafficking.' ...

         8.4.4    The USSD TiP Report 2018 noted that 'Endemic social stigma
         associated with victimhood and concerns over retribution  in  their
         local communities likely  further  discouraged  many  victims  from
         seeking or benefiting from protection services."

28. At 9.2, the September 2018 CPIN deals with  the  importance  of  the  h?
   kh?u  registration.  The respondent does not dispute its importance:

         "9.2.1   The 2017 DFAT Report stated that:

         'Ho  Kh?u  registration   is   initially   obtained   through   the
         registration of a person's birth with  the  village  or  provincial
         administrators. Officials use the registration system to  determine
         the levels of services provided to villages and provinces,  linking
         a person's right to access  government  healthcare,  education  and
         other services to their place of residence. Ho Kh?u registration is
         also essential for obtaining employment with the government  or  in
         state-owned enterprises. Although health  care  facilities  can  be
         accessed anywhere in Vietnam in emergency cases, public  facilities
         may turn away non-life-threatening cases where the  person  is  not
         properly registered. Access to schools is  determined  by  Ho  Kh?u
         registration and administration fees  may  apply  to  children  not
         registered  in  an  area  zoned  for  a  particular  school.  ...'"
                                     [Emphasis added]

29. At 9.2.2, the respondent relies on a  report  in  the  Vietnam  Law  and
   Legal Reform Magazine that the h? kh?u is to  be  scrapped  in  2020  and
   Vietnamese citizens managed  through  identification  numbers  on  a  new
   online national database:

         "'Under Government Resolution No. 112/NQ-CP issued  on  October  30
         [2017], Vietnamese citizens will be managed  solely  through  their
         identification numbers on a new online national database.  Personal
         transactions  will  be  performed   only   through   the   national
         identification (NI) number and all changes of personal  information
         will be updated on the  national  database  and  recorded  in  each
         person's NI number.

         'With the abolishment of the household registration book, many time-
         consuming administrative procedures  will  be  scrapped,  including
         formalities to change persons named in the book, obtain a new  book
         when  moving  houses,  deregister  permanent  residence  or  extend
         temporary residence. The procedures to declare temporary  residence
         to the commune-level police will also be abolished. Papers  proving
         family relationship or birth  certificates  to  register  permanent
         residence for children will not be needed either.'

         'To prepare for this, the Ministry of Public Security  is  striving
         to complete gathering personal information of all citizens by early
         2019, and by 2020, every citizen is expected to have a new ID  card
         with NI number.'"                                [Emphasis added]

Fact-Finding Mission report

30. In September 2019, the respondent reported  on  a  Fact-Finding  Mission
   carried out in Vietnam between 23 February and 1 March 2019, intended  to
   gather 'accurate and up-to-date information from a range of sources about
   trafficking of men, women and children, organised crime, state protection
   and the Buddhist Hoa Hao' in Vietnam. The information contained  in  that
   report is expressed to be complementary to the respondent's 2018 CPIN and
   other information  in  the  public  domain,  and  was  carried  out  with
   reference to the November 2010 European Union Common Guidelines on  Joint
   Fact-Finding Missions and  the  respondent's  own  internal  Fact-Finding
   Mission guidelines.

31. The Fact-Finding Team conducted 18 face to face interviews with a  total
   of 44 sources, all of whom were  given  the  opportunity  to  correct  or
   improve the notes taken by the Team.  The information in the Fact-Finding
   Mission report came from  undisclosed  diplomatic,  non-governmental  and
   academic sources, one completely  anonymised  source,  Hoa  Hao  Buddhism
   Managers, the IOM, Hagar  International  in  Vietnam,  the  Institute  of
   Migration, the Alliance Anti Traffic (AAT) in Ho Chi  Minh  City,  UN-ACT
   (the Secretariat  for  the  COMMIT  process  in  Cambodia,  China,  Laos,
   Myanmar, Vietnam and Thailand), and the Vietnamese Ministry of Labour and
   Social Affairs  (MOLISA),  the  Ministry  of  Public  Security.  Detailed
   interviews are set out at annex D to the report.

32.  All  of  the  sources  consulted  agreed  that  there  was  a   growing
   trafficking problem in Vietnam, despite the new  statutory  regime.   The
   Fact-Finding Team accepted that in Vietnam, trafficking was a big  issue,
   mainly involving young women and girls trafficked across  the  border  to
   China  for  forced  marriage  and/or  prostitution.   Hagar  and   UN-ACT
   confirmed that the victims were mainly from ethnic  minorities  in  North
   Vietnam and 90% were women.  About  75%  of  the  victims  recognised  by
   Vietnam had been trafficked to China.

33. IOM told the Fact-Finding Mission that victims of trafficking tended  to
   have borrowed money from friends and family and/or mortgaged property  to
   raise the cost of  migration.   Families  were  therefore  aware  that  a
   relative was travelling to the United Kingdom to access illegal work  but
   'they view the migration as an investment opportunity as the migrant will
   be paying off any debt owed and returning remittances  in  the  following
   years'.  IOM stated that some families did not realise that  the  illegal
   migrant could then end up in an exploitative situation'. Those trafficked
   to the United Kingdom were mainly men, and mainly for  work.   They  were
   seen as economic migrants, because they were sending remittances back  to
   Vietnam.  The evidence  indicated  a  growing  trend  to  traffic  better
   educated women, luring them into trafficking through social media.

34. Government sources  were  optimistic,  setting  out  the  new  statutory
   regime but saying  little  about  how  it  worked  in  practice.   MOLISA
   referred to Article 150 of the 2015 Penal Code of Vietnam which came into
   force in January 2018, and which reflects the  international  definitions
   of trafficking:

         "1. Any person  who  uses  violence,  threatens  to  use  violence,
         deceives, or employs other tricks to commit any  of  the  following
         acts shall face a penalty of 05 - 10 years' imprisonment:
         a)   Transferring or receiving human people for transfer for money,
         property, or other financial interests;
         b)   Transferring or receiving human  people  for  sexual  slavery,
         coercive labour, taking body parts, or for other inhuman purposes;
         c)   Recruiting, transporting,  harbouring  other  people  for  the
         commission of any of the acts specified in Point a or  Point  b  of
         this Clause."

   Article 151 excepts minors from proof of compulsion.

35. An undisclosed NGO said that most Vietnamese prosecutions under  Article
   150 related to persons trafficked to China: the  number  of  prosecutions
   relating to trafficking to  the  United  Kingdom  was  low,  because  the
   Article 150 definition was interpreted in Vietnam as requiring  a  victim
   to prove that they had been forced, threatened or lured to  go  with  the
   trafficker. Persons like the appellant, who had left willingly  but  been
   misled by the traffickers as to where they were going, were not likely to
   be protected under Article 150.  If people had lost their  ID  card  when
   trafficked, they could be supported to get a  new  card  and  loans  made
   available to enable them to start a business.

36. There were now 400 government-run shelters and 3  NGO-operated  shelters
   in Lao Cai, An  Giang,  and  Vinh  City.   Local  police  could  issue  a
   certificate to returning VOTs, enabling them to access  support,  subject
   to the Article 150 definition of  VOT.   In  2018,  500  people  received
   support.  Facilities support was provided by the  British  Embassy,  with
   finance through an unspecified Pacific NGO.

37. MOLISA could not say how  many  traffickers  had  been  prosecuted,  and
   referred the Fact-Finding Team to the courts for that information,  which
   is not included in the report.  MOLISA confirmed that there had  been  no
   successful prosecutions of persons who had induced VOTs  or  VOMs  to  go
   willingly to the United Kingdom, unless they were aged between 16 and  18
   and the Article 151 exemption for minors was applicable.

38. Diplomatic and NGO sources  were  less  optimistic.  Diplomatic  sources
   said this:

         "Sufficiency of protection for VOT

         [Vietnam] has made some improvements and  addressed  some  concerns
         but there remains significant concern about the pace  of  progress.
         There have been  advancements  at  provincial  level,  but  central
         government is not as organised, central government and  local  does
         not always align.  At provincial level, more  assistance  is  being
         requested.  They try in terms of protection,  but  victims  do  not
         tend to want to be identified due to social stigma. ...

         Vietnamese view of VOT from the United Kingdom

         The Vietnamese see many of those Vietnamese nationals  that  go  to
         the United Kingdom and remain there  illegally  as  being  economic
         migrants.   They  are  sending  remittances  back  to  Vietnam  and
         fuelling the economy. There is a  special  website  in  the  United
         Kingdom for Vietnamese to find jobs.  Why is the United Kingdom  so
         desirable?  There is a big diaspora in United  Kingdom,  they  know
         United Kingdom authorities treat them nicely, they know the  United
         Kingdom doesn't detain minors, and it will be easy to  get  a  job.
         In some of the provinces  it  appears  that  travelling  to  United
         Kingdom and abroad is similar to a rite of passage.  In many  cases
         where Vietnamese are encountered by authorities and believed to  be
         potential  VOTs  they  will  have  entered   the   United   Kingdom
         clandestinely."

39. At 5.2.1, the Fact-Finding Mission says this:

         "5.2.1 Hagar told the FFT that the  information  about  traffickers
         mainly comes from the victims  themselves  and  that  it  tends  to
         involve a spurious relationship or the promise of an education or a
         job.  In the majority of cases they travel to another country for a
         job and are then mistreated.  The government do not recognise  them
         as victims of trafficking as they went of their own accord.

         5.2.2   In relation to the VOTs who end up in the  United  Kingdom,
         IOM confirmed that people smugglers provide a service for a fee  to
         facilitate the irregular migration of persons  to  Europe  and  the
         United     Kingdom.      AAT     confirmed     that,     typically,
         traffickers/smugglers  are  paid  �30,00  to  facilitate  someone's
         passage into Europe.  The victim tends to fly to Moscow, where they
         are then transferred to Europe, this was also confirmed by IOM  who
         stated that there are multiple routes for migration, but  the  most
         common involves legal travel to Russia, after which  the  smuggling
         network facilitates their illegal migration across Europe."

40. MOLISA's statement that there are 300-400  cases  of  human  trafficking
   each year was an understatement as it took no account of those (like  the
   present appellant) who would not receive a police victim  certificate  on
   return because they were not considered to have been  trafficked  out  of
   Vietnam.

41.  Protection  programmes  recognised   the   difficulty   of   addressing
   trafficking  where  it  occurred.   The  authorities   had   focused   on
   prevention, highlighting the risks and methods  used  by  traffickers  in
   television documentaries  and  in  a  prevention  programme  in  schools.
   Government shelters provided 60 days' support in 400 mixed  sex  shelters
   for all types of vulnerable people, during which time they received  free
   health support, legal support, accommodation,  food,  and  help  to  find
   jobs, all of which were free.   Most  VOTs  did  not  stay  long  in  the
   shelters as they wanted to go home to their families.   Hagar  considered
   that there were not many shelters, not enough qualified counsellors,  and
   that the support  received  was  bureaucratic,  requiring  disclosure  of
   confidential information by the  victims,  and  resulting  in  a  support
   package of US $50 for each woman.

42. There was some evidence about the  difficulties  of  reintegration  from
   IOM, from AAT (who said  99.9%  of  victims  did  not  want  to  use  the
   shelters), and from MOLISA, which spoke of ongoing  assistance  for  VOTs
   leaving shelters.   Hagar could provide  vocational  training  and  small
   business loans: they supported 60 people at any one time,  not  all  VOTs
   and dependants, but also victims of domestic violence  and  sexual  abuse
   within Vietnam.  Hagar said  that  social  stigma  for  former  VOTs  was
   significant: Vietnam had a victim  blaming  culture  both  for  VOTs  and
   victims of domestic violence.   Hagar dealt with about 5  returnees  from
   the United Kingdom each year,  referred  by  the  Medaille  Trust,  their
   United  Kingdom  partner.   Mainly,  their  assistance  was  limited   to
   providing counselling over Skype after return.  Hagar did not  deal  with
   repatriation.  AAT received lists of those being returned and  were  able
   to organise training courses and check on  the  current  situation  of  a
   number of victims returned  from  the  United  Kingdom.   None  of  those
   consultees were aware of any re-trafficking.

43. As regards loans, MPS said that late payment of loans  could  result  in
   the lender hiring gangs to carry  out  debt  collection,  using  threats,
   destroying property, injury or humiliation, trouble at  home  or  at  the
   work place, or psychological terrorisation such as throwing dirt, sending
   funeral wreaths or coffins.  People so treated were too afraid to involve
   the police, but caused anxiety and insecurity for those who owed money.

44. A loan, once taken, was the debt of the  whole  family,  and  diplomatic
   sources said that 'where the loan is used to fund migration to the United
   Kingdom, the family in Vietnam sometimes get harassed if no repayment  is
   made'.  If a person relocated to avoid the gangs,  the  police  would  be
   able to trace them, and a criminal might be able to get  the  information
   from the police.

Respondent's case

45. Mr Bates for the respondent relied on paragraph 2.2.1 of  the  September
   2018 CPIN: he argued that there was sufficiency of protection for VOTs in
   Vietnam and disputed the opinion of Dr Tran to the contrary  effect.   Mr
   Bates acknowledged that the September 2019 Fact-Finding  Mission  report,
   while helpful, was an addendum and its sources were largely anonymous and
   anecdotal, with little or no reference or cross reference  to  background
   material.

46. Mr Bates recognised that the country  evidence  overall  indicated  that
   the following factors were  likely  to  lead  to  an  increased  risk  of
   retrafficking for women and girls from rural areas  (see  CPIN  September
   2018 at 2.4.1):

   a) An outstanding financial debt to the traffickers;

   b) Absence of a supportive family willing to take the appellant back into
      the family unit;

   c) The person having no other support network, no or little education  or
      vocational skills, mental  health  conditions  (which  may  have  been
      caused by experiences of  abuse  when  originally  trafficked)  and/or
      material and financial deprivation meaning that they would  be  living
      in poverty or conditions of destitution.

47. As regards the continuing risk to the  appellant  from  her  husband,  a
   long-term drug user whose current whereabouts were not  known,  Mr  Bates
   argued that the burden was on her to show evidence of continuing interest
   by him or risk from him.  Mr Bates argued that there was no ongoing  risk
   from the original traffickers and that the risk envisaged by the  expert,
   Dr Tran, was of re-trafficking from a different group of  traffickers  on
   return.  There was a functioning police force in  the  larger  cities  in
   Vietnam such as Ho Chi Minh City.

48. The September 2019 Fact-Finding Mission recorded that in  Vietnam  there
   were about 400 shelters for vulnerable people, which  must  therefore  be
   widely dispersed, although there was no  mention  of  a  shelter  in  the
   appellant's home area.   Mr Bates accepted that the absence of any family
   support  would  be  an  additional  adverse  factor,  material   to   the
   reasonableness of internal relocation:  the appellant  had  cut  off  all
   contact with her family and it was not clear whether if  contacted,  they
   would be supportive of her on return, nor whether the former  traffickers
   remained in contact with her family.

49. The CPIN had identified family support as a factor in lowering the  risk
   of re-trafficking. As to social stigma and the  risk  of  re-trafficking,
   the  respondent  relied  upon  sub-paragraphs  4.1.1  and  4.3.3  of  the
   September 2018 CPIN, and paragraphs 5.11, 5.3-5.7, and  5.8-5.10  of  the
   September 2019 Fact-Finding Mission report.

50. In relation to the h? kh?u booklet the respondent's September 2018  CPIN
   at 8.1.1 indicated that children  born  overseas  had  no  right  to  the
   obligatory residence permit and became 'illegal citizens, deprived of the
   right to education and health care'.  It  remained  unclear  whether  her
   husband's consent would be needed to re-register in a different place and
   to register the child (see Annex D of the Fact-Finding Mission  at  pages
   57-58): Mr Bates did not accept that such was the case.

51. Mr Bates sought to rely on paragraph 9.2 of the CPIN which  stated  that
   the h? kh?u  Family Register Booklets were due to be scrapped in 2020 and
   replaced with a system  of  national  identification  numbers  on  a  new
   national database,  following  completion  of  a  national  census.   The
   September 2019 Fact-Finding Mission had further  information  at  section
   4.1.1-4.1.4.

52. Mr Bates contended that on the evidence, it was  not  reasonably  likely
   that the appellant would be at risk on return from her husband,  or  from
   her previous traffickers, and there being no risk in the home  area,  the
   question of internal relocation did not arise.  There was no detailed  or
   current evidence of her mental health needs nor that family  support  was
   not available to her in Vietnam.

53. The respondent relied on the Marriage and  Family  Law  1986,  by  which
   single mothers became legally legitimate, and the country  evidence  that
   their children born abroad could be registered  as  Vietnamese  citizens.
   Many  single  mothers,  including  those  who  had  experienced  domestic
   violence, lived and worked independently in Vietnam.

54. The respondent asked the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.



Appellant's case

55. For the appellant, Mr Collins reminded the Tribunal that the  respondent
   in the refusal letter had accepted that the appellant was a member of two
   particular social groups:  former VOTs and former VOMs.  Mr Bates had not
   relied on assertion to  the  contrary  in  his  skeleton  argument.   The
   appellant's account of circumstances in her home area  was  accepted  and
   the Upper Tribunal should also accept the domestic violence risk  to  her
   from her husband.  It was not irrelevant that her  parents  and  children
   were no longer traceable in the home area.

56. The evidence was that after the appellant was spirited  out  of  Vietnam
   by the Hanoi trafficker, her husband threatened her family members at her
   parents' home.  He threatened then that he would find her,  wherever  she
   went: the appellant had been a significant source of income  to  him  and
   there was no social protection for victims of domestic violence which was
   regarded as a private matter in Vietnam.

57. The appellant had never asserted that she knew the details of the  price
   her father arranged with the original Hanoi trafficker.  Given  the  high
   cost  of  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  Vietnamese  people,  the
   appellant's fear that the sale of the family home might still  have  left
   the family with a debt to the traffickers which she had  been  unable  to
   help repay was not irrational.  There was a  reasonable  likelihood  that
   she was right: if she was, the  Fact-Finding  Mission  acknowledged  that
   debts to traffickers carried a risk of harm to family members or  to  the
   VOT/VOM themselves.

58. Regarding the h? kh?u issue, Mr Collins asked  the  Tribunal  to  prefer
   the evidence of Dr Tran that the system had not yet changed and  that  in
   order to access schooling and health care  for  her  United  Kingdom-born
   child, as well as other Social Services, the appellant would need to  try
   to get her h? kh?u separated from that of her  husband  and  Vietnam-born
   children.  Without it, she and the  United  Kingdom-born  daughter  would
   have significant difficulty in reintegrating in Ho Chi Minh City, despite
   her having previously been employed and having secondary education.

The legal context

59. I am aware that an appeal against the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal
   in Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA
   Civ 594 was heard in the Supreme Court on 21 November 2019 but  that  the
   Supreme Court's decision has not yet been handed down.  The issue  before
   the Supreme  Court  concerns  the  weight  to  be  given  to  a  negative
   Reasonable Grounds or  Conclusive  Grounds  decision,  not,  as  here,  a
   positive finding in the appellant's favour:

         "Where the Competent Authority for the  purposes  of  the  European
         Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (ECAT) has
         determined that a person is  not  a  victim  of  trafficking,  what
         effect does this have on the jurisdiction of a tribunal hearing  an
         appeal against a decision to remove that person to decide whether a
         person is a victim of trafficking?"

60. Since this appellant has been accepted to be a VOT/VOM, the decision  in
   the present appeal can be justly decided  without  awaiting  the  Supreme
   Court decision.

61. I have  had  regard  to  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  DC
   (trafficking: protection/human rights appeals) Albania [2019] UKUT  00351
   (IAC), handed down on 13 November 2019, which found that  the  Conclusive
   Grounds decision is part of the evidence which the  Upper  Tribunal  must
   assess in reaching its decision in this appeal, bearing in mind that  the
   decision of the Competent Authority is made to  the  higher  standard  of
   balance of probabilities.  A decision to that higher  standard  that  the
   appellant is a VOT/VOM is conclusive of that issue and the respondent has
   not sought to suggest otherwise.

Analysis

62. I approach the decision of this appeal on the basis that  the  appellant
   is a witness of truth and that her evidence can be accepted.  I  am  also
   satisfied, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  me,  including  the
   appellant's oral evidence, that she has  a  genuine  subjective  fear  of
   return to Vietnam, having  regard  to  her  history,  in  particular  her
   trafficking  for  prostitution  in  Russia,  the  domestic  violence  she
   experienced at her husband's hands before she left Vietnam, and the  fact
   that she will be returning with a third child who is  not  her  husband's
   daughter.

63. I remind myself that pursuant  to  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
   Rules HC395 (as amended):

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

64. In the present case, the appellant was subjected  to  beatings,  as  was
   her father, and to direct and indirect threats of serious harm  from  her
   husband, to whom she is still married.  Her parents and her children have
   disappeared.  I am not satisfied that I have been shown good  reasons  to
   consider that if the appellant returned to the home area,  the  husband's
   interest in her earning capacity and her duties as  his  wife  might  not
   revive, to like effect.  He may of course have  died  or  remarried,  but
   neither party was able  to  bring  evidence  about  that,  the  appellant
   because she is  no  longer  in  contact  with  her  home  area,  and  the
   respondent because such enquiries cannot be  made  without  creating  the
   very risk which the appellant  fears,  if  he  is  still  alive  and  her
   husband.

65. I accept, therefore, that there is a risk in the home area and  that  no
   family support is available to the appellant.  She is unwilling  to  live
   in Hanoi, where  the  original  trafficker  lives,  to  whom  she  thinks
   (probably rightly) that her family owes  a  large  amount  of  additional
   money.  I must consider therefore whether she can reasonably be  expected
   to make a new life for herself in Ho Chi Minh City with  her  5-year  old
   daughter.   On the plus side, she has worked before coming to the  United
   Kingdom, and in the  United  Kingdom  also,  when  she  could.   She  has
   secondary education.

66. I have considered the weight I should give to the  digitisation  of  the
   h? kh?u system said to be planned for 2020.  There are  two  reasons  why
   this carries no weight in the decision I have  to  make:   the  first  is
   that, as always, an international protection decision is made  on  an  ex
   nunc basis.  I am required to decide the risk to the appellant today, not
   in the future.  The second is that the  evidence  is  that  the  h?  kh?u
   system will be digitised following a  census  which  has  not  yet  taken
   place, and that Dr Tran's evidence was that it had already been  promised
   for some years and would probably be no more than an  online  version  of
   the same system.  The observations in the Fact-Finding Mission are to say
   the least, optimistic as to the amount of novation which might take place
   in the digital system.  I conclude that I need to make this  decision  on
   the basis of the h? kh?u system as it is now.

Country conclusions

67. The respondent in the  September  2018  CPIN  accepted  that  return  to
   Vietnam  would  place  an  appellant   at   risk   of   harm,   including
   retrafficking, in the following circumstances:

    (a)  An outstanding financial debt to the traffickers;

    (b)  Absence of a supportive family willing to take the appellant  back
    into the family unit;

    (c)  The person having no other support network, no or little education
    or vocational skills, mental health conditions  (which  may  have  been
    caused by experiences  of  abuse  when  originally  trafficked)  and/or
    material and financial deprivation meaning that they would be living in
    poverty or conditions of destitution.

68.  In relation to internal relocation, the Fact-Finding Mission  indicates
   that a woman living in a city who has never been married and has a  child
   born either by IVF or outside any long-term relationship may have  social
   support and legal support from networks of women who are  single  mothers
   by choice in Vietnam, although she should expect some level of stigma and
   discrimination.  Women who can work, and who are educated, will be  in  a
   better position.

69. Women are  secondary  citizens  and  although  their  rights  have  been
   strengthened in statute, enforcement in rural areas remains  problematic,
   with local authorities required to fund support out of local  funds,  and
   underreporting occurrences in their areas.

70. The risk is  higher  for  women  who  have  experienced  persecution  or
   serious harm in the home area, and in particular domestic violence, which
   communist Vietnam regards as a  private  matter.   The   police  and  the
   authorities are  unwilling  to  provide  support  for  domestic  violence
   complaints.

71. Internal relocation is not practical where there remains a risk  in  the
   home area from a family member, since a woman's h? kh?u is  held  by  her
   father or husband, who would be asked to allow her  to  separate  her  h?
   kh?u to the city where she relocates.  Any risk in the  home  area  would
   then be capable of being pursued wherever her internal relocation  option
   was exercised, if the family member in question  remained  interested  in
   pursuit.

72. A VOT/VOM who left Vietnam willingly, albeit having  been  tricked  into
   doing so, will not have the benefit of protection under  Article  150  of
   the Vietnamese Penal Code.  If a  debt  to  the  original  trafficker  is
   outstanding, it remains a family debt for which the trafficked woman  has
   shared responsibility, increasing the risk  of  harm  to  her  or  family
   members, and also making her vulnerable to  retrafficking,  although  the
   evidence of retrafficking is less clear.

Decision on appellant's appeal

73. Looking at the h? kh?u system as it stands, the appellant will  need  to
   obtain schooling and healthcare for  her  daughter  born  in  the  United
   Kingdom.  If she wishes to deregister  her  permanent  residence  on  her
   husband's h? kh?u, it is reasonably likely that he would have to be  made
   aware that she did so  and  (perhaps)  consent.   Given  the  history  of
   domestic violence which I have found to be credible, there is a real risk
   that he might choose to pursue her  and  the  child  born  outside  their
   subsisting marriage.

74. If her husband was not contacted, the appellant would have no  h?  kh?u,
   and it seems that she would not be able to re-register  her  foreign-born
   child as a Vietnamese citizen. The  child  would  need  to  be  added  to
   someone's h? kh?u to get access to health care, schooling, and a host  of
   social security issues.   There are temporary permits available but  they
   provide very limited protection and are on a short term rolling basis.

75. The appellant would not qualify for the financial support available  for
   VOTs, because of the interpretation which Vietnamese law and  the  police
   put on Article 150 of the  Vietnamese  Penal  Code,  excepting  from  the
   definition of trafficked persons anyone who left  Vietnam  willingly  but
   was tricked into doing so.  The support which  is  available  is  in  any
   event rather limited: given the huge numbers trafficked, a support of 500
   persons per year (just over one person from each  of  the  shelters,  for
   context) and Skype counselling for 65, does not indicate  that  there  is
   real  help  for  a  woman  in  this  appellant's  particularly  difficult
   position.

76. The appellant can expect  no  assistance  from  her  family  members  in
   Vietnam.  Her parents and her children are no longer in her home  village
   and, although she does not profess to be certain, it is reasonably likely
   that the sale of the family home did not raise the enormous sum asked  by
   the trafficker and that money remains due from her family to  him,  which
   will not have been helped by her escaping the United Kingdom traffickers.
    At the very least, she faces a fragile existence in a city, either as  a
   temporary resident, or with the risk of her husband finding her,  or  the
   traffickers, who would regard her as still in debt to them.

77. Internal relocation is not a reasonable option for  this  appellant  and
   her daughter, and she cannot be expected to return  to  her  former  home
   area, where she was previously ill treated and there is no good reason to
   think the risk will not recur. The  appellant's  asylum  claim  therefore
   succeeds. She does not qualify  for  humanitarian  protection,  which  is
   available only where asylum is not.

78. There  were  no  section  55  arguments  advanced  in  relation  to  the
   appellant's United Kingdom-born daughter and I do not  consider  that  on
   this factual matrix, the child's best interests can properly be separated
   from those of her mother.

79. Neither party asked me to consider Article 8 ECHR.   For  the  avoidance
   of doubt, given the lack of any evidence about  the  appellant's  private
   life, I would have dismissed the human rights  appeal.   The  appellant's
   private life in the United Kingdom is very limited,  it  seems,  and  all
   developed while she was here without leave.  I am  required  to  give  it
   little  weight  with  regard  to  section  117B(4)  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

DECISION

80. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     19 December 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
