
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03067/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 December 2016                |On 03 January 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     S J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene (Counsel) instructed by Kothala & Co,
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of any information regarding
   the proceedings which would be likely to lead members of  the  public  to
   identify the appellant, because the appellant is a child and to  preserve
   the anonymity order made in the First-tier Tribunal.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Young promulgated on 11 October 2016, which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The  Appellant  was  born  on  15  August  1999  and  is  a  national  of
   Afghanistan.

4. On  14  March  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Young ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  11  November  2016  Judge
Parkes gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The grounds argue that the Judge had not made  findings  about  the
      Appellant's family including his mother and their ability  to  receive
      him on return and speculated on the ability of more distant  relatives
      with whom he had no contact and where the relationships were  unclear.
      It was also procedurally unfair the findings were made on the question
      of contact with the Appellant's mother without the point  having  been
      put to the  witnesses  in  evidence  and  that  the  Appellant's  best
      interests had not been adequately considered. It is also  argued  that
      return would be in breach of article 15(c)


      4. The first ground has most merit as return has to be feasible and to
      someone able to receive a minor, it is arguable that  the  Judge  made
      his findings on an inadequate basis. The other grounds may be argued.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the Appellant, Mr Anyene moved the grounds of appeal. He took  me
to [111] of the decision where, he told me, the Judge acknowledged that  the
appellant's home area is one of the most volatile areas in  Afghanistan.  He
reminded me that the appellant is under the age of 18  years,  and  told  me
that the Judge failed to take proper account of the attempts  to  trace  the
appellant's family,  or  of  the  reception  facilities  available  for  the
appellant (as an unaccompanied minor) in Afghanistan. He told  me  that  the
Judge was incorrect to find that extended family members  are  available  to
support the appellant on return to Afghanistan.

(b) Mr Anyene told me that the decision is tainted by procedural  unfairness
because at [122] and [125] the Judge makes  findings  that  extended  family
members are available to  support  the  appellant  because  of  the  contact
between the appellant's mother and the appellant uncle. He argued  that  the
Judge, in making those findings, places reliance on factors which  were  not
put to the appellant for his comment.

(c) Mr Anyene argued that the decision betrays a  failure  to  consider  the
best interests of the child and urged me  to  set  the  decision  aside  and
substitute my own decision.

7. Mr Nath, for the respondent, told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law, material or otherwise. He took me through [122] to  [138]  of
the decision and told me that there the Judge carefully  considered  all  of
the evidence before reaching conclusions which were well  within  the  range
of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge. He  asked  me  to  dismiss
the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. At [129] & [130] of the decision, the Judge finds that enquiry  has  been
made by the Red Cross for the appellant's mother, and that that enquiry  has
been unsuccessful.

9. Between [136] & [138] the Judge considers whether or  not  the  appellant
is an unaccompanied minor. At [136] of the decision, the Judge  states  that
consideration of the case in the preceding [135] paragraphs  does  not  help
in determining whether or not the appellant has family  in  Afghanistan.  He
commences [137] by saying

      but there are obviously extended family members in Kabul. They are not
      directly related to him but are certainly well known to his  uncle  in
      the UK being his (the uncle's) wife's family.....

10. At [138] the Judge concludes that the appellant's uncle could leave  the
UK and return to Kabul with the appellant to introduce the appellant to  the
uncle's wife's family in Kabul.

11. In HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced  recruitment
by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  378
(IAC)  the  Tribunal  said  that  where  a  child  has close  relatives  in
Afghanistan who have assisted him in  leaving  the  country,  any  assertion
that such family members are uncontactable or are unable to meet  the  child
in Kabul and care for  him  on  return, should  be  supported  by  credible
evidence of efforts to contact those family members and their  inability  to
meet and care for the child in the event of return.

12. In this case there is a finding of fact that the Red Cross  cannot  find
the appellant's mother and his sisters. The potential  for  the  appellant's
uncle's in-laws to take the appellant in is not the prospect  of  assistance
from close relatives in Afghanistan.  Unfortunately,  the  Judge's  findings
cannot be said to be evidence based.  Between  [120]  and  [131]  the  Judge
expresses dissatisfaction with the evidence  and  finds  inconsistencies  in
the evidence, but it is from those identified gaps in the evidence that  the
Judge draws the assumption that relatives,  who  he  identifies  as  distant
relatives, are available to support the appellant.

13. There was no clear evidence of the identity of the distant relatives  in
Kabul, or their circumstances      and  their  ability  to  look  after  the
appellant until he attains majority. The Judge's findings at [137]  &  [138]
are really an assumption drawn from his findings that the appellant and  his
uncle are neither credible nor reliable witnesses. They are not,  therefore,
findings of fact that there are close family members in Kabul who  are  able
to take care of the appellant.

14. In HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced  recruitment
by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  378
(IAC) the  Tribunal  said  that  (i)  Children  are  not  disproportionately
affected by  the  problems  and  conflict  currently  being  experienced  in
Afghanistan. Roadside blasts, air-strikes, crossfire,  suicide  attacks  and
other war-related incidents do not impact more  upon  children  that  upon
adult civilians; (ii)  While forcible recruitment by the Taliban  cannot  be
discounted as a risk, particularly in areas of  high  militant  activity  or
militant control, evidence is required to show that it is a  real  risk  for
the  particular  child  concerned  and  not  a  mere  possibility.   In   AA
(unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
held that (i) The evidence before the Tribunal does not alter  the  position
as described in HK and Others (minors -  indiscriminate  violence  -  forced
recruitment by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG  [2010]
UKUT 378 (IAC),  namely  that  when  considering  the  question  of  whether
children are disproportionately affected by the consequences  of  the  armed
conflict  in  Afghanistan,  a  distinction   has   to   be   drawn   between
children who were living with a family and those who are not.  Whilst it is
recognised that there are some risks to which children  who  will  have  the
protection of the family are nevertheless subject, in  particular  the  risk
of landmines and the risks of being trafficked,  they  are not of  such  a
level as to lead to the conclusion  that  all  children  would  qualify  for
international protection.  In arriving at this conclusion, account has  been
taken of the necessity to have regard to the  best  interests  of  children.
However, the  background  evidence  demonstrates  that  unattached  children
returned to Afghanistan, depending upon their individual  circumstances  and
the location to which they are returned, may be exposed to risk  of  serious
harm, inter alia from indiscriminate violence,  forced  recruitment,  sexual
violence,  trafficking  and  a  lack  of  adequate  arrangements  for  child
protection.  Such risks will have to be taken into account  when  addressing
the question of whether a  return  is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a
primary  consideration  when   determining   a   claim   for   international
protection.

15. I must conclude that inadequate consideration has been given firstly  to
whether or not the appellant is an unaccompanied minor and secondly  whether
or not there are  either  adequate  reception  facilities  or  close  family
relatives available to help the appellant in Kabul. The appellant  was  born
in  August  1999.  Reception  facilities  and  the  availability  of   close
relatives remain central to this case until he reaches his 18th birthday  in
August 2017. The failure to consider those  two  important  factors  and  to
reach evidence-based conclusions amounts to a material error of law. I  must
therefore set the decision promulgated on 11 October 2016 aside

16. I consider whether there is sufficient material before me to  enable  me
to substitute my own decision but find that I cannot do so  because  further
fact finding is required about the reception facilities  for  a  17-year-old
in Kabul and the  availability  of  close  relatives  there.  The  appellant
insists that he is an unaccompanied  minor.  It  is  for  the  appellant  to
produce evidence of the relatives that he has in Kabul  and  the  degree  of
relationship to those relatives.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Young.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  11  October  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 29
December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

