
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03622/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre, Priory   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Courts                                       |                              |
|On 5th February 2020                         |On 2nd March 2020             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     z a
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Young-Harry, promulgated on 8th August 2019, following a  hearing
    at Birmingham Priory Courts on 21st June 2019.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, was born on 22nd  May  1998,
    and is a male.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    dated 1st March 2018.  The decision refused the Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph  339C  of
    HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that the Taliban in Afghanistan
    had a specific interest in him because his elder brother worked for the
    Afghan Government and the army.  The Taliban therefore threatened  him.
    They came to his  home  to  search  for  him  on  two  occasions.   The
    Appellant's father told them he was not in.  Eventually  they  abducted
    him.  He was detained.  He escaped.  He returned back to his home,  and
    from there he was able to flee and come to the United Kingdom and  make
    his application for asylum and humanitarian protection.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not accept the Appellant's claim to be a credible one for
    a  whole  range  of  reasons.   These  reasons  are  set  out  in   the
    determination from paragraphs 12 to 33, together with a firm  confusion
    on those reasons reached at paragraph 34.

 5. The judge quite simply does not  accept  the  Appellant's  claim  that,
    whereas the Appellant's argument was that the Taliban  were  interested
    in him despite the fact that his elder brother was left  unmolested  on
    grounds that he works for the Afghan  Government,  that  they  took  no
    interest in his father either.  The judge did not find it credible that
    the Taliban left his father equally unmolested as  his  elder  brother.
    As the judge concluded, "This simply does not follow" (paragraph 12).

 6. It was moreover held that the Appellant could not explain why his elder
    brother continued to work for the Government and the army  despite  the
    fact that threats were received and two visits were made to the  family
    home (paragraph 13).  Furthermore, the judge was concerned  that  on  a
    number of occasions the Appellant changed his evidence, and had earlier
    claimed in a screening interview that his brother had been in the  army
    for three-and-a-half years before his problems began.  However, he then
    changed his evidence, when he found that this did not assist his claim,
    to stating that his problems began  a  few  months  after  his  brother
    joined the army (paragraph 14).

 7. The judge went further on to say that as far as the Appellant's account
    of his abduction was concerned, this was not credible  because  he  had
    stated that his mobile phone was left with him when  he  was  abducted,
    because he kept his phone in his pocket, so that when he was taken away
    he still had the phone on him.  It was also held  that  "The  Appellant
    would have me believe that it was normal for  him  to  sleep  with  his
    mobile phone in his pocket; I do not accept this" (paragraph 15).

 8. The judge went on to say that the Appellant even stated that there were
    other detainees at the camp and that they:-

         "also had their own phones with them, however their SIM cards  were
         removed, as the Appellant's was  when  he  arrived.   I  find  this
         unusual.  The Appellant could not explain why detainees would  have
         phones with them at all, given their predicament" (paragraph 16).

 9. There was additionally a  finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant
    changed his account when, just two or three days at the camp  following
    his detention, he claimed not to have been subject to supervision which
    allowed him to move freely and then  eventually  to  escape  (paragraph
    18).

10. Once he had escaped he claimed to have run for a whole  hour  from  the
    camp before he encountered a taxi , "yet no-one chased  him",  and  the
    judge did not find it credible that his captors could not catch up with
    him (paragraph 19).  It was not found  as  credible  that  no-one  came
    looking for the Appellant (paragraph 20) after that.  The expert report
    by Dr Giustozzi states that the  Taliban  did  not  ordinarily  recruit
    people by force.  They used subtle methods.  They added people to their
    "blacklist", but they gave them at least one warning, and sometimes  up
    to five warnings, and the factor was that the Appellant's name was  not
    consistent with what Dr Giustozzi had stated (paragraph 22).  For these
    reasons, the appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application which  are  cumbersome  and  badly  drafted,
    state that the judge made credibility findings  on  the  basis  of  the
    account given by a 15 year old Appellant who had been kidnapped by  the
    Taliban, and in circumstances where the judge ended up imposing his own
    views as to what may or may not have happened at a camp in Afghanistan,
    which was a misuse of his judicial authority.

12. On 14th October 2019 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    it was arguable that the operative reason of the judge was  based  upon
    her view of the plausibility or inherent likelihood of the  Appellant's
    case.  It was, however, trite that in asylum law that judges should  be
    slow to impose their own cultural expectations on the actions of people
    in a very different context.  The judge arguably did this  in  relation
    to whether the Afghan boy would be allowed to  sleep  with  his  mobile
    phone in his pocket at night, and as to whether detainees at a  Taliban
    camp would be able to retain their mobile phones SIM-free (at paragraph
    16).  The judge also  arguably  imposed  her  own  expectation  on  the
    Appellant's abductors and what his  knowledge  of  them  would  be  (at
    paragraph 27).

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 5th February 2020, Mr Toora,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant handed up a skilfully drafted skeleton argument
    which he placed reliance upon.

14. In essence what the skeleton argument stated was that the Appellant was
    a 15 year old Afghan boy, and the judge's findings of fact in  relation
    to this  evidence  were  unwarranted  because  there  were  a  host  of
    authorities such as SM [2005] UKAIT 00116, which worked to  the  effect
    that the judge has to look at all the evidence in the round, and to try
    and grasp it as a whole, in order to  see  how  that  fitted  together,
    rather than to look at it piecemeal.

15. There was also the case of KS [2014] UKUT 00552, where the Tribunal had
    held that the "benefit of the doubt" applied in asylum cases and should
    be  given  proper  effect  so  that  there  is  a  "positive  role  for
    uncertainty".  Insofar as it was suggested that the Appellant had  told
    "lies", and that this impacted on the  credibility  of  the  Appellant,
    attention should be drawn to MA (Somalia) [2010]  UKSC  49,  where  the
    Supreme Court had held that "So the significance of lies will vary from
    case to case.  In some cases, the AIT may conclude that a lie is of  no
    great consequence ....".

16. Mr Toora submitted that that was the position here.  Secondly, he  went
    on to argue that the judge placed a burden on a  15  year  old  boy  to
    explain aspects of the claim that he would have  had  little  knowledge
    about.  For example, it was said  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    explain why the Taliban should have a specific interest in him and  not
    in the rest of his family (paragraph 12).   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal
    had wrongly put the burden on the Appellant to explain why his  brother
    continued to work for the  Government  and  the  army  despite  threats
    received in two visits to the family home  by  the  Taliban  (paragraph
    13).  In the same way,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  lack  of
    documentary evidence of his brother's  employment  with  the  army  (at
    paragraph 18).  The judge was also wrong in stating that "after only 48
    hours following his kidnapping, his captors would no longer be  closely
    supervising him" did not appear to be at all credible.

17. For his part, Mr Howells submitted that there was no Rule  24  response
    here.  Although permission was granted on the basis that the judge  had
    arguably erred by  imposing  her  own  "cultural  expectations  on  the
    actions of people in a very different context" the fact  was  that  the
    judge had made credibility findings from paragraph 12 onwards and there
    were also several  material  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, together with his changing his evidence  dramatically,  which
    formed a proper basis for the judge to conclude as  she  did.   It  was
    also incorrect to say that the judge had not  taken  into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant was a 15 year old child, because the  judge  at
    the outset (at paragraph 8) had highlighted this very  fact.   Finally,
    even if the Appellant was to be believed in every way,  the  judge  had
    drawn attention to the case of AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118, which confirmed that the Appellant can safely return
    to  Kabul.   Therefore,  internal  relocation  was  available  to   the
    Appellant.

18. In reply, Mr Toora submitted that it was impossible to know why certain
    events took place as they did.  For example, if the  Taliban  took  SIM
    cards out of the telephones of the detainees, it was  not  possible  to
    know whether they intended to use these  SIM  cards,  and  it  was  not
    possible to know what their own reasons were for this.   The  fact  was
    that the Appellant was abducted.  He was taken to a Taliban  camp.   He
    was able to escape in the manner that he has properly explained, and he
    was then able to return home from where he fled to  the  UK.   Finally,
    the Appellant could not return to Kabul as was being suggested  by  the
    judge (at paragraph 34) because as his witness  statement  makes  clear
    (at paragraph 12) he is known in Kabul and was without any relatives or
    material support.  He has to rely on other people.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I come to this conclusion notwithstanding Mr Toora's welcome
    balanced skeleton argument before me and the submissions  that  he  has
    made.  My reasons are as follows.

20. First, although permission was granted on the basis that it  was  trite
    in asylum law  that  judges  should  not  impose  "their  own  cultural
    expectations on the actions of people in a very different  context",  I
    fail to see how that is the case here.  The criticism in this regard is
    specifically in relation to the Appellant being  allowed  to  keep  his
    telephone with him (at paragraph 15).  However, this has to be read  in
    conjunction with the next statement,  namely,  that  there  were  other
    detainees at the camp who "also had their own phones with them, however
    their SIM cards were removed, as the Appellant's was when he arrived".

21. The judge was entitled to conclude that this was indeed "unusual".   It
    was unusual because the  Appellant  was  dealing  with  a  particularly
    brutal regime.  It was open to the judge to conclude that  it  did  not
    make sense why great effort should be taken to remove the SIM cards but
    then have the telephones themselves returned to their owners.  However,
    the matter does not just rest there.  The entirety of  the  Appellant's
    claim has to be looked at and the findings by  the  judge  have  to  be
    placed in that context.

22. In this regard, what the judge concluded was not a cultural  imposition
    of his own views on that of the  Appellant  at  all.   The  Appellant's
    account was that his family had been visited on two occasions and  they
    had been threatened.  Yet, his elder brother continued to work for  the
    Afghan Government and his father was not at any risk at all.  The judge
    was entitled to conclude that "This simply does not follow"  (paragraph
    12).  The Appellant's brother continued to work with the army  and  the
    Afghan Government (paragraph 13) and the judge was entitled to conclude
    that this also was not indicative of any threat  being  levied  at  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant had also changed his evidence  (paragraph  14
    and paragraph 18).  The account given by the judge that  the  Appellant
    was able to escape after 48  hours  of  abduction  with  no-one  coming
    looking after him (at paragraph 20)  was  one  that  was  open  to  the
    Appellant.

23. However, most importantly, the fact that the judge makes  her  findings
    of fact by reference to the expert report of  Dr  Giustozzi,  that  the
    Taliban operate by ordinarily  recruiting  people  by  subtle  methods,
    rather than by force (at paragraph 22) was  one  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to.  Although Mr Toora properly refers me to a list of
    cases where it has been held that a decision maker must take a cautious
    approach to making findings of fact in  such  context,  and  especially
    where a child is concerned, I see no evidence that the  judge  has  not
    done exactly that.  The findings made by the judge were ones that  were
    open to her.

24. In conclusion, I note that Mr Toora in his reply  to  Mr  Howells,  had
    said that the Appellant could not be returned to Kabul because  he  had
    no family support network there.  However, the judge rejected this.  He
    held that:-

         "I find that the Appellant does have a family  support  network  in
         Afghanistan.  On his return to Kabul, the Appellant and his  family
         can make the necessary arrangements to have him return  to  Baghdad
         to join his family.  In the alternative, the appellant  can  remain
         in Kabul, where he will be safe and can be assisted by  his  family
         in establishing himself there" (paragraph 34).

    That conclusion too was open to the judge.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not amount to an error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

26. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th February 2020
