
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03836/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd September 2016                       |On 6th December 2016          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                MR KHALID [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. D Ball, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Oliver promulgated on 27th June  2016,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse
       the appellant's claim for asylum.


Background


    2. The appellant is a Somali national and a member of  the  Reer  Hamar,
       sub-clan Shanshi, sub-sub clan Abdalla Imaiylely.  The appellant  had
       previously lived in Somalia in the  Hamarweyne  district,  Mogudishu.
       When war broke out in Somalia in 1991, the appellant  was  away  from
       his family and they became separated.  When he tried to return  home,
       the appellant claimed that he was kidnapped by  the  Hawiye  militia,
       and detained for two weeks. He was forced to work with  them  like  a
       slave and  was  beaten  and  mistreated  by  them  until  a  friendly
       neighbour paid a bribe for his release. He  later  learned  that  his
       sister had been killed and that his family had fled.


    3. The appellant left Somalia in 1994 and travelled to Yemen.  He worked
       as a car washer for 21 years, moving from one place  to  another.  He
       claims that the police detained him for seven days in about 2000, and
       the appellant claims that they tortured him in detention  and  forced
       him to clean the police  station  area.  His  friends  paid  for  his
       release. There were about 10 other occasions when he was  caught  and
       forced to pay a bribe in Yemen.


    4. Whilst living in Yemen the appellant married Gebrehawariat Wammin, an
       Ethiopian national, and he has two daughters from that  marriage.  At
       the end of 2014 when his wife told him that her father was very  sick
       in Ethiopia, the appellant arranged for their passage to Ethiopia, by
       boat.  The appellant remained in Yemen.  When the civil war broke out
       in Yemen in March 2015, the appellant claims that  he  suffered  very
       badly, because he was unable to get any medication for his  diabetes.
       He arranged with an agent to leave the country and  he  travelled  to
       the UK where he knew that his parents and siblings were  living.  The
       appellant arrived in the UK on 18th June 2015 and claimed  asylum  on
       23rd June 2015.


    5. The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the respondent on 4th
       December 2015 and it was that refusal that was  the  subject  of  the
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant was represented
       at the hearing of his appeal.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge sets out the background to  the  appeal
       at paragraphs [13] to [20] of his decision.  At  paragraphs  [22]  to
       [32] of his decision, the Judge sets out the evidence that  he  heard
       from the appellant, his father, his brother and sister.


    7. Having recorded the evidence and the legal framework, the Judge  sets
       out his findings and conclusions at paragraphs [34] to  [44]  of  his
       decision.  At paragraph [34] of his decision the Judge found that the
       appellant is related to his family in the UK, all of whom  have  been
       accepted as refugees,  as  he  claims.   The  Judge  found  that  the
       appellant was mistreated as he claims, although  the  degree  of  his
       mistreatment is difficult to measure from the  meagreness  of  detail
       that he has supplied.


    8. The Judge then turned to the risk upon return and had regard  to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in the country  guidance  decision  of
       MOJ & others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442.   At
       paragraph [36] the Judge states:


             "...Generally, an  ordinary  citizen  returning  to  Mogadishu
             would face no Article 3  harm  requiring  protection  and,  in
             particular, would not be at real risk, simply  on  account  of
             having lived in a European location for a period of  time,  of
             being viewed with suspicion as a supporter of Al  Shabab,  who
             were no longer a power in the city. The significance  of  clan
             membership  had  changed   and   there   was   no   clan-based
             discriminatory treatment even for minority clan members. There
             was no article 15� risk. A checklist was  set  out  for  those
             with no family to return to. Relevant to  this  appellant  are
             his prospects of securing a livelihood and the availability of
             emittances from abroad. In this respect he is only 44 and  has
             shown a good work ethic in the Yemen.


    9. The Judge concluded at paragraph [37] of his decision, that  whatever
       may have happened over 20 years ago, the appellant  will  not  be  at
       risk of persecution  or  corresponding  Article  3  ill-treatment  on
       return.


   10. The Judge went  on  at  paragraphs  [38]  to  [44]  to  consider  the
       appellant's claim under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.  At paragraph [38] the
       Judge states:


             "The respondent has accepted that he suffers from  diabetes  2
             and that the insulin with which she has been treated for  many
             years is not available there. He has  not,  however,  provided
             evidence that he is dependent on insulin and, according to the
             World Health  Organisation  Diabetes  Country  Profiles  2016,
             although insulin is not  generally  available  in  the  public
             health sector, Metformin is. Although it is harsh,  a  medical
             article 3 claim requires a more acute threat to life (D  v  UK
             [1997] 24 EHHR i23; N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453)."


   11. Insofar as the Article 8 claim  is  concerned,  the  Judge  found  at
       paragraph [42] of his decision that the appellant has  potentially  2
       claims to family life in the United Kingdom, but his real family life
       must be that he enjoys with his wife and children. Having  considered
       the appellant's family life with his parents and siblings in the  UK,
       and the priority that the family life that the appellant has with his
       wife and daughters must take, the Judge found at paragraphs [43]  and
       [44] of his decision:


             "43. It follows that I do not find that he has any  family  or
             private life, with which there would be  an  interference,  on
             which further to consider whether an article  8  medical  case
             could be considered. If I am wrong on this, however,  I  would
             find  that  his  removal  would  engage  the  convention  and,
             although it would be in accordance with the  law  and  in  the
             public interest for the  maintenance  of  effective  but  fair
             immigration, I must consider whether it would be proportionate
             in the final balancing exercising.


             44.  From the available background evidence I find that he has
             2 options on return to Africa. The first is to see whether  he
             can join his family in Ethiopia.  If  this  is  not  feasible,
             however, he  has  the  opportunity  to  return  to  Mogadishu,
             rebuild his life here  and  prepare  for  the  return  of  his
             family. Set within these possibilities I cannot see  that  his
             removal is disproportionate".


The grounds of appeal


   12. The appellant advances six grounds of appeal.  First, the Judge erred
       in his application of the country guidance set out in MOJ by  failing
       to take account of the fact that  the  appellant  has  not  lived  in
       Mogadishu for over 20 years. Second,  the Judge  failed  to  consider
       the appellant's insulin  dependent  diabetes  as  an  aspect  of  the
       reasonableness of the appellant returning to  Mogadishu.  Third,  the
       Judge proceeds upon a mistake of fact in his finding that  there  was
       no evidence of the appellant being dependent upon  insulin.   Fourth,
       the Judge erred in law in carrying out  his  own  internet  research.
       Fifth, the Judge erred in his consideration of Article 8 relating  to
       the physical and moral integrity of the appellant  and  finally,  the
       Judge erred in his assessment of the private and family life  of  the
       appellant by failing to consider the low threshold that applies,  and
       failing to give cognisance to the emotional upheaval  that  would  be
       caused by the family being separated again.


   13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Foudy
       on 20th July 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether or
       not the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  involved  the
       making of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


   14. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Ball  submitted  that  the
       critical grounds upon which he proposed to address  me  were  grounds
       three and four. That is, the Judge proceeds upon a mistake of fact in
       his finding that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant  being
       dependent upon insulin and the Judge erred in law in carrying out his
       own internet research. He submits that these errors upon the decision
       as a whole.   Mr Ball referred me to the letter dated  25th  November
       2015 addressed to the respondent  from  Ms  Ros  Thrussell,  a  Nurse
       Manager, that was in the appellant's bundle.   That  letter  confirms
       that the appellant's medication has been reviewed and his insulin  is
       necessary to control his Type 2 diabetes. The  letter  confirms  that
       the appellant "is dependent on all of his current medication  and  if
       the medication were  to  be  withdrawn  his  diabetes  control  would
       deteriorate which could be life threatening.".


   15. Mr Ball submits that the question for the Judge  was  whether  it  is
       reasonable for the appellant to  return  to  live  in  Mogadishu  and
       whether removal of the appellant would amount to  a  disproportionate
       interference with the appellant's Article 8 right  to  a  family  and
       private life, and would be in breach of  his  Article  3  rights.  He
       submits that at paragraph [38] of his decision,  the  Judge  proceeds
       upon the basis that the appellant has not provided evidence  that  he
       is dependent on  insulin.   The  Judge  notes  that  insulin  is  not
       generally available in the public health sector, but Metformin is. To
       that end, the Judge appears to  have  undertaken  his  own  research,
       without  considering  whether  Metformin  may   be   a   satisfactory
       substitute for insulin in the appellant's case.  Mr Ball submits that
       the mistake of fact goes to  the  heart  of  the  appeal  because  it
       impacts upon the Judge's  assessment  of  the  protection  claim  and
       whether return to Mogadishu is reasonable.  It also impacts upon  the
       Judge's assessment of the appellant's Article 3 and Article 8 claims.
        The appellant has no relatives remaining in Mogadishu, and the  fact
       that he is an insulin dependent diabetic,  has  an  impact  upon  all
       aspects of his life  including  his  ability  to  work  and  maintain
       himself.  Mr Ball submits that the appellant was previously  able  to
       work because he had access to the insulin that he  requires,  but  if
       that were not available, it would affect his ability to work  and  in
       turn his ability to take advantage of any economic boom, if  in  fact
       there is still an economic boom in Mogadishu.


   16. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 8th September 2016.
        The respondent opposes the appeal and submits  that  the  Judge  had
       noted from the outset that the appellant is from a minority clan  and
       has lived for the last  21  years  in  Yemen.   The  Judge  noted  at
       paragraphs [16] and [28] of his decision that the  appellant  claimed
       to have been a diabetic for 14/15 years.  The respondent submits that
       the Judge considered all aspects of the claim, and  dealt  with  them
       sufficiently in his decision.


   17. Mr Clarke submits that the Judge had proper  regard  to  the  country
       guidance decision in MOJ and that the Judge considered  the  relevant
       factors from the non-exhaustive list of relevant matters that are set
       out at paragraph (ix) of the headnote.  He submits that  the  country
       guidance decision of MOJ also makes it clear that generally, a person
       who is "an ordinary civilian'', on returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a
       period of absence will face no real risk of persecution  or  risk  of
       harm such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
       Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   Furthermore,  the
       country guidance  makes  it  clear  that  the  significance  of  clan
       membership in Mogadishu has changed. It is said  that  there  are  no
       clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based
       discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.  He submits
       that paragraphs (x) and (xi) of  the  headnote,  are  also  important
       because the country guidance makes it clear that it will be  for  the
       person facing return, to explain why he would not be able  to  access
       the economic opportunities that have been produced  by  the  economic
       boom, and that it will therefore, only  be  those  with  no  clan  or
       family support who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad,
       and who have no real prospect of securing access to a  livelihood  on
       return, who will face the prospect of living in circumstances falling
       below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.


   18. Mr Clarke accepted, rightly in my  view,  that  the  Judge  erred  in
       stating at  paragraph  [38]  that  the  appellant  has  not  provided
       evidence that he is dependent on insulin and that  the  Judge  should
       not have carried out his own research  as  to  what  alternatives  to
       insulin are available.  However, he submits neither of these  factors
       amount to a material error of law capable of affecting the outcome of
       the decision.  The fact that the appellant is  an  insulin  dependent
       diabetic, would not be capable of meeting  the  high  threshold  that
       applies in Article 3 and Article 8 medical cases.


Discussion


   19. The principles relating to the impact upon proceedings of  unfairness
       arising from error of fact were considered by the Court of Appeal  in
       R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal  held
       that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of a Judge  on  the
       grounds of error of law, it has to be satisfied that  the  correction
       of the error would have made a material difference to the outcome, or
       to the fairness of the proceedings.


   20. At paragraph [36] of his decision, the Judge refers  to  the  country
       guidance decision of MOJ  and  refers  to  the  matters  set  out  in
       paragraphs (ii), (viii) and (ix) of the headnote.  In particular, the
       Judge had regard to some of the  relevant  factors  identified  under
       headnote (ix).  The Judge noted that:


            "....Relevant to this appellant are his prospects of securing  a
            livelihood and the availability of remittances from  abroad.  In
            this respect he is only 44 and has shown a good  work  ethic  in
            the Yemen."


   21. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:
       set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the requirement for
       sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  headnote  (1):
       "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief  explanation  of  the
       conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal  is  determined,
       those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes
       sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


   22. In MOJ the Tribunal concluded that an ordinary civilian would face no
       real risk of persecution on return and that any ordinary  citizen  of
       Mogadishu would be able to reduce  personal  exposure  to  risk.   At
       (vii) the Tribunal said:


             "A person returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of  absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer."


   23. At (ix) the Tribunal said:


             "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             the circumstances. These considerations will include, but  are
             not limited to:


                   circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;


                   length of absence from Mogadishu;


                   family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;


                   access to financial resources;


                       prospects of securing a livelihood, whether  that  be
                  employment or self-employment;


                   availability of remittances from abroad;


                   means of support during the time spent in the UK;


                       why his ability to fund the journey to  the  west  no
                  longer enables an appellant to secure financial support on
                  return."


   24. At paragraphs [36] and [37] of his decision,  the  Judge  made  brief
       findings that whatever may have  happened  over  20  years  ago,  the
       appellant will not be at  risk  of  persecution  on  return.  It  was
       however incumbent upon the Judge to conduct a careful  assessment  of
       the appellant's circumstances.  The Judge was assessing the  risk  to
       someone whom was accepted to be a minority clan member, who had  been
       away from Mogadishu for a period of some 20 years and someone who  is
       without family support in Mogadishu.


   25. In my judgment, there is no such careful analysis  in  the  decision.
       Most of the matters referred to in (ix) were  not  addressed  by  the
       Judge. The Judge focused  simply  on  the  appellant's  prospects  of
       securing a  livelihood  and  the  availability  of  remittances  from
       abroad, presumably, his family in the UK.  Those are plainly relevant
       factors and ones that might weigh significantly against the appellant
       but the Judge did not consider the other factors referred to in  that
       sub-paragraph.  It may well be that a careful assessment would result
       in the same decision being reached, but in my judgment, the appellant
       is entitled to that careful analysis in  determining  the  risk  upon
       return.


   26. The guidance given in MOJ was that  relocation  in  Mogadishu  for  a
       person of a minority clan with no former links to the city, no access
       to funds and no other form of  clan,  family  or  social  support  is
       unlikely to be realistic as, in the absence of means to  establish  a
       home and some form of ongoing financial support there will be a  real
       risk of having no alternative but to live in makeshift  accommodation
       within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of  having  to
       live in conditions  that  will  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian
       standards.  I accept that this guidance is relevant to a person of  a
       minority clan with no former links to the city, whereas the appellant
       has previously  lived  in  Mogadishu.   However  the  fact  that  the
       appellant has been absent for a considerable number of years may well
       be relevant and required careful analysis.


   27. I can take the appellant's remaining grounds of appeal together since
       grounds two, three, four and five are all  are  linked  to  paragraph
       [38] of the Judge's decision that  the  appellant  has  not  provided
       evidence that he is dependent on insulin and, although insulin is not
       generally available in the public health sector, Metformin is.  There
       plainly was evidence before  the  Judge  that  the  appellant  is  an
       insulin dependent diabetic. The Judge noted at paragraph [38] of  his
       decision that the respondent has accepted that the appellant  suffers
       from diabetes 2 and that the insulin with which he has  been  treated
       for many years, is not available  in  Somalia.    The  Judge  rightly
       noted at paragraph [38] that although it is harsh, a medical  Article
       3 claim requires a more acute threat to life.  The Judge went  on  to
       consider whether the appellant qualifies for the elusive requirements
       of an Article 8 medical case and in my judgement, it was open to  the
       Judge to find that the high thresholds were not met.  On its  own,  I
       do not consider that the mistake of fact would  be  material  to  the
       Judge's assessment of the appellant's Article 3 and 8 claims, but  in
       my judgement, the availability of medication to treat the appellant's
       diabetes, is capable of being a relevant factor in the assessment  of
       the risk upon return.  The Judge does not appear to  have  considered
       whether the fact that the insulin with which the appellant  has  been
       treated for many years, is not available is Somalia, has  any  impact
       upon the assessment of the risk upon return.


   28. It follows that in my judgement, the Judge erred in law in failing to
       give adequate reasons for his conclusion that the appellant will  not
       be at risk of persecution upon return to Somalia.  The  determination
       is set aside.


   29. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having considered paragraph 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice
       Statement of 25th September 2012.


Notice of Decision


   30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   31. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal.


   32. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia         6th December 2016



FEE AWARD


As the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  there  was  no  fee
award. I have remitted the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.   No  fee
award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by the First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia         6th December 2016
