

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/03666/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                 |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th September 2018                  |  On 18th October 2018              |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           Suhail Najem Abed Abed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Citizens Advice Bureau
(Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Suhail Najem Abed Abed, was born on  25  September  1977
    and is a male citizen of Iraq.  He claims to have arrived in the United
    Kingdom in September 2017 when he claimed asylum.  On 2 March  2018,  a
    decision was made by the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge J Austin) which, in a decision which is  dated  13  May
    2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  I shall deal with the  second  ground
    first for reasons which I trust will become clear.  To a large  extent,
    the appellant's appeal turned on his credibility  as  a  witness.   The
    appellant claims to have been a member of  the  Ba'ath  Party  in  Iraq
    under Saddam Hussein.  The appellant claims that he will be  prosecuted
    and/or killed or injured if returned to Iraq on account  of  his  party
    membership.  The appellant claims that he was forced to join the Ba'ath
    Party in 2003.  In the same year he had been dismissed from his post at
    the University of Basra because he was a party  member.   Judge  Austin
    records [29] the appellant having said in evidence that,  "the  militia
    had a list of party members and killed everyone on  the  list  in  July
    2003.  The appellant escaped to Jordan for two weeks and then came back
    to face the problem and say it was not his fault.  In 2009  he  changed
    his surname in order to protect himself and in the same year he thought
    to emigrate but remained in Iraq".  The appellant had  first  travelled
    to the United Kingdom in December 2012 to accompany his  wife  who  was
    studying for a doctorate in this country.

 3. The appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  focused  upon  [77]  of  Judge
    Austin's decision which reads:

         The appellant's own account is that his particular risk arises as a
         result of his association with the Ba'ath Party at  the  University
         of Basra.  He gives an account of former colleagues being  targeted
         and killed as a result of their involvement with the Ba'ath  Party.
         He has produced documents which he suggests show his name alongside
         the name of others who have been targeted.  I place  little  weight
         on these documents.  Originals have not been produced of them,  but
         more particularly I am concerned that the point raised in regard to
         the appellant's change of name which he suggests was done in  order
         to protect himself because he was on a list, a list which was  then
         used for targeting persons for violence rather than  for  exclusion
         is a process of deeper  application.   The  evidence  is  that  the
         appellant was travelling freely as early as 2010 and  the  evidence
         in regard to his change of name is not consistent with his  account
         as to why and when he did so.  He appears to have changed his  name
         several years before according to the evidence submitted  with  the
         claim.  Further, his explanation for failing to mention that he had
         used a different name before undermines his credibility as I do not
         accept he was being asked about passport names but whether  he  was
         or had been known by a different name.  The fact that he claims  to
         have changed his name for  a  protection  reason  would  have  been
         uppermost in his mind, if it were true.

 4. Mr Holmes, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that the appellant
    had not "failed to mention" change of name.   Indeed,  at  the  hearing
    before  Judge  Austin,  cross-examination  on  this  point   had   been
    terminated  by  the  judge  at  counsel's  request  because  the   Visa
    Application Form which had been the subject of the  questions  had  not
    required the appellant to provide details of any  previous  names.   Mr
    Holmes submitted there was no inconsistency in the names given  by  the
    appellant in his screening and asylum interviews.  Secondly, Mr  Holmes
    submits that it is not clear why the judge considered that  the  change
    of name was "not  consistent"  with  other  parts  of  the  appellant's
    account.

 5. Responding to those submissions, Mr Tan, for the  Secretary  of  State,
    acknowledged that the appellant  had  said  in  various  parts  of  his
    evidence that he had changed his name in order to protect himself in or
    around 2009/2010.  However, the birth certificate of his child  (D16  -
    respondent's bundle) shows the name "Suhail Najem Abed".  The  document
    appears to be dated April 2008.  The appellant's graduation certificate
    (D22) again shows the name "Suhail Najem Abed" and is  dated  September
    2007.

 6. Mr Tan submitted that  the  fact  that  the  changed  name  appears  on
    documents prior to the  date  (2009/10)  when  the  appellant  said  he
    changed his name supports what Judge Austin says  at  [77].   It  would
    have been helpful if Judge Austin had explained in greater  detail  why
    he considered the change "not consistent with the account" but  I  find
    that I agree with Mr Tan; the evidence which I have detailed above does
    support the judge's observation.  Mr Holmes submitted that the new name
    of the appellant was Suhail Najem Abed Abed (as it now appears in these
    proceedings).  He submitted that that the change (the  addition  of  an
    extra "Abed") only occurred in 2009/10 and the appellant's  account  is
    internally consistent.  He referred to the appellant's driving  licence
    which shows the "double" Abed.  I do not agree  with  that  submission.
    It is clear to me that the judge had in mind the substantive change  of
    name from "Abed al Radhi" to a name which removed the word "al  Radhi".
    The appellant's account only makes sense if the change he refers to  is
    that change rather than the addition of an additional "Abed".  In other
    words, the only substantive change of name was the removal of the words
    "al Radhi".  I am satisfied that the judge was right to find that  that
    change as evidenced by the documents occurred before the appellant said
    that he changed the name.  It was open to the judge  to  conclude  that
    the evidence was not consistent.

 7. As regards the appellant's "failure to mention" his change of  name,  I
    refer to the last sentence of [77].  The point made  by  the  judge  is
    that the change of name is an important part of the appellant's account
    of his difficulties in Iraq.  It was open to the judge to attach weight
    to the appellant's failure to mention his change of name as part of his
    account.

 8. The first ground of appeal also challenges the decision  at  [77].   Mr
    Holmes submitted that the judge appeared to have placed "little  weight
    on these documents" because "originals have not been produced of them".
     Mr Holmes submitted that the appellant had not been asked  to  produce
    the originals; indeed, he had some original documents (for example  his
    driving licence) with him at court before Judge  Austin.   Whilst  that
    may be true, I am not satisfied that, even if the judge  has  erred  in
    criticising the appellant for not producing original documents which he
    possessed, his decision is materially flawed in consequence.  It is for
    the appellant to present his case to the Tribunal; if the appellant has
    original documents with him, then he should voluntarily  produce  these
    to the Tribunal.  It is not for the judge to have to ask  for  original
    documents and if they are not produced then it is  reasonable  for  the
    judge  to  assume  that  the  originals  are  not  in  the  appellant's
    possession.  Secondly, it is  clear  on  any  reading  of  the  judge's
    decision  that  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  produce  original
    documents was very much a minor part of the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    evidence.  "Most significant" as described by the judge is what he says
    at [78].  The judge considered the appellant's  account  undermined  by
    the fact that the appellant's wife  returned  promptly  to  resume  her
    employment at the university where he claims "the most significant risk
    against him exists".  The judge considered that those who wish to  harm
    the appellant would know that his wife was employed at  the  university
    and that they would easily have found out where he lived if they wished
    to target him.  As the judge says, "this issue is  about  whether  [the
    appellant's] whereabouts could be known to those who mean to  harm  him
    as he claims.  I consider he was aware that his relationship  with  his
    wife, who he admits works at the university, indicated that his account
    did not stand up to close examination and this is why he  was  avoiding
    or seeking to avoid answering the question".

 9. I find that it was open to the judge to find that the appellant, if  he
    had been a member of the Ba'ath Party, did not occupy any  position  of
    authority within that party and had not, as he  claims,  been  targeted
    because he had been a member of the Ba'ath  Party.   I  find  that  the
    judge was fully justified in what he says at [79]

         If the appellant was a member of the Ba'ath  Party,  and  I  accept
         that membership was widespread and was the norm, I do not  consider
         in his personal circumstances that he is  at  risk.   He  does  not
         claim to have held a high position and states that his  involvement
         was in regard to organising cultural activities and talks.  On  the
         basis of the guidance referred to in the respondent's  reasons  for
         refusal letter and taking the individual appellant's  circumstances
         into account I do not consider that he is particularly at risk as a
         result of his possible former membership of the Ba'ath Party  which
         on the evidence before me I am not  prepared  to  accept  has  been
         shown.

10. I find that neither of the grounds of appeal are persuasive.   They  do
    not undermine the sound reasoning of the judge who,  on  the  evidence,
    reached findings which were available to  him.   Having  reached  sound
    findings on the appellant's account of  past  events  and  the  profile
    which he would have on return to  Iraq,  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    accurately concluded that the appellant would not be at  real  risk  on
    return.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
