
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/03404/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2017                         |On 2 October 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. D.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania who lodged a claim to protection
      on 13 August 2015 based upon an account of being trafficked  into  the
      UK for sexual exploitation. That claim was referred to  the  NRM,  but
      their decision was not received until 23 March 2017. On 28 March 2017,
      in the light of their decision, the Respondent refused the  protection
      application.
   2. The Appellant's appeal to the First tier Tribunal ["FtT"] against that
      decision was heard on 4 May 2017. It was dismissed on all grounds,  in
      a decision promulgated on 31 May 2017 by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Garro. (It is common ground that the reference to the  appeal  being
      allowed on Article 3 grounds at the conclusion of the decision must be
      a typographical error, since the text of the decision makes plain  the
      Judge's intention to dismiss the appeal.)
   3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  23
      June 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on the basis that it was
      arguable the Judge had made a number of errors. Arguably he had failed
      to deal with the appellant's evidence in response to the NRM  decision
      at all, and had simply relied upon the NRM decision and looked to  the
      Appellant to show why it was wrong, rather than to consider and  weigh
      the Appellant's evidence for himself. Since the NRM decision had  been
      to accept that the Appellant had been a victim of trafficking
   4. Neither party has made formal application to adduce further  evidence.
      Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   5. When the appeal was called on for hearing,  Mr  Duffy  confirmed  that
      notwithstanding the Rule 24 Notice that had  been  filed  on  25  July
      2017, the Respondent did not seek to defend the Judge's decision.  The
      Respondent accepted that the Judge's approach was flawed, and that  as
      a result none of the findings of fact could be preserved.
   6. In the circumstances it is common ground that the decision discloses a
      material error of law that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe,
      and the decision must in the circumstances be set aside and remade.  I
      have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or whether  to
      proceed to remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where  it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.
   7. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is not to be listed  before
        Judge O'Garro.
    ii) An Albanian interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that further psychiatric evidence  may
        need to be filed. Further enquiries may need to be made in relation
        to  the  availability  of  corroborative  evidence  concerning  the
        Appellant's ability to travel within Europe, and into the  UK.  The
        Appellant is therefore to file and serve any further evidence to be
        relied upon at his appeal by 5pm 26 October 2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing centre after 27 October
        2017.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   8. The decision promulgated on 31 May 2017 did involve the making  of  an
      error of law sufficient to require the decision to be  set  aside  and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 26 September 2017
