
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/03023/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Court Justice              | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On  3rd July 2017                         | On 5th July 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M. Butler, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on the 1st  May
    2017 dismissed his claim for protection.  The  Appellant's  immigration
    history is set out within the determination at paragraphs  3-6  and  in
    the decision letter issued by  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  can  be
    summarised briefly as follows.  The Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the 17th May 2015 having been granted a business visa on the
    4th December 2014. He remained in the UK after his  leave  expired.  He
    was encountered on an enforcement visit on the  8th  January  2017  and
    after removal directions were set he made  a  claim  for  asylum  which
    resulted in a substantive interview and a decision letter issued by the
    Secretary of State dated 10th March 2017 in which his  application  for
    asylum was refused.

 3. The basis of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [13] to [19] which is
    also referred to in the detailed reasons for refusal.   His  claim  for
    protection related to fear on return to Algeria; he  had  worked  as  a
    trader but had made losses from his business and had  received  threats
    from those who traded with. He also  had  not  undertaken  is  military
    service despite having received a summons to do so. It failed his first
    appointment after receiving call-up papers and after receiving a second
    summons have been granted a deferment. He left before the third summons
    would have been issued  and  thus  feared  return  on  account  of  not
    attending   to   military   service.   He   feared    being    punished
    disproportionately for not undertaking military service and  fear  that
    he would be forced to fight.

 4. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 19th April 2017.

 5.  The judge set out her findings at paragraphs [90]  to  [119].  It  had
    been conceded on behalf of  the  appellant  that  whilst  he  did  have
    business problems, this was not part of his  asylum  claim  and  relied
    upon his claim relating to military service. The judge  considered  the
    appellant's evidence relating to his claim to have failed to attend for
    military service.  The  judge  accepted  the  documents  provided  were
    genuine (paragraph 99) and considered them in the light of the  country
    materials. The judge made reference to his  failure  to  produce  third
    summons.  At  paragraphs  101-103  the  judge  considered  whether  the
    appellant was a conscientious objector but found that he had not stated
    this in his screening interview or in his asylum interview and that had
    been  raised  in  submissions  following   the   screening   interview.
    Furthermore when asked if he had been a member of any organisation  for
    conscientious objectors, the appellant had said he had not.  The  judge
    therefore found that if he was a conscientious objector he  would  have
    contacted one of the organisations in the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge
    considered military service and that the penalty for draft evasion  was
    imprisonment for 2 to 10 years. The judge acknowledged that  there  was
    no alternative service offered in Algeria but  in  any  event  had  not
    found the appellant to be a conscientious  objector.  Thus  whilst  the
    judge accepted that the appellant may not choose to undertake  military
    service, he was not a conscientious objector and that  he  provided  no
    evidence that it received third call-up  papers  and  that  registering
    late for military service would cause him any problems. Thus the  claim
    for protection was dismissed on all grounds.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated 17th May 2017.  Designated  Immigration
    Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal on the 25th May 2017  in  the
    following terms:

     "the grounds for appeal focus on the judge's decision on the issue  of
    the appellant's draft evasion. The  appellant  asserts  that  he  is  a
    conscientious  objector.  It  is  arguable  the  judge  erred  in   her
    consideration of this. She accepted he  was  a  draft  evader  but  the
    findings of  fact  at  paragraphs  101  -  104  and  112  are  arguably
    insufficient to support  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  not
    conscientious objector. Consequently permission to  appeal  is  granted
    but only on the grounds relating to the appellant's draft  evasion  and
    the jurisprudence in Sepet and Bulbel [2003] UKHL 15."

 7. At the hearing before this Tribunal Miss Butler, who  had  drafted  the
    grounds relied  upon  those  that  were  before  the  Tribunal  and  by
    reference to her skeleton argument.

 8. There are three grounds advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  although
    the grant of permission by Designated Immigration Judge Shaerf  granted
    permission on grounds one and three only. Ground  one  relates  to  the
    failure of the judge to give anxious scrutiny to the claim and to  give
    sufficient  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant   was   not   a
    conscientious  objector  to  military  service.  The  remaining  ground
    relates to the whether the decision of the House of Lords in Sepet  and
    Bulbel is still good law in the light of the  status  of  conscientious
    objection in international  law.  It  is  common  ground  that  if  the
    appellant succeeds on ground one,  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider
    ground 2 as the first ground relates to the  factual  circumstances  of
    the applicant's claim. I have therefore considered ground  one  in  the
    light of the submissions that I have heard from  both  parties  and  by
    reference to the written documentation including the skeleton  argument
    produced by Miss Butler and the rule 24 response provided on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

 9. In the rule 24 response it is submitted that there  were  a  number  of
    reasons given by the judge for the factual finding that  the  appellant
    was not a genuine conscientious objector to military service. However a
    reading of the determination  demonstrates  that  the  judge  gave  two
    reasons for reaching that decision. Firstly, that  he  had  not  stated
    that he was a conscientious objector in the screening interview or  his
    asylum interview (see paragraphs 101) and secondly, that he was  not  a
    member of any pacifist organisation.



10. When considering whether those reasons were sufficient to reach such  a
    conclusion, it is necessary to consider the evidence and the  way  that
    the case proceeded before the First-tier Tribunal. Miss Butler has  set
    out in the skeleton argument the requirement for the judge to  consider
    claims for protection with anxious scrutiny which involves taking  into
    account every factor which might tell in an asylum seekers favour  (see
    R(YH) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116). There is also reference to the UNHCR
    Handbook  at  paragraph  174  dealing   with   the   establishment   of
    conscientious objection. Against that background she submits that there
    was a failure to make sufficient enquiry both during the interview  and
    during the hearing relating to this issue which had been raised by  the
    appellant in his evidence both in the  interview  and  in  the  further
    representations sent by his legal  representatives.  This  was  further
    referred to by the judge at paragraph 78 of the determination.  However
    only one question was asked by the judge and in the  circumstances  the
    findings were insufficient. She submitted that the judge  had  made  no
    general adverse credibility findings and had  in  fact  accepted  large
    parts of his evidence (see paragraphs 95, 96, 98  and  105).  She  also
    made reference to the appellant's screening and asylum  interviews  and
    that the alleged failure to raise conscientious objection was  not  put
    in cross examination or by the judge. However that had been relied upon
    by the judge for rejecting his claim (based on  failure  to  raise  the
    issue) thus he had been denied the  opportunity  to  respond  to  that.
    Similarly, the judge relied upon his answer that he had not joined  any
    pacifist organisation in the UK but that he was not asked  any  reasons
    as to why that would be the case  by  reference  to  his  own  personal
    circumstances.



11. Mr Clarke on behalf  of  the  respondent  submits  that  there  was  no
    reference to the screening interview to any conscientious objection  to
    military service and similarly in  the  asylum  interview.  He  further
    submits that there was no evidence from the appellant  in  this  regard
    and consequently it is not incumbent on either the interviewer  or  the
    judge to raise the issue and to ask further questions  concerning  this
    issue. He points to the lack of evidence in the witness  statement  and
    that his case had previously focused on his fear  of  traders.  In  the
    interview, he points to the end of the interview and question  116  and
    that the appellant did not try to add anything and when  taken  in  the
    round, the judge's findings were sufficient  to  reach  the  conclusion
    that he was not a genuine conscientious objector.

12. The appellant's screening interview was carried  out  on  20  February.
    Whilst it is right that he did not mention the issue  of  conscientious
    objection in the screening interview, I do not find at this  by  itself
    demonstrates that he had not raised the issue during the course of  his
    case. The preamble  to  the  screening  interview  makes  reference  to
    providing a "brief outline" and that the appellant will be able to give
    full particulars at any asylum interview at a later  date.  Whilst  the
    appellant made reference to his business problems (see paragraph 4)  he
    did make reference to military service at paragraph 5.2 and that he had
    not  undertaken  his  military  service.  At  paragraph   73   of   the
    determination the judge records the appellant's evidence, that  he  had
    been told that he  screening  interview  that  he  would  be  given  an
    opportunity to give any other reasons at his substantive interview  but
    when reaching a conclusion on this issue, the judge makes no  reference
    to this explanation (see findings of fact at paragraph 101).

13. In his asylum interview on 2 March 2017,  he  was  asked  a  number  of
    questions concerning his fear of business traders. However questions 32
    onwards the interviewer asked questions concerning  whether  he  feared
    others in Algeria. In answer to a question at question 33 the appellant
    made reference to being summoned  to  join  military  service  and  the
    difficulties with this and at question 34, when asked if he feared  the
    government he responded that he did fear the  government  because  they
    wanted to force him to take part in a war that "I am not convinced of".
    He made reference to his fear in the context of avoiding the  army  and
    that he could be punished. Whilst Mr Clarke submits that there  was  no
    duty on the interviewer to take this further, in my judgement  it  must
    have been clear that the appellant was articulating  a  further  reason
    why he was in fear of return which gave rise to a claim possibly  based
    on conscientious objection particularly when seen in the light  of  the
    country materials. However the interviewer  did  not  ask  any  further
    questions. The interview did however  return  to  military  service  at
    question 101 onwards concerning letters/summons relating to why he  did
    not undertake military service. There were no further  questions  asked
    about his conscientious objection. On the face of it, this  was  a  new
    ground advanced by the appellant but no further questions were asked of
    him. Against that background I do not consider that the judge's finding
    is made out or was sufficient in the circumstances.

14. The representation sent by his solicitors on  8  March  did  raise  the
    issue further. Whilst Mr Clarke submits that the  challenge  raised  to
    the interview questions related to other  issues,  at  page  3  of  the
    representations the letter clearly stated "conscientious objection" and
    referred to this in the context  of  the  objective  evidence  and  the
    country materials and expressly made reference to the appellant  claims
    a conscientious objector and that he did not wish to go to  war  as  it
    would "offend his religion beliefs and moral values." It was  therefore
    clear in my judgement that this was a ground being advanced  on  behalf
    of the appellant and he provided further documentation relating to  the
    issue of military service which were attached to a letter of 13  March.
    That  letter  again  reiterated  the  basis  of  the  claim  based   on
    conscientious objection that he did not wish to engage in war.

15. The refusal letter was issued on 10 March and gave consideration to the
    risk on return as  regards  military  service  (page  8).  However  the
    refusal  letter  did  not  express  any  adverse  credibility  findings
    concerning  this  issue  or  whether  the  appellant  was  in  fact   a
    conscientious objector or the genuineness of this. It is  against  this
    background that the hearing took place. I am  satisfied  after  hearing
    the submissions of the  parties  that  the  appellant's  representative
    appears to have approached the hearing on  the  basis  of  the  refusal
    letter did not expressly challenge the genuineness of his conscientious
    objection and that  those  circumstances  it  was  accepted.  This  was
    supported in my judgement by the lack of evidence in chief expanding on
    this and importantly the lack of cross  examination  relating  to  this
    issue. The judge however was  alert  to  this  issue  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 78 where the judge recorded:  -  "I  then  asked  Mr  X  some
    questions. I noted that he stated (in his submissions)  that  he  is  a
    conscientious  objector.  I  asked  whether  he  is  a  member  of  any
    conscientious objectors organisations, either  in  Algeria  or  in  the
    United Kingdom. Mr X stated that he was not. Nor  could  you  name  any
    organisation. Mr X said he had no knowledge of any organisations."

16. It is plain from this paragraph that the judge did recognise that  this
    was an issue. The judge had been referred to the UNHCR Handbook and had
    made reference to it in the determination at paragraphs 59  -  63.  The
    judge however did not record paragraph 174 which makes reference to the
    reasons given for conscientious objection and in particular that  there
    should be a "thorough investigation of his personality and background."
    Consequently if the judge was going  to  reach  a   conclusion  on  the
    evidence that he was not  a  genuine  conscientious  objector,  it  was
    necessary for this issue to be ventilated given that the refusal letter
    did not raise any adverse credibility issues. It was insufficient in my
    judgement to ask the one question that was  set  out  at  paragraph  78
    relating to pacifist organisations in the UK.  As  Ms  Butler  submits,
    there was a requirement of anxious scrutiny. I do not  think  that  the
    judge was assisted by the advocates and there was a misunderstanding as
    to the basis upon  which  the  hearing  proceeded  which  led  to  this
    situation. However once it had been identified  by  the  judge  it  was
    necessary for a greater consideration.

17.  The only question asked related to  whether  he  was  a  member  of  a
    pacifist organisation (see paragraph 78] which led to  the  finding  at
    paragraph 103 that had he been a genuine conscientious objector that he
    would have contacted one of the organisations in the UK.  There  are  a
    number of issues arising from this finding. As Ms Butler submits, there
    is  no  requirement  in  law  or  practice  that  someone  who   is   a
    conscientious objector must show that they are a member of any pacifist
    organisation to prove  the  genuineness  of  their  belief.  The  UNHCR
    Handbook makes reference to  personality  and  background  rather  than
    affiliation to any such organisation. Furthermore,  no  questions  were
    asked as to the circumstances of the appellant in the UK, such  as  his
    knowledge of English to determine whether joining such an  organisation
    was  either  feasible  or  realistic  when  reaching  such  an  adverse
    credibility finding. In my judgement then, the two  reasons  given  for
    rejecting his factual claim of being a genuine  conscientious  objector
    were insufficient in circumstances where  there  was  no  dispute  that
    Algeria has compulsory military service with no alternative  for  those
    who are conscientious objectors. For those reasons I  am  satisfied  at
    the determination demonstrates an  error  of  law.  Thus  the  decision
    cannot stand and will be set aside.

18. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence in the  light  of
    the objective evidence and any issues of law arising from  the  factual
    findings made.

19. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is hereby set aside; it shall be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.  The  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date: 4/7/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
