
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03528/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 MR M I M I
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy of Immigration Barrister Services
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent, dated 27 February  2018,
    to refuse the appellant's application for  protection.   Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hussain, in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on
    13 February 2019, dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The appellant  now
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission,  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, born on 5 September 1991, is a Tamil speaking Sri Lankan
    Muslim.  As highlighted in the appellant's  skeleton  argument  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal his case had "one primary dimension to it",  namely
    his claimed fear of the Sri Lankan authorities premised on his  claimed
    LTTE connections.  The appellant claims he was held  in  captivity  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka.  He further claims that he is  at  risk  in  Sri
    Lanka's increasingly dangerous environment which is becoming virulently
    anti-Muslim.

 3. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge failed to address material aspects of his claim and asserted,  in
    the narrative grounds, that the appellant's case was meritorious due to
    the fact that the Sri Lankan authorities had information about his LTTE
    links; his fears were genuine and based on  cogent  evidence  including
    expert evidence; and his precarious mental and  other  conditions  made
    him highly  vulnerable.   The  narrative  grounds,  which  appeared  to
    rehearse the arguments that were before the First-tier  Tribunal,  also
    mentioned that the appellant comes from an Islamic background which, it
    was asserted, further aggravates his security  situation  and  asserted
    that the judge's findings in  relation  to  the  medical  evidence  was
    legally unsound.

 4. Judge McGeachy granted permission on the  basis  that  there  were  two
    matters of concern to him, namely the appellant's scarring and the fact
    that he was a Muslim and had lived in Britain for some time.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. It was Mr Lingajorthy's primary submission that  the  judge's  findings
    were flawed and that the judge had failed to factor in the  appellant's
    Muslim faith which was mentioned in the appellant's witness  statements
    and in his skeleton argument.  Mr Lingajorthy also  drew  attention  to
    additional bundle 1, which Ms Jones did  not  dispute  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, including a Guardian report dated March 2018 and a
    BBC report also  dated  March  2018  in  relation  to  attacks  against
    Muslims.  This was, initially, Mr Lingajorthy's only submission.   When
    pressed on the remaining grounds  Mr  Lingajorthy  submitted  that  the
    judge was wrong not to accept the opinion of the expert in relation  to
    the scarring and the judge was  not  a  medical  expert.   However,  he
    accepted that the judge had pointed out at  [58]  that  the  expert  at
    paragraph 5.5.4 had provided confusing evidence when he had stated that
    the appellant:-

         "said that was burnt (sic) with boiling water during his detention.
          The scar is consistent with deliberate injury caused by  a  flame,
         as described by the claimant.   I  assume  there  is  a  difference
         between flame and hot water! (my emphasis)".

 6. Mr Lingajorthy speculated that the expert had made  a  mistake  between
    flame and boiling water; however he accepted there was no evidence  nor
    any application made, for example to  produce  further  evidence,  that
    might support such an argument.  He submitted that such a  mistake  was
    not fundamental.

 7. Ms Jones for the respondent submitted that the judge was right to point
    out the inconsistencies in the expert report and was entitled to  reach
    the conclusions  he  did  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  evidence,
    concluding that it had not been demonstrated that  he  was  of  adverse
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  In relation to  the  point  in
    the appellant's grounds (not pursued by  Mr  Lingajorthy)  she  further
    submitted that the judge's findings in relation to the appellant's risk
    of suicide were also open to him and  there  had  been  no  mention  of
    suicide attempts prior to this.

 8. In relation to the arguments which were  now  being  relied  on  almost
    exclusively, that the judge had not addressed that  the  appellant  was
    Muslim, it was  Ms  Jones'  submission  that  although  this  had  been
    mentioned it  had  not  been  particularised  and  the  thrust  of  the
    appellant's case was his LTTE involvement including as  highlighted  in
    his witness statements and interview.

 9. In reply Mr  Lingajorthy  submitted  that  the  failure  to  adequately
    address the fact  that  the  appellant  was  Muslim  and  the  evidence
    produced  including  of  anti-Muslim  sentiment  which  was   worsening
    (including in the advent  of  the  Easter  bombings,  although  it  was
    accepted that this post-dated the appeal) was fundamental to the  case.



Error of Law Conclusions

10. I am not satisfied that the  grounds,  which  in  effect  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  are  made
    out.  The judge  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round  as
    identified in the Decision and Reasons (including at [59]).   Primarily
    the judge did not find the appellant to be credible for  the  evidence-
    based reasons given.  For example at [44] the judge found that:-

         "What makes the appellant's claim entirely devoid of any  truth  is
         that according to his interview, his family were visited in  August
         2014.  If that acted as a trigger for the application then  he  has
         not explained at all why it was not until April the following  year
         that he applied for asylum."

11. The judge took into consideration that  some  of  the  attacks  by  the
    Secretary of State on the appellant's credibility appeared rather  weak
    on the face of it; however the judge took into consideration, which was
    open to him, that the appellant had failed to provide any  evidence  of
    his arrest, detention and bail without any reasonable  explanation  for
    the absence of such evidence.  In view of the absence  of  evidence  of
    the grant of bail to the appellant the judge found this  indicative  of
    the fact that the appellant's story about being arrested  and  detained
    was untrue ([48]).  Contrary to what was stated  in  the  grounds,  the
    judge made clear that  he  came  to  this  conclusion  considering  the
    totality of  the  evidence  including  that  the  appellant's  evidence
    "unravelled".  It was the judge's finding that the appellant's evidence
    was  inconsistent  and  embellished  and  those   findings   were   not
    substantively  challenged  before  me,   including   that   the   judge
    highlighted the inconsistencies in that evidence between the  interview
    and the witness statement.

12. In respect of scarring the judge took into consideration, in the round,
    a report from Dr Andreas Izquierdo-Martin which included, at 5.5.3 that
    the:-

         "appearance, distribution and  pattern  of  the  scars  are  highly
         consistent with unwilling and intentionally caused injuries with  a
         hot  object,  such  as  cigarette  burns,  as  described   by   the
         appellant".




13. The judge highlighted difficulties with the  expert  report,  including
    that it was not clear on what basis the expert concluded that the scars
    were unwilling and it was not clear how the expert could conclude  that
    these had not been inflicted by a third party.  In addition, as already
    indicated the judge also highlighted inconsistencies in the  report  as
    to whether the injuries were caused by boiling water  or  by  a  flame.
    The judge went on to conclude, at [59] having looked at the totality of
    the evidence, that the appellant had failed to demonstrate to the lower
    standard that he was of adverse interest in Sri Lanka.




14. Although not relied on by the parties before me, and promulgated  after
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I have taken into consideration
    what was said by the Supreme Court in KV (Sri Lanka)  [2019]  UKSC  10.
    The Supreme Court found concluding as follows:-

         "31. The third point arises out of the Tribunal's final  conclusion
             that there were only two real possibilities,  namely  that  KV
             had been tortured and that his wounding was SIBP.   The  point
             is that  the  likelihood  of  both  possibilities  had  to  be
             compared with each  other  before  either  of  them  could  be
             discounted.  And the contention  is  that,  when  it  came  to
             compile  the  final  section  of  its  determination  entitled
             'Assessment of the Appellant's Appeal', and in particular  the
             final  sub-section,  entitled  'Conclusion',   in   which   it
             discounted the possibility of torture, the  Tribunal  made  no
             reference to  the  likelihood,  or  rather  on  any  view  the
             unlikelihood, that the wounding was SIBP.

         32.  That there was extensive torture by state forces in Sri  Lanka
             in 2009 was  well  established  in  the  evidence  before  the
             Tribunal. For example at para  187  of  its  determination  it
             quoted an EU report dated October 2009 as follows:

                  'International  reports  indicate  continual   and   well-
                  documented allegations  of  widespread  torture  and  ill-
                  treatment committed by state forces (police and  military)
                  particularly in situations of detention.  The  UN  Special
                  Rapporteur on Torture has expressed shock at the  severity
                  of the  torture  employed  by  the  army,  which  includes
                  burning with soldering irons and suspension  of  detainees
                  by their thumbs.'

         33.  By contrast, evidence of wounding SIBP on the part of  asylum-
             seekers was almost non-existent. The Tribunal referred at para
             11 to just one unreported decision in 2011  in  which  it  had
             concluded that the wounding had been  SIBP.   Dr  Zapata-Bravo
             said that, in the field of immigration,  neither  he  nor  any
             colleague to whom he had spoken  had  experience  of  wounding
             SIBP. He  contrasted  it  with  tribal  and  ritual  scarring,
             administered with social consent, which no one  had  suggested
             to account for the  scars  in  question.  His  and  the  other
             medical  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
             wounding of a body which that person deliberately achieved  by
             his own hand was slightly less uncommon; but that  there  were
             parts of a body which  that  person  could  not  burn  without
             assistance and that they certainly included the burnt parts of
             KV's back. Dr Zapata-Bravo said that in the literature he  had
             found only one statement referable to a  person's  burning  of
             himself by use of a proxy.  'Very rarely', it  had  said,  'an
             accomplice might be asked to cause a  wound  in  a  place  the
             person cannot reach'.

         34.  There is no doubt that,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
             serious lack of KV's credibility in several other areas of his
             evidence, the Tribunal was correct to address the  possibility
             of wounding SIBP.  But,  in  assessing  the  strength  of  the
             possibility, it had to weigh the following:

             (a)      It is an extreme measure for a person  to  decide  to
                  cause  himself  to  suffer  deep  injury  and  severe  and
                  protracted pain.

             (b)  Moreover KV needed someone to help him to do it.

             (c)  Wounding SIBP is, in the words of Sales LJ at para 93  of
                  his judgment, 'generally so unlikely'.

             (d)  If KV's wounding was SIBP, the wounds on his  back  could
                  have been inflicted only under anaesthetic and so he would
                  have  needed  assistance  from  a  person   with   medical
                  expertise prepared to act contrary to medical ethics.

             (e)  If his wounding was SIBP, an explanation had to be  found
                  for the difference in both the location and in  particular
                  the presentation of the scarring as between the  back  and
                  the arm.

             (f)  If his wounding was SIBP, an explanation had to be  found
                  for the number of the wounds, namely the three  wounds  on
                  the back, albeit now represented by five  scars,  and  the
                  two wounds on the arm. As Elias LJ observed  in  para  99,
                  'one or two strategically placed scars could equally  well
                  have supported a claim of torture'.

         35.  Elias LJ offered a summary in para 101:

                  'In my view very considerable weight should  be  given  to
                  the fact that injuries which are SIBP  are  likely  to  be
                  extremely rare. An individual is highly unlikely  to  want
                  to suffer the continuing  pain  and  discomfort  resulting
                  from self-inflicted harm, even if he is anaesthetised when
                  the harm is inflicted. Moreover, the possibility that  the
                  injuries may have been sustained in this way is even  less
                  likely in circumstances where  the  applicant  would  have
                  needed to be anaesthetised. This would in all  probability
                  have required the clandestine co-operation of a  qualified
                  doctor who would have had to be willing to act  in  breach
                  of the most fundamental and ethical standards, and who had
                  access to the relevant medical equipment.'

             That was his view. It should also, I suggest, be ours."

15. The Supreme Court's decision in KV indicates  that  the  primary  issue
    with the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  was  the  interpretation  of  the
    medical evidence.  The Tribunal in that case, in effect, concluded that
    the scars were inflicted by SIBP, but I am satisfied that  the  context
    of this case is distinguishable and fundamentally  different  including
    that the appellant at his interview made no mention of his beating when
    he claimed he was detained in 2013.

16. In this case Judge Hussain  gave  sound  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    expressing doubts about the medical  evidence  including  the  lack  of
    adequate reasoning provided  by  the  expert  for  the  conclusions  he
    reached and the inconsistencies in the findings at 5.5.4 of the  report
    which found scar 4 to be consistent with a deliberate injury  by  flame
    whereas the previous sentence stated that the appellant claimed to have
    been burnt with boiling water.  Although KV highlights  the  fact  that
    injuries caused by SIBP are likely to be extremely rare, that does  not
    obviate the need for expert  reports  to  adequately  address  all  the
    issues.  The Supreme Court in KV had significant evidence  in  relation
    to the nature of the scars and the possibility of SIBP,  whereas  Judge
    Hussain drew attention to the fact that this issue was  not  adequately
    dealt with in the expert report in his findings including that  it  was
    not clear how the expert had concluded that the scars were "unwilling".
     It is not the case that Judge Hussain concluded that the injuries were
    caused by SIBP, rather that the judge found that the  totality  of  the
    evidence did not discharge to the lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
    appellant had been of adverse interest in Sri Lanka and  this  included
    taking into consideration the inadequacies of the expert report.

17. On the facts of the appellant's case the findings of Judge Hussain  are
    not undermined by the guidance in KV and  accordingly  I  am  satisfied
    that there was no material error in the judge's approach to the medical
    evidence of scarring.

18. In relation to the appellant's  mental  health  difficulties,  although
    this was not specifically relied on  by  Mr  Lingajorthy  in  his  oral
    submissions, it was mentioned in the narrative grounds  for  permission
    to appeal.  However, I agree with  Ms  Jones  that  the  judge  reached
    findings which were open to him including that it was  surprising  that
    although the consultant psychiatrist mentioned the risk of suicide, the
    appellant's general practitioner in her report on 29 December 2017 made
    no mention of suicide attempts despite the  fact  that  the  consultant
    psychiatrist mentions that the appellant states that he twice attempted
    to take his own life by hanging.  The judge went on to find, which  was
    open to him, that whilst he  had  no  reason  to  doubt  the  appellant
    suffers from depression and may suffer from the effects of  PTSD,  this
    did not assist in corroborating his claimed arrest, detention and  ill-
    treatment.   In addition the judge was satisfied  that  the  conditions
    the appellant suffers can be treated in Sri Lanka. There  has  been  no
    challenge to that finding, which was adequate and sustainable.  It  was
    also open to the judge to highlight and draw the conclusions he did  in
    relation to the inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  evidence.   Those
    findings when considered holistically are sustainable.

19. In relation to the remaining aspect of the appellant's claim and indeed
    the only aspect initially relied on by Mr Lingajorthy, the  appellant's
    Islamic background, it was not disputed that this was mentioned in  the
    appellant's  witness  statements  and  skeleton  argument.   What   was
    disputed  was  the  focus  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Although   Mr
    Lingajorthy in effect submitted before me that this was now fundamental
    to the appellant's claim, in fact  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal confirmed the "primary dimension" of his
    claim was his fear of his LTTE connections.  It is in that context that
    the appellant's Islamic background must be considered.  The  judge  was
    aware of the background of the  appellant's  claim  including  that  he
    first arrived in the UK in 2014.  Therefore the judge was aware of  the
    length of the appellant's stay in the  UK.   Although  the  appellant's
    Muslim background is not specifically referenced in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons, that  is  reflective  of  the  minor  role  which  his  Muslim
    background played in  his  case  as  highlighted  by  Mr  Lingajorthy's
    skeleton argument which indicated the primary dimension of  his  appeal
    was his LTTE connections.

20. Whilst that does not obviate the need for the judge to address all  the
    factors, I am satisfied that that is what he did.  The judge indicates,
    including at [59], that he has considered the totality of the  evidence
    and it is implicit in my view, that the appellant's Muslim  background,
    the difficulties experienced by some  Muslims  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    length of time that  he  has  been  in  the  UK  formed  part  of  that
    consideration. I have reminded myself what was said in  MD  (Turkey)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that adequacy meant no  more  nor  less  than
    that. It was not a counsel of perfection. Still less should it  provide
    an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons  to
    see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.  The
    purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable  the  losing
    party to know why she has lost and it is also to  enable  an  appellate
    court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision are so  that
    they can be examined in case there has been an error of approach.

21. It was not the appellant's case, before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    his Muslim background in itself, or indeed the length of time he  spent
    in the UK would put him at risk.    Neither  the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, nor the jurisprudence, would have supported such a
    finding.  The judge took into consideration the  factors  including  GJ
    and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC) and MP & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 89  including  as  highlighted  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter.  The judge for the adequate, sustainable reasons  he  gave  did
    not find the appellant to be credible and was not satisfied that he had
    demonstrated that he had previously come to  adverse  interest  in  Sri
    Lanka and the judge was satisfied that the evidence did not demonstrate
    that he came within any of the risk categories identified in  GJ.  When
    read fairly and  as  a  whole,  the  judge's  findings  demonstrate  no
    material error.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



