
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03085/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2017                           |On 2 February 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     L m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Amin sitting at Hatton Cross on 6 September 2016) dismissing her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    recognise her as a refugee on account of her being a claimed victim  of
    trafficking or a potential target for an "honour killing" for having  a
    child outside marriage and not obeying her father with  regard  to  his
    choice of whom she should  marry.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity direction in the appellant's favour, and I consider  that  it
    is appropriate that  the  appellant  should  continue  to  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal were settled by Ben Bundock, Counsel,
    who had represented her at the hearing before Judge Amin.  Ground 1 was
    that the Judge had failed to take into account material  evidence  when
    coming to adverse  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  credibility.   In
    particular, the Judge had failed to have regard to the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been diagnosed  with  PTSD.   The  diagnosis  was  highly
    material (a)  in  appraising  the  appellant's  evidence  in  terms  of
    demeanour and consistency (e.g. in considering the significance  to  be
    attached to the fact that the appellant had  not  given  much  "sensory
    detail" about her experiences in  coerced  prostitution);  and  (b)  in
    being  suggestive  in  itself  of  the   appellant   having   genuinely
    experienced the trauma which she described.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

 3. On 31 October 2016 Judge Davidge gave detailed reasons for refusing the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 4. The difficulty about Ground 1 was that it  was  quite  clear  that  the
    Judge was fully aware of  the  diagnosis,  making  adjustments  to  the
    hearing so that it took place in camera, taking great care  to  explain
    in detail the procedure to be adopted,  offering  adequate  breaks  and
    ensuring that control was exercised so that the  questions  asked  were
    put in a sensitive manner and confined to the issues in the appeal.

 5. The difficulties surrounding the appellant's account did not arise from
    confusion or late additions to her evidence which were explained  by  a
    diagnosis of PTSD.

 6. Further evidence of the Judge's awareness of the  appellant's  position
    was to be found at paragraph [70]  where  the  Judge  referred  to  the
    medical facilities available in Albania,  and  her  acknowledgement  at
    paragraph [71] that the appellant was  suffering  from  depression  and
    waiting for counselling.

 7. While the grounds asserted that the absence of sensory  detail  in  her
    account of being trafficked might be  explained  by  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD, this point did not bear  scrutiny,  given  that  the  Victims  of
    Trafficking Guidance for Competent Authorities stated  that  sensory  -
    rather than specific - detail should be expected to be offered.  In the
    event, the Judge was merely noting the absence of such  evidence.   The
    Judge  did  not  hang  any  adverse  credibility  findings  upon   this
    observation.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On a renewed application for permission to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission on 16  December  2016  for  the
    following reasons:

        It is arguable that the Judge erred in failing to  take  account  of
        the appellant's  diagnosis  of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  in
        evaluating her credibility.  The other matters raised in the grounds
        may also be argued.

Discussion

 9. There is some force in the observations  made  by  Judge  Davidge  when
    refusing permission to appeal on, inter alia, Ground 1.  The Judge  was
    confronted with only a bare diagnosis of PTSD made by Barnet, Enfield &
    Haringay Mental Health NHS Trust.   There  was  no  psychiatric  report
    before the Judge explaining how this diagnosis had been arrived at, nor
    what the implications were in terms of its impact upon the  appellant's
    ability to recall details, such as the names of any of  the  hotels  to
    which she said she had been taken by the trafficking gang  after  being
    kidnapped in Tirana.

10. However, in his skeleton argument which he  presented  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Amin, Mr Bundock  cited  at  paragraph  27  the  following
    extract from page 48 of the Respondent's "Victims of Modern  Slavery  -
    Competent Authority Guidance":

       Victims' early accounts may  also  be  affected  by  the  impact  of
       trauma.  In particular victims may experience post-traumatic  stress
       disorder, which can result in symptoms of:

       - difficulties in recalling details or entire episodes

       - difficulty concentrating.

11. The Judge plunged into her adverse credibility findings  without  first
    assessing the probative value of the PTSD diagnosis or its relevance to
    the assessment of the appellant's general credibility.  She did not ask
    herself whether the appellant's symptoms of PTSD were corroborative  of
    her account of the traumatic events which she recounted; or whether any
    asserted discrepancies, omissions or  inconsistencies  in  her  account
    were reasonably attributable to the effects of PTSD.

12. The Judge quoted a  different  extract  from  the  same  guidance.  The
    guidance stated that the level of detail with which a potential  victim
    presented his/her claim was  a  factor  when  the  Competent  Authority
    assessed credibility:

        It is reasonable to assume that a victim giving an account of  their
        human  trafficking  or  modern  slavery  experience  would  be  more
        expressive and more likely to include  sensory  details  "e.g.  what
        they saw, heard, felt or thought about an event".

13. It was open to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the  names  of  the  hotels
    constituted "sensory" details - as the appellant would in her view have
    seen the names -  and  that  therefore  her  ignorance  on  this  topic
    supported a finding that the  appellant  had  only  provided  the  bare
    minimum of detail on the "sensory aspects" of her claim. While this was
    prima facie damaging to her credibility, the Judge did not engage  with
    the extract from the guidance relied on by appellant's Counsel. She did
    not explain how the extract quoted by her could be reconciled with  the
    parallel  proposition  that  PTSD  victims  might  have  difficulty  in
    recalling details or entire episodes.  On the face of it, a  difficulty
    in recalling details would include a difficulty  in  recalling  sensory
    details.  Alternatively, if this is not the case, the Judge  needed  to
    explain why.

14. For the above reasons, the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal are not safe and the  decision  is  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law, such that it must be set aside and  remade.   As
    was agreed by the legal representatives at the hearing before me,  this
    is an appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
    novo hearing.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

(1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  for
a de novo hearing before any Judge apart from Judge Amin.

(2)  None of the findings of fact made by the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

(3) The time estimate is three hours.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

