
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03094/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 July 2017                            |On 20 July 2017                  |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Jeet Singh Arora
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Williams, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Jeet Singh  Arora,  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan and appeals against the decision of the respondent dated 17
    March 2016 to refuse his claim for protection.  The First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge J Austin) in a decision promulgated on 2 February 2017,  allowed
    the appeal on asylum grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is a single ground of appeal.  This concerns the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge, following an application by the Secretary of
    State, not to adjourn the hearing.  The Secretary of State submits that
    the refusal to adjourn the hearing was unfair  (Ngwaigwe  (Adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418) claiming that  she  had  been  denied  the
    opportunity  to  make  submissions  and  to  cross-examine   witnesses.
    Granting permission, Judge E B Grant wrote:

         If there had been an application on behalf of an  appellant  before
         the First-tier Tribunal that because his  representative  was  sick
         and unable to represent him he wished to have an adjournment, it is
         most unlikely to have been refused.  In the normal course one would
         expect the same courtesy to be  afforded  to  both  sides.   It  is
         arguable fairness to both parties required the appeal hearing to be
         adjourned.  However, had the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered
         the respondent's case in detail and made findings thereon  I  might
         have refused this grant of permission but there was  no  indication
         in the decision that the respondent's case was taken  into  account
         at all.

 3. Both parties and the  Upper  Tribunal  were  hampered  at  the  initial
    hearing in Manchester on 13 July 2017 by the fact that the letter  from
    the Presenting Officers' Unit (POU) seeking an adjournment and to which
    the judge refers at [2] and dated 8 December 2016  was  not  available.
    Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State,  checked  on  the  Home  Office
    database but could not find a copy of the letter and,  during  a  brief
    adjournment, he spoke with a colleague who had written the  letter  who
    was unable to assist.  Judge Austin  simply  records  that  the  letter
    indicated that "due to staff shortages there  would  be  no  Presenting
    Officer available for the  hearing  and  asking  the  Tribunal  for  an
    adjournment of this appeal and the other appeals in the  list".   Judge
    Austin does say that the reason for  the  adjournment  was  that  staff
    shortages have been caused due to sickness.  From the decision  of  the
    judge it appears that the medical condition of no specified  member  of
    staff had been referred to in the letter; it seems  that  the  POU  had
    been put into difficulties by reason of staff sickness generally.

 4. Judge Austin refused the adjournment and, at the end of  his  decision,
    set out the relevant Rule (paragraph  4(3)(h)  of  the  2014  Procedure
    Rules) and gave detailed reasons.  He also summarised the authority  of
    Ngwaigwe and then at [31] wrote this:

         In considering whether to adjourn this matter I had regard  to  the
         following matters:

         (a)  The respondent had issued a refusal  letter  setting  out  his
             (sic) views.

         (b)  The respondent had been given notice of the hearing date on  8
             December 2016 and had made  an  operational  decision  not  to
             attend the hearing.

         (c)  Other than indicating in the letter dated 8 December 2016 that
             there was staff  sickness,  the  respondent  had  provided  no
             explanation as what  steps  had  been  taken  to  instruct  an
             advocate to attend on his behalf, or to  explain  why  it  was
             that listing court 3 at Manchester  had  been  chosen  as  one
             which would not have an advocate present.

 5. Having heard the oral submissions of Mr Williams,  for  the  appellant,
    and Mr McVeety, I reserved my decision.

 6. First, I observe that there is no principle  either  in  the  Procedure
    Rules or relevant jurisprudence to the  effect  that  a  Tribunal  must
    adjourn a hearing if a representative of either party is taken  ill  on
    the day of the hearing.  However, such a principle appears  to  lie  be
    behind Judge Grant's observations (see above) and also the Secretary of
    State's grounds of appeal.  The Secretary of State appears to take  the
    view that, if an  appellant's  representative  was  taken  ill  on  the
    morning of a hearing, an adjournment would be inevitable and  that  the
    same principle should apply to the respondent's  representatives.   The
    fact remains, there is no such principle; all adjournment  applications
    are to be considered, as  this  one  was  considered,  subject  to  the
    Procedure Rules and the relevant jurisprudence in this case,  Ngwaigwe.



 7. Secondly, I find that Judge Grant has misread the decision of the judge
    given that she observes that "there is no indication  in  the  decision
    that the respondent's case  was  taken  into  account  at  all".   That
    comment is not consistent with my reading of the decision. Judge Austin
    at [21] noted that, "although there was no-one present on behalf of the
    respondent I was asked to consider the reasons for refusal letter dated
    17 March 2016 and I did so".  It was not entirely  clear  by  whom  the
    judge was asked to consider the reasons for refusal letter but I assume
    that he had been asked to do so in the now missing letter from the POU.
     The  judge  goes  on  in  the  remainder  of  [21]  to  summarise  the
    respondent's case.  Moreover, at [26], the judge wrote, "I  heard  from
    the appellant and he addressed issues taken with him by the  respondent
    as to his account of experiences of living in Afghanistan  ..."   I  am
    satisfied that the  judge  has  properly  considered  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing protection when determining the appeal.

 8. Thirdly, I agree with Mr  Williams,  for  the  appellant,  that  it  is
    significant that the grounds of appeal make no mention at  all  of  the
    basis upon which the judge has allowed the appeal.  The grounds  solely
    concern the refusal to adjourn; the judge's findings of  fact  are  not
    challenged.  I accept that the respondent  did  not  cross-examine  the
    appellant or the witnesses but I do find it is significant that, having
    set out her case in the refusal letter, the judge's rejection  of  that
    case on its merits has not been challenged at all by the  Secretary  of
    State.

 9. Fourthly, I consider that it is significant that the  application  made
    for the  adjournment  referred  to  staff  shortages  rather  than  the
    sickness of a particular Presenting Officer to whom this case had  been
    allocated.  I am aware that the Secretary of State is frequently unable
    to provide Presenting  Officers  for  every  court  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as a result of a variety of  administrative  difficulties.   I
    have no doubt that such shortages are often caused by  staff  sickness.
    First-tier Tribunal Judges are very familiar with  determining  appeals
    in courts where there is no representation for the Secretary of  State;
    indeed, this is such a common occurrence that it has been addressed  on
    more than one occasion in the jurisprudence of the Upper  Tribunal  and
    its predecessors (see for example, the familiar Surendran  guidelines).
    It is a matter entirely for the POU how it distributes  such  resources
    as it has on any given day between the various  appeals  to  be  heard.
    However, it is difficult to see why shortages  in  resources  to  which
    staff sickness may have contributed should be treated  any  differently
    than shortages caused by other reasons.  Ultimately, the POU chose  not
    to employ such resources as it had that day in Judge Austin's court.  I
    consider that to be a different scenario from one where an advocate who
    has been instructed to attend cannot reach the court on the day of  the
    hearing on account of sickness.  Moreover, the grounds of the Secretary
    of State in this appeal come close to  suggesting  that  when  the  POU
    indicates to the court that it  cannot  provide  a  Presenting  Officer
    because of general staff sickness then the judge has no option  but  to
    adjourn the hearings listed before him or her.   That  observation,  in
    turn, brings me back to my first point, namely that there is nothing in
    the Procedure Rules or in the jurisprudence which requires the Tribunal
    to adjourn  a  hearing  because  an  advocate  is  unavailable  due  to
    sickness.   I  find  that  Judge  Austin  considered  the   adjournment
    application according to the correct Procedure Rules and  jurisprudence
    and  that  he  reached  the  decision  which  was  fair  in   all   the
    circumstances.   Moreover,  he  properly  considered  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing protection and ensured that the appellant, when he
    gave oral evidence, addressed the reasons for the refusal of his claim.
     I find that the judge did not err in law and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 19 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane










