
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03564/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd March 2018                             |On 19th March 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mr syed kazim hussain shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Garbett, sitting at Bennett House on 9th May 2017, and  promulgated  on
    16th May 2017.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of
    the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  30th
    January 1989.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    4th  April  2017,  refusing  his  refugee  claim  and  his  claim   for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The essence of
    the Appellant's claim is that he would face  mistreatment  due  to  his
    membership of a particular social group, namely, that he is a  gay  man
    from Pakistan.

Salient Facts

 3. The salient facts of the claim are set  out  in  the  determination  of
    Judge Garbett (at paragraph 11) as well as paragraph 4 of  the  refusal
    letter.  The Appellant entered the UK on a Tier 4 Student visa on  25th
    September 2012.  When his application for further leave to  remain  was
    refused on 6th July 2016, on 4th October 2016 he claimed asylum.   This
    claim is based upon his arrival in the UK where he acquired residential
    accommodation through a friend called  Baqar,  whom  he  had  known  in
    Pakistan.   The  Appellant  then  shared  property  with  three   other
    individuals, one of whom was a transgender  woman  called  Claire.   He
    became close to her and started a physical relationship towards the end
    of 2015.  In January 2015 Baqar visited the Appellant and  accused  him
    of being gay.  He said this  would  bring  shame  upon  his  family  in
    Pakistan.  The Appellant then confirmed he was gay and  stated  he  was
    free  to  live  his  sexuality  as  he  wanted.   The  day  after   his
    confrontation with Baqar, the Appellant began  to  receive  threatening
    telephone calls from his family in Pakistan.  The Appellant  moved  out
    of the house at the end of January 2015 and has not seen  Claire  since
    then.  However, although he has had no other  long  term  relationships
    since then, he has had only one night stands and he goes to  gay  clubs
    and meets gay people and does not hide his  sexuality.   The  Appellant
    confirmed the  nature  of  his  relationship  during  cross-examination
    before Judge Garbett (at paragraph 12).  He also confirmed that he  had
    telephone calls from his mother, brother,  cousins,  aunts  and  uncles
    with respect to this (paragraph 12).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to  the  Appellant's  evidence,  as  well  as  the
    evidence of a Mr [K], who confirmed that he had known the Appellant for
    approximately four years, and  had  met  at  his  sister's  wedding  in
    Birmingham, although he could not confirm that he had ever  met  Claire
    "and the Appellant has not told him much about her, only that they were
    in a relationship for about two years" (paragraph  15).   Consideration
    was given by the judge to the closing  submissions  of  the  Presenting
    Officer that the Appellant had not been in touch with his family  since
    2015, although he maintained that he had received threats from them and
    that, "no further evidence has been received from any LGBT organisation
    in respect of the Appellant" (paragraph 17).

 5. The judge concluded that the "key issue is credibility" (paragraph  21)
    and in this respect the Appellant lacked all credibility because he was
    asked on three occasions during his asylum interview "to  describe  his
    emotional reaction to his first experience with Claire, his first  with
    a transgender woman" and the Appellant was unable to do so because  his
    responses  were  "entirely  focused  on  his  physical,  sexual   acts"
    (paragraph 24(i)).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

 7. In his grounds of application, the Appellant states that his  lifestyle
    now clearly shows that he lives openly as a gay  man,  that  there  are
    emails, that he has joined LGBT organisations and other gay clubs,  and
    that he falls squarely under the leading authority of HJ (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31.On 14th September 2017 permission to appeal was granted by  the
    Upper Tribunal on the  basis  that  the  Tribunal  may  have  erred  in
    expecting the Appellant to be able to clearly  describe  in  detail  an
    emotional and religious response to his sexuality,  when  he  explained
    that his focus was on the physical.  On 4th October 2017 a Rule 24  was
    response was entered to the effect that, "It is  clear  from  paragraph
    24(ii) that the judge finds the appellant's evidence to  be  vague  and
    lacks detail."  The judge is entitled to reject submissions made on the
    Appellant's behalf.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 2nd  March  2018,  the  Appellant  did  not
    attend.  Nor, did a legal representative appear  on  his  behalf.   Nor
    indeed, was there any explanation  for  non-attendance,  for  what  was
    listed as an oral hearing.  Mr Mills, appearing as Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer on behalf of the Respondent, relied upon the Rule 24
    response, emphasising that the judge was entitled to give reasons  that
    he did at paragraph 24 of the determination and to find  the  Appellant
    to be wholly lacking in credibility, and that there  was  no  error  of
    law.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

10. In what is a clear, comprehensive, and closely reasoned  determination,
    Judge Garbett has provided ample good reason  for  why  the  claim  put
    forward by the Appellant was unsustainable  and  cannot  succeed.   Any
    suggestion that the judge's emphasis on the Appellant's  emotional  and
    religious response, to what the  Appellant  described  as  a  focus  on
    physical activity, as being  misguided,  is  wholly  insupportable  and
    illogical.  The judge was entitled to give the reasons that he did.

11. First, this is a case where the Appellant claimed to have had a  strict
    religious upbringing as a Shia Muslim in Pakistan.  He claimed that  he
    did not, as a result,  have  the  opportunity  to  explore  his  sexual
    identity.  Nor, did he have any sexual relationships while in Pakistan.
     Against this background, the judge was  entitled,  in  a  fact-finding
    exercise, to observe  that,  "His  sexual  encounter  with  Claire  was
    counter to all religious principles he had been brought up  with.   The
    Appellant, despite being given three  opportunities,  did  not  provide
    even a basic account of his emotional response to this event".   It  is
    by no means unreasonable for the judge to expect there to have  been  a
    "basic account of his emotional response" to the event of the Appellant
    having had a sexual encounter with a transgender person.

12. After all, the judge has to make a finding  on  whether  the  Appellant
    actually is gay in the manner that he  suggests,  or  whether  this  is
    simply an account that is made up,  by  a  person  who  had  unlawfully
    entered as a student in the  first  place,  subsequently  attempted  to
    remain here by making an asylum  claim,  on  the  one  ground  that  he
    thought would be available to him, as a person  who  had  come  from  a
    religiously strict country such as Pakistan.

13. Not only this, when the judge  compared  the  Appellant's  lack  of  an
    adequate response to this enquiry, with what  the  Appellant  had  been
    able to say in relation to other matters, this only deepened the  sense
    that the judge had of the claim being lacking in credibility.  Thus, in
    the next breath, the judge explains that, "I also do not accept that he
    is not equipped to do so as a he gave  perfectly  cogent  and  eloquent
    responses in other parts of the  asylum  interview.  I  find  that  the
    Appellant's responses  to  this  area  of  questioning  do  damage  his
    credibility" (paragraph 24(i)).  It is quite difficult to see  what  is
    wrong with such a carefully analysed evaluation of the  evidence  given
    before the judge.

14. Second, and in the same way, the judge was entitled, faced with a claim
    that the Appellant was a gay person frequenting gay clubs in the UK and
    having one night stands, but never having had any sexual  encounter  or
    inkling of his sexuality in Pakistan, to say that,

         "The  Appellant  could  not  provide  a  detailed  account  of  his
         transition from a strict Shia Muslim living in a homophobic society
         to being an openly gay man in the UK.  And again when this was  put
         to the Appellant in interview his response was  a  purely  physical
         one" (see paragraph 24(ii)).

  15. Third, equally relevant was the fact, as the judge  found,  that  "The
      Appellant has not put forward any explanation of how he reconciled his
      strict religious upbringing with his newly discovered sexual identity"
      (see paragraph 24(ii)).

16. Finally, what was perhaps most telling,  as  the  judge  found  in  his
    analysis, to the Appellant's complete lack of credibility in the  claim
    that he was putting forward, was, a total absence of any  understanding
    of what it means to be gay.

17. As the judge explained,

         "The Appellant left Pakistan when he was  23  years  old.   On  his
         evidence he  had  no  sexual  experiences  prior  to  leaving  that
         country.  In his  asylum  interview  he  stated  that  he  had  'no
         feelings at all' about his sexuality (AIR 51).  He also stated that
         he did not feel different to other people growing up  in  Pakistan"
         (see paragraph 24(iii)).

18. This sort of thing, I am bound to say, does a  complete  disservice  to
    the claims of those genuinely  gay  people,  who  do  have  a  fear  of
    persecution, in countries where sexual orientation rights are not fully
    recognised.

19. The judge in this case was perfectly entitled to make a finding that an
    explanation that a person who claimed to be gay  had  "no  feelings  at
    all" when it came to his sexuality and that he did "not feel  different
    to other people growing up in Pakistan", was bound to be untenable.

20. On the other hand, the judge  is  perfectly  mindful  of  the  standard
    jurisprudence in this area.  A proper account was taken of the Rule  in
    Tanveer  Ahmed  (2002)  UKIAT   00439   (at   paragraph   26   of   the
    determination).  In the same way, a  very  detailed  consideration  was
    given to the Supreme Court judgment in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31,  where
    the judge cited at length the relevant parts from the judgment of  Lord
    Rodgers (at paragraph 32)  and  also  took  into  account  Lord  Hope's
    analysis (paragraph 33).

21. In the same way, regard was given to the Appellant's Article  8  rights
    (at paragraph 35) and once again there are no criticisms to be made  of
    the judge's findings in this respect.

22. The Appellant did not attend and  did  not  have  legal  representation
    present to take matters any further  and  I  accordingly  dismiss  this
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 16th March 2018



