

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/03822/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC              |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 April 2018                      |           On 18 April 2018          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     FK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Holmes, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
         ('DRC') and claims that  was  forcibly  conscripted  into  military
         service at the age 14 and was subjected  to  anal  rape.   He  also
         claims to be gay and believes that he is at risk of persecution  in
         the DRC for reasons relating to this, together with  his  desertion
         from the army.

Appeal proceedings

      3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision  dated  29
         March 2017 refusing his asylum claim.  That appeal took place at  a
         hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  12  July  2017.   In  a
         decision prepared on 12 July but promulgated on 21 July  2017,  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,  having   found   the
         appellant's claim to be gay, as well as much of  the  remainder  of
         his account, to not be credible.

      4. In a decision dated 19 January  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
         granted permission to appeal observing that the grounds  of  appeal
         to be arguable.

Hearing

      5. Mr Holmes relied upon and amplified  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He
         focussed upon the First-tier Tribunal's failure to  pay  regard  to
         the country background evidence on the use of child soldiers in the
         DRC  and  its  misdirection  regarding  the  appellant's   evidence
         regarding his sexual orientation.

      6. Mr Bates submitted that any error in failing to  consider  all  the
         country background evidence was immaterial  because  when  that  is
         considered it does not support  the  proposition  advanced  by  the
         appellant, that child soldiers are forcibly  conscripted  into  the
         DRC army.  He also argued that the First-tier Tribunal has provided
         reasons entirely open to it at [15(a) to (f)],  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's claimed sexuality.

      7. At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Country background evidence

      8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  it  clear  at  [14(b)]  that   it
         'struggled' to accept the appellant's account that he was forced to
         join the  army  when  he  was  14,  in  2011,  and  said  this  was
         "particularly the case given the objective material  cited  in  the
         refusal letter relating to child labour".  That is a  reference  to
         [23] of the refusal letter in which the  respondent  contends  that
         the appellant's claim of being forced to join the  army  at  14  is
         inconsistent with the background country information.  Reference is
         then made to an online article accessed  on  23  March  2017  which
         states, inter alia, that the child protection code sets the minimum
         age for work at 16 and a Ministerial Order sets the minimum age for
         hazardous work at 18.

      9. As Judge Smith observed when granting permission to  appeal,  there
         was other evidence relied upon by the appellant  and  contained  in
         his bundle which addressed the issue of child labour in more detail
         and was capable of undermining  the  proposition  advanced  in  the
         refusal letter.  The First-tier Tribunal makes no mention  of  this
         evidence whatsoever.  The material includes the following:

          i) An undated article from 'SOS  Children's  Villages'  in  which
             reference is made to the  army  and  the  rebels  using  child
             soldiers.

         ii) A UNICEF report from July 2006 that the DRC tops the  list  of
             countries where armed forces and militia groups  use  children
             as soldiers.

        iii) A US State Department report for 2015  in  which  it  is  said
             that: the government did not effectively enforce  the  law  on
             forced labour, including child labour;  the  child  protection
             code  and  Ministerial  Order  were  insufficient   to   deter
             violations;  child  labour,  including  forced  child   labour
             remained a problem throughout the DRC.

     10. Mr Bates submitted that this evidence does not establish  that  the
         army used child soldiers in 2011, when the appellant claims to have
         been forced to join it.   This  is  because  the  articles  clearly
         stating that child soldiers are used in the army are either undated
         or out of date, and the US State report makes  no  mention  of  the
         child soldiers in the army.  Mr Bates therefore submitted that  the
         failure to consider this evidence could not be said to be material.
           I do not accept that the error  is  immaterial.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal regarded the legal provisions in place as undermining  the
         claim that there were child soldiers in the army.  Such an approach
         failed to take into account: when those provisions were implemented
         given the appellant joined the army in 2011; the evidence that  the
         legal provisions were not effectively  enforced  and  child  labour
         remained a problem; the DRC has at least in  the  past  used  child
         soldiers in its army albeit it is unclear if and when this stopped.



     11. In my judgment, the material available to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         was  capable  of  calling  into  question  the  country  background
         evidence relied upon by the respondent, even if it did  not  wholly
         undermine it, and the First-tier Tribunal was  obliged  to  address
         it,  resolve  any  inconsistencies  arising  and  then   take   the
         appropriate background evidence into account when  considering  the
         plausibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  forcibly
         conscripted to the army at 14.  In failing to do so, the First-tier
         Tribunal has committed a material error of law.

     12. The First-tier Tribunal also failed to take into  account  a  short
         two-page summary of the appellant's military camp in  Kinshasa,  as
         contained in the appellant's bundle.  This  referred  to  the  camp
         have  around  40,000  inhabitants  with  nearly  6000  being   men,
         approximately 6000 women, with the  remainder  probably  comprising
         children.  The appellant claimed that there were about 50  gay  men
         in the camp, and it is difficult to see how 12% (50/6000,  and  the
         number is likely to be higher if the figure for men excludes  older
         teenage boys) could be said by the First-tier Tribunal  at  [15(c)]
         to be "such a large" group.



Sexuality

     13. The First-tier Tribunal regarded the appellant's claim of realising
         that he was attracted to men as "somewhat unusual" at [15(a)].   In
         summary he explained, that he was raped so much  and  for  so  long
         when forcibly recruited to the army as a child  that  it  made  him
         "become gay" and "took away the pleasure of women".  The First-tier
         Tribunal made this finding:

             "I struggle to find how  being  anally  raped  would  make  an
             individual more inclined to become gay."

     14. As Mr Holmes submitted, the appellant gave an account of  sustained
         trauma over an extended period at a young age.  He described a path
         of sexual  identity  awareness  that  was  peculiar  to  him.   The
         question for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  was  therefore
         whether it was reasonably likely  that  this  particular  appellant
         would identify as gay, given his past and all  the  other  relevant
         circumstances.  There was no expert evidence or any other  form  of
         evidence to support the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that  being
         anally raped in the circumstances claimed in the DRC would not make
         an individual more inclined to be gay.

     15. The Asylum Policy  Instruction  on  Sexual  Orientation  in  Asylum
         Claims, 3 August 2016, states:

             "Where stigmatisation may  have  inhibited  an  individual  in
             coming to terms with their true  sexual  identity  and  openly
             expressing it, feelings of self-denial and shame  may  persist
             and some claimants may find it  extremely  difficult  to  talk
             freely and openly about the development of such identity. This
             may render  the  process  of  fact  finding,  in  some  cases,
             challenging and caseworkers should  be  aware  that  a  sexual
             orientation claim can be linked to some of the most sensitive,
             intimate  areas  of  an  individual's  private  life  such  as
             emotions, affections, love and companionship.




             Caseworkers are required to explore  the  claimant's  feelings
             about their sexual orientation in a sensitive manner and where
             narratives of shame are presented, explore its impact  on  the
             claimant and what coping strategies or responses they may have
             adopted to deal with this, for example, whether  the  claimant
             found relief,  support  or  guidance  in  religion,  work,  or
             friendships."

     16. The appellant's claim to have "become gay"  must  be  seen  in  the
         context of the society he was brought up in, in which homosexuality
         is  illegal  and  systematically  stigmatised.   No   consideration
         appears to  have  been  given  to  the  impact  of  this  upon  the
         appellant, and in particular the manner he expressed the reasons he
         believed he had "become gay".  I wholly acknowledge,  as  Mr  Bates
         submitted,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  provided  other
         reasons  for  not  accepting  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  gay.
         However, the first reason provided was not open  to  her,  for  the
         reasons set out above, and it cannot be said  that  her  assessment
         would have remained the same without this.

Other grounds of appeal

     17. There is no need for me to address the  other  grounds  of  appeal.
         This is because I am satisfied  that  the  errors  of  law  I  have
         identified are such that the First-tier Tribunal decision  must  be
         set aside and remitted de novo.

     18. This is an appeal that turned largely on  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's claim to be gay and his  forced  recruitment  into  the
         army as a child.  When the errors identified above  are  considered
         together I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's  credibility
         assessment contains material errors of law and must be set aside.

Disposal

     19. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         This is because completely fresh findings of fact  in  relation  to
         detailed evidence are necessary.

Decision

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     21. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
11 April 2018

