
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03518/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 February 2018                     |On 6 March 2018                     |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     SAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal, A-R Law Chambers.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 25 March 2017 refusing her application for asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 18 November 1983.   She
    arrived in the UK on 24 February 2012 with entry clearance as a student
    valid until October 2013.  On  12  December  2013  she  applied  for  a
    residence permit on EEA grounds.  Her  application  was  refused.   She
    appealed but her appeal was dismissed.  She made a further  application
    on EEA grounds in July 2015 but again  she  was  unsuccessful.   On  15
    August 2016 she made an application for international  protection.  The
    respondent accepted that the appellant was a citizen  of  Cameroon  but
    she was not satisfied  that  she  had  a  genuine  subjective  fear  of
    returning or  that  she  would  be  of  any  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities.  For these reasons her application was refused.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

3.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  adopted
    her witness statement which the  judge  has  set  out  at  [4]  of  his
    decision.  She gave oral evidence summarised  at  [5]-[13].   In  brief
    outline, she claimed she had been a student in Cameroon  from  2004  to
    2010.  In April 2005 students at the university she was  attending  had
    taken part in peaceful protests which led to her being arrested  on  28
    April 2005 by police in her hostel off-campus.  She  said  that  whilst
    detained she was raped  both  vaginally  and  anally  on  two  separate
    occasions by two masked police officers.   She  was  released  after  a
    month.  On 3 November 2006 she was arrested again by police  on  campus
    during a peaceful student protest.  She was detained for about  a  week
    and then released.

4.    In September 2010 she enrolled on a  Master's  programme.   There  was
    another protest at the university and the  appellant  was  arrested  in
    class on 28 September 2010.  She was later taken to  a  police  station
    and at night uniformed and armed police officers walked  in  and  raped
    her, including anally.  She was detained for about one month.  She  had
    to stop schooling and she went to a hospital where she was attended  to
    medically.  Later, she submitted an application to study in the UK  and
    her application was successful.  On 3 February 2012 she  went  back  to
    the university to collect her transcripts and all necessary  documents.
    She was arrested in the street and was detained for  two  nights.   She
    was again raped at night by two masked police officers.  After she  was
    released she went to hospital for a check-up.  She arrived in the UK on
    24 February 2012.  The following month she started feeling sick and had
    a positive pregnancy test at six weeks carried out  by  her  GP  on  22
    March 2012 and her pregnancy was terminated on 3 April 2012.

5.    The appellant claimed that she could not return  to  Cameroon  as  she
    would be in danger from the police authorities. She still believed that
    they wished to harm her.  In support of her  application  she  produced
    medical evidence including a letter from a hospital in London dated  25
    January 2017 which confirmed a previous attendance  on  22  March  2012
    "following an alleged vaginal rape  by  a  masked  assailant  while  in
    Cameroon one month previously".  At  the  hearing  the  appellant  also
    produced and relied on  background  evidence  about  the  situation  in
    Cameroon and on written statements from her mother and brother.

6.    The judge accepted that the appellant had told  the  truth  about  her
    nationality and identity and that  there  did  not  appear  to  be  any
    discrepancy over her immigration history as the issue  of  the  appeals
    against the EEA matter had  been  resolved  [32].   He  considered  the
    background evidence at [33]-[34] but commented that it was not of great
    help.  One document referred to  clashes  in  November  2016  over  the
    abolition of financial penalties for  students  who  were  late  paying
    tuition fees.   There  was  an  article  from  an  unidentified  source
    referring to clashes between the authorities, the public  and  students
    in 2016 which accused the authorities of rape, torture and arrests and,
    in passing, referring to previous student riots in 2005 and  2006  ,  a
    document referring to clashes  since  October  2016  which  showed  the
    government's willingness to use force against citizens  but  the  judge
    commented that he had not been provided with any evidence as to whether
    the government was the same as in 2005 and another  document  referring
    to the same troubles which, although showing the  heavy  handedness  of
    the authorities, did not confirm the appellant's claim in  relation  to
    clashes back in 2005. He  took  into  account  the  statements  of  the
    appellant's mother and brother and explained in [38] and  [39]  why  he
    could not regard them as independent confirmation of her claim.

7.    The judge set out his findings on the appellant's claim that  she  had
    been raped in [35]- [37].  She had claimed that  she  was  detained  on
    four occasions and on three of  these  occasions  she  was  beaten  and
    raped, both vaginal and anal rape.  She maintained that the reason  the
    first attack took place in April 2005 and then again in  November  2006
    was because of her involvement as vice president of the student  union.
    The judge commented that despite these horrendous incidents she claimed
    to have stayed on at the university to finish her degree and  continued
    with her student  union  activities  but  she  had  not  satisfactorily
    explained why  she  should  remain  there  following  these  incidents,
    especially as it occurred firstly so early on in her university  course
    and there was no reason  why  she  could  not  have  moved  to  another
    university if necessary.

8.    The judge described as even  more  unlikely  her  claim  that,  having
    qualified in 2008 and presumably then taken up  a  teaching  post,  she
    returned in 2010 to the university but within a month of  starting  her
    course, another protest had taken place and security officers from  the
    university detained her and then handed her over to the  police  as  an
    instigator of the protest.  He did not believe that she would ever have
    got on a master's course in the first place if she were so viewed as  a
    troublemaker.

9.    The judge commented that she had claimed that the last attack  on  her
    happened when she went to university to pick up documents.  He did  not
    find this credible as she had left the university and  had  stated  she
    did not complete the master's course.  He also noted that she made  her
    on-line application to come to the UK on 25 January 2012,  a  few  days
    before going to the  university  and  had  produced  a  valid  CAS  and
    documents to show her qualifications. She claimed that she went back to
    the university to get her documents, but the judge could see no  reason
    why she should do so when she already had sufficient to provide for her
    visa application.  She had clearly been planning to leave  the  country
    for the UK long before her claimed latest detention and this cast doubt
    on  the  credibility  of  her  claim  to  have  been  attacked  by  the
    authorities in the way she claimed.  The judge said at the end of [37]:


         "It may well be true that she was attacked in some way by a  masked
         assailant and is the victim of rape both vaginal and anal but I  do
         not believe that she has shown to the required standard that she is
         the victim of an attack perpetrated by  the  authorities  and  that
         therefore she would be at risk on return."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10.   In the grounds of appeal, it is argued at [2] of the grounds that  the
    main reason for refusal seemed to be that the appellant did not provide
    any documentary evidence to show that she was not able to  get  letters
    from her legal advisers and that postal services in Cameroon  were  not
    functioning due to strikes.  It is argued  that  it  was  not  for  the
    appellant to provide such evidence.  The burden was on her to show that
    she might be telling the truth and the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    burden of proof.  It is then argued at [3] that the judge had applied a
    wrong test in rejecting the  appellant's  evidence  in  [35],  when  he
    commented that the appellant  had  complained  to  the  doctor  at  the
    hospital not of anal rape but of vaginal  rape  by  masked  assailants.
    The grounds comment that the policemen were the masked assailants.

11.   It is then argued at [4] that the judge had stated  in  [37]  that  it
    might well be true that the appellant had been attacked in some way  by
    masked assailants and was the victim of rape both vaginal and anal.  It
    is argued that the judge applied the wrong test as  the  appellant  was
    only required to show that she was  raped  and  at  [5]  that  she  had
    produced documentary evidence to  show  that  a  few  weeks  after  her
    arrival in the UK she  had  a  pregnancy  terminated.   The  judge  had
    accepted this evidence but had refused the appeal.

12.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that at [35] the  judge  had  misapprehended
    the evidence: he  had  perceived  inconsistencies  as  to  whether  the
    appellant had been subjected to vaginal or anal rape  and  whether  the
    rape was perpetrated by police officers or a masked assailant.  It  was
    arguable that the appellant's statement, reproduced verbatim at [4]  of
    the decision indicated that she was raped both vaginally and anally and
    that the perpetrators were masked police  officers.   It  was  arguable
    that this misapprehension contributed  to  the  finding  at  [37]  that
    whilst the appellant might have been raped, she  had  not  proved  that
    this was perpetrated by the authorities and in  consequence  she  would
    not be at risk on return.

13.   In his submissions Mr Afzal adopted his  grounds  and  submitted  that
    the judge's decision raised doubts as to whether  he  had  applied  the
    proper standard of proof.  His comment in [37] that the  appellant  may
    well have been the victim of vaginal and anal rape met the low standard
    of proof.  The judge appeared to draw an  adverse  inference  from  the
    fact that she had been unable to  obtain  further  information  and  he
    should also not have drawn an adverse inference from what was  recorded
    in the letter from the hospital.

14.   Mr Avery submitted that  the  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings  of  fact.   The  judge,  so  he
    argued, had adopted a balanced approach to the evidence and his adverse
    credibility findings had been properly open to him.  He was entitled to
    attach weight to the fact that on the appellant's own account  she  had
    remained at the university after the claimed  events  of  2005  and  to
    comment on the fact that there appeared to be no reason for her  return
    in February 2012 to obtain further documents.  He further  argued  that
    there was no indication that the judge had misapprehended the evidence.
     He had taken all the relevant evidence into account and had reached  a
    decision properly open to him.

Assessment of the Issues

15.   The issue which the First-tier Tribunal judge identified  as  arguable
    when  granting  permission  to  appeal  was  whether  the   judge   had
    misapprehended the evidence in [35] by identifying  inconsistencies  on
    the issues of whether the appellant had been raped vaginally and anally
    and whether the perpetrators were masked police officers.  It would  be
    helpful to set out [35] in full:
         "It is clear from the medical documents provided by  the  appellant
         that she has  some  physical  symptoms  including  persistent  anal
         fissures.  An anal fissure, according to the dictionary, is a  tear
         or open sore that develops in the lining of the  anal  canal.   The
         medical evidence does not attribute her fissures to any  particular
         cause.  Although the medical records appear to suggest that she has
         complained of anal rape the evidence does not confirm this.  It  is
         possible that there are other causes and so far as I  am  concerned
         the records simply suggest that she has made previous complaints of
         anal rape causing the problem.  The records, however, also show  an
         inconsistency in her complaint which does damage  her  credibility.
         That is the fact that when she complained  to  a  doctor  at  [...]
         Hospital it was not of anal rape but of vaginal rape and it was  by
         a "masked assailant" and not by Police Officers as she now  claims.
         The medical evidence adds some weight  to  her  claim  but  is  not
         conclusive."

16.   When [35] is read in the context of the decision as a whole, I am  not
    satisfied that there is any misapprehension of the evidence.  The judge
    said that it was clear from the medical documents  that  the  appellant
    had some physical symptoms including persistent anal fissures.  He  was
    right to comment that  the  medical  evidence  did  not  attribute  her
    fissures to any particular cause  and,  although  the  medical  records
    appeared to suggest that she had complained of anal rape, the  evidence
    did not confirm this.  The reference to "the evidence" in this  context
    is  clearly  to  the  medical  evidence.   The  judge  was   under   no
    misapprehension that the appellant claimed that she had been raped both
    vaginally and anally by police officers:  this is not only set  out  in
    the summary of the evidence at [4] but also referred to [36] and  [37].
    The judge was not  under  any  misapprehension  about  the  appellant's
    evidence which could have had any bearing  on  or  contributed  to  his
    comment in [37] that the  appellant  may  have  been  raped  albeit  in
    different circumstances.

17.    The  judge  did  comment  that  the   medical   records   showed   an
    inconsistency which  did  damage  her  credibility  in  that  when  she
    complained to the doctor at the hospital it was not of anal rape but of
    vaginal rape by a masked assailant.  The inconsistency was between what
    was recorded in  this  letter  and  the  account  being  given  in  the
    appellant's evidence in her statement adopted at the hearing.  This was
    a factor that the judge was entitled to take into account  and  it  was
    for him to decide in the context of the evidence as a whole what weight
    to attach to this discrepancy.  There is no reason to believe  that  he
    gave this undue weight.  It was one of a number of factors he took into
    account including the fact that he  took  the  view  that  the  medical
    evidence added some weight to her claim but there  were  other  factors
    the judge was entitled to take into account identified in [36]-[37]  as
    adverse to her credibility.

18.   It is further argued that the judge's comment  at  [37]  that  it  may
    well be true that the appellant had been attacked  in  some  way  by  a
    masked assailant and was the victim of rape indicated that he  did  not
    apply the proper standard of proof when assessing her evidence.   I  am
    not satisfied that there is any substance in this  ground.   The  judge
    properly directed himself on the correct standard at [18] and  referred
    again to this standard in [41] and [42]. Whilst the judge accepted that
    the appellant may have been raped, he made it clear  that  he  did  not
    accept that she had showed to the required standard that  she  was  the
    victim of an attack perpetrated by the authorities.  That was a finding
    of fact properly open to him for the reasons he  gave  particularly  in
    [36] and [37] of his decision.

19.   It was also argued in the grounds that the  main  reason  for  refusal
    appeared to be that the appellant did not provide  further  documentary
    evidence about her inability to get letters from her legal advisers and
    that the postal services were not working due to strikes. However, when
    assessing the appellant's evidence, the judge was entitled  to  comment
    on the absence of evidence which could reasonably have  been  produced.
    His comments in [28] and [29] were properly open to him.  There  is  no
    substance in the argument that the main reason for the  appeal  failing
    was the lack of documentation although that was a relevant  matter  the
    judge was entitled to take into account.

20.   In summary, I am not satisfied that  the  judge  proceeded  under  any
    misapprehension of the evidence or that he failed to apply the  correct
    standard of proof.  He reached findings of fact properly  open  to  him
    for the reasons he gave following a careful assessment of the evidence.
     The grounds do not satisfy me that he erred in law.

Decision

21.   The First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in  law  and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal stands.

22.   The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
