
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 February 2018                  |On 8 March 2018                         |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [C P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Toal, Counsel, instructed by


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  brought  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith whose determination
    was promulgated on 10 October 2017 in which he allowed  the  appeal  of
    [CP] on human rights grounds.  He dismissed the asylum appeal  and  the
    Article  3  claim  and  no  challenge  is  made  to   those   findings.
    Consequently the only material aspect of the claim was  the  Article  8
    claim.

 2. I shall refer to [CP] as the appellant as she  was  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  She is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  was  born  on  1  February
    1976.  She is  now  42  years  old  and  is  a  single  woman  with  no
    dependants.  She has what has to be described  as  a  poor  immigration
    history.  She came to the United Kingdom in 1994 as a visitor with  her
    aunt but then returned to Zimbabwe.  The  significant  entry  into  the
    United Kingdom as far as we are concerned is the last that  took  place
    when she returned to the United Kingdom in September 2000  with  a  six
    month visit visa.  That visit visa would have expired in March or April
    of 2001.  She was then aged 24 and she has remained  as  an  overstayer
    ever since.  She sought to remain as  a  student  in  2003.   That  was
    refused in 2005.  It was considered and refused at a time when she  had
    no extant leave and there was therefore  no  continuation  leave.   She
    later applied for further leave to remain and this  was  also  refused.
    She was served with a notice of removal on  7  August  2015  and  later
    submitted additional grounds.  The application was refused in September
    2015.  Very much at the end of the period,  she  claimed  asylum  on  9
    October 2015 in circumstances where there was no arguable case that she
    was at risk of serious harm on return to Zimbabwe.   The  human  rights
    claim was a parasitic claim attached  to  that  asylum  claim,  brought
    under the operation of Article 8.

 3. The appellant has three sisters in the United Kingdom. [M] was born  in
    1983, [J] in 1979 and [S] in 1981.  Between those three  sisters  there
    are some four  nephews  and  nieces  and  the  one  which  is  of  most
    significance for our purposes is K who was born on [ ] 2005.  She is of
    course the appellant's niece and she is now aged 12.  There  are  other
    children who are mentioned but they do  not  pose  such  a  significant
    difficulty.

 4. The judge dealt with the appellant's claim under  Article  3  following
    the diagnosis of PTSD which was  provided  in  a  report  by  Professor
    Katona.  It was based upon incidents of domestic  violence  experienced
    by her in the United Kingdom.  He  concluded  that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD  and  he  recommended  treatment  in  the  form  of
    cognitive behavioural therapy rather than antidepressants.   He  failed
    to give any reasons to support his conclusions and it was as  a  result
    of this that the judge did not attach significant weight to his  report
    as outlined at paragraph 51 of the determination.  However it is  clear
    that the judge took into account Professor Katona's report  as  one  of
    the factors which assisted him in reaching his conclusion  in  relation
    to Article 8.

 5. In addition there was a report of Mr Horrocks.  That  was  referred  to
    expressly in paragraph 56 of the determination in which the judge  says
    that he had regard and placed significant weight on the  report  of  Mr
    Horrocks.  He then summarised it in very very brief terms.  They  were,
    in my judgment, inadequate to do justice to it.  On the face of it  the
    fact that the appellant  does  not  fall  within  the  public  interest
    criteria set out in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  does  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276(1)(iii) was a significant factor
    in the consideration that the judge was required  to  carry  out.   The
    appellant  does  not  meet  the  public  interest  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules. That was a matter recorded by the decision maker  in
    the decision of March 2017.

 6. However during the course of the hearing this morning I was referred to
    the report of Mr Horrocks.  It is an impressive piece of report writing
    which clearly influenced the judge and which, had it been  set  out  in
    greater detail, would doubtless have made my preliminary  view  of  the
    merits of this appeal rather different.  He  sets  out  in  his  report
    following an interview with the appellant in September  2017  that  she
    and all of her  siblings  were  exposed  to  high  levels  of  domestic
    violence at home and difficult relationships with  their  parents.   It
    led to a very divisive family breakdown.  That may have  been  part  of
    the history and, if it were only a matter of history, would  be  of  no
    particular relevance in the appeal before us.  However it is clear that
    the long term sequelae of that severe abuse that the children  suffered
    has had its impact - and continues to have its impact - on the lives of
    the siblings.  In  summary,  the  role  that  has  been  taken  by  the
    appellant is a role which is described  as  a  parenting  role  to  her
    siblings to the extent that she has become almost a maternal figure for
    them in the absence of their mother.  Both the appellant and [J]  spoke
    in similar terms about the role that she  plays  and  the  past  family
    experiences.

 7. The appellant herself was the victim of further  domestic  violence  at
    the hands of her partner, [B], who had followed her from Zimbabwe.  Her
    own vulnerability also features in the report.

 8. In November 2006 the appellant returned to London in order to be  close
    to her sisters and her grandmother.  At that time K was about 11 months
    old.  Her mother, [M], whose mother was in full-time work,  was  looked
    after by the appellant. [M]  was  struggling  a  great  deal  with  her
    parenting role.  She used to drink alcohol to excess.  She was also the
    victim of domestic violence with her then partner. As a result of  that
    early, very short period of some six months  or  so,  the  relationship
    between K and the appellant was developed.   The  role  played  by  the
    appellant was an extensive one, not  simply  directed  towards  K,  but
    towards her mother, the appellant's sister, [M].  She helped [M] attend
    alcohol misuse programmes and the appellant  used  to  be  involved  in
    school events for K.  Once social services became involved  because  of
    the ongoing domestic violence, the appellant would attend meetings with
    them.  However, when [M] and K were moved  to  a  women's  hostel,  the
    appellant continued to be involved and support her  sister  and  niece.
    The appellant describes her sister as  a  vulnerable  individual  as  a
    result of her experiences.  She struggles to meet her  own  needs,  let
    alone the needs of her daughter who was born when she was  very  young.
    Her  difficulties  had  continued  and  there  has  been  more   recent
    involvement  with  social  services  over  the  last  eighteen   months
    following allegations that [M] was abusing K.  Mr Horrocks  appears  to
    believe that as a result of the intervention of [CP], it  was  possible
    for [M] to remain living with K.

 9. As a result of the housing department's involvement  with  the  family,
    they decided in 2016 that the appellant could no longer live  with  [M]
    and K in their home but she continues to have contact in a  very  overt
    way, seeing them  three  times  a  week  and  staying  overnight.   The
    appellant attends all of K's activities when she takes parts in  plays,
    singing and sports.  She takes K to guides and  other  sporting  events
    such as school sports day.  She is said by Mr Horrocks to be the  first
    point of contact if an adult is required.  She attends meetings, took K
    to her entrance exams for her secondary school and used to take her  to
    and from school after her mother had started working full-time until  K
    was able to manage this on her own.  It is the appellant who talks with
    K about the problems of puberty.  K herself is too shy to talk  to  her
    mother about such matters and her father is clearly not reliable.   The
    appellant said that [M] had made a lot of progress and is now in  full-
    time employment but remains very dependent  on  her  elder  sister  and
    continues to be very immature in her functioning.

10. Mr Horrocks continues with the description and interview with K herself
    and it is clear from this that K places a great deal of reliance on her
    aunt's presence.  There was also  an  interview  with  [J],  her  other
    sister.  She describes her sister as speaking to [M] on  the  telephone
    several times during the day.  They talk about everything and anything.
     Indeed [M] will call her in the middle of the  night.   The  appellant
    calms her down and helps her out.  She also  described  [M]  as  making
    progress and trying her best but was still very vulnerable.   [J]  also
    spoke about the risks if [M] were to revert to her  alcohol  misuse  or
    even were she to go back to her abusive  partner.   She  described  the
    role that the appellant played in trying to keep the  family  together,
    notwithstanding the fact that [M]  herself  is  often  abusive  to  the
    appellant and says hurtful things but this is tolerated by  her  sister
    as part of the process of trying to keep the family together.

11. The report then deals with a series of questions. I  am  not  going  to
    refer to those questions and the answer that were provided.   They  are
    set out in paragraphs 4 onwards of the report but the summary of  those
    findings is that the appellant's sister [M] is a vulnerable  individual
    and needs a considerable amount of support  that  would  inevitably  be
    lost, were the appellant to be removed to Zimbabwe.

12. The conclusions and recommendations are set out in  Section  5  of  the
    report and paragraph 5.3 concludes

         "On this occasion in the absence of the protective role  played  by
         [CP] and the lack of any progress in terms of  the  functioning  of
         [M] there is a not inconsiderable risk that K would be removed from
         the care of her mother and that she would require alternative  long
         term care arrangements.  As a result there would be  risks  that  K
         would suffer  further  emotional  harm  as  well  as  harm  to  her
         educational and social development because of the upheavals in  her
         life."

    That report clearly  underpins  and  informs  the  conclusion  that  is
    reached by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  paragraph  57  of  his
    determination where he says

         "I am satisfied that the relationship between the appellant and her
         adult sisters,  her  nieces  and  nephews  and  in  particular  her
         relationship with [M] and K goes far beyond the usual  family  ties
         and amounts to family life,  removing  the  appellant  would  be  a
         significant interference capable of engaging Article 8."

    The judge then goes on to deal with  proportionality  and  reaches  his
    conclusion based both on the family situation and the  background  that
    Mr Horrocks referred to as well  as  the  medical  evidence  which  was
    provided by Professor Katona  which  although  not  meeting  Article  3
    standards was a material factor when it came to  the  consideration  of
    proportionality.

13. Before I deal with my ultimate conclusion, I feel it necessary to  deal
    with the way this was approached  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing before Judge Griffiths.   The  note  of  what  is  said  is  as
    follows.

         'Although I also submitted that her physical  conditions  were  not
         serious enough to engage Article 3 either and that  the  suggestion
         in the psychiatric report of suicide risk was very  speculative,  I
         did accept that they might engage Article 3.   Similarly,  although
         her  carer  roles  of  her  sisters  appeared  to  be  merely   the
         convenience she offered for child-care like many  families  and  so
         amounted to nothing more than normal emotional ties, I did  concede
         that combined with her medical issues and the length of  residence,
         this might tip the overall Article 8  balance  in  her  favour.   I
         suspect that the new evidence on her mental state will lead to  the
         judge allowing the appeal but possibly on Article 8 only.'

14. That was obviously a prescient statement by the Presenting Officer  but
    it also assists me in forming a view as to how the case was approached.
     It was clear that the  Secretary  of  State,  as  represented  by  the
    Presenting Officer, was clearly mindful of the matters to which I  have
    referred and was providing the judge with a fairly open opportunity  to
    consider Article 8 in its roundest form.  In particular, this was not a
    case where paragraph 276ADE(1) afforded the public interest element  of
    the appeal the  range  that  is  sometimes  possible  in  other  cases.
    Neither Appendix FM nor paragraph  276ADE(1)  makes  reference  to  the
    principles which we all now associate with the decision in  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2003]  INLR  170.  The
    emotional ties for which one looks for evidence, the closeness  between
    siblings and the emotional links that tie them together do not normally
    result  in  family  life  such  as  to  prevent  removal.    There   is
    understandably a high threshold to be met before those  emotional  ties
    and links provide protection against  removal.   In  the  circumstances
    described in the material placed before him, I think it was open to the
    judge to reach the conclusion that he did.  It  is  for  those  reasons
    that I allow the appeal.

15. I apologise for dealing with the report of Mr Horrocks in  such  detail
    but I think it was only by reference to a detailed consideration of the
    report that the impact it had on the judge's  thinking  comes  through.
    That is to some extent reflected, I think, in the note that was made by
    the Presenting Officer.  The report clearly influenced the stance  that
    he adopted before the judge.

DECISION

      i) I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

     ii) The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  revealed  no
         error of law and  his  determination  shall  stand  as  the  proper
         disposal of the appeal.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
