




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/03230/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House                 |    Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 24 July 2017                      |    On: 2 August 2017                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                     K K
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, counsel (instructed by AH Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of  India,  born  on  5  April  1986.  She
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Anstis  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision  refusing  her  application  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
      protection. The decision was promulgated on 14 February 2017.

The background to the First-tier Tribunal appeal

   2. Judge Anstis noted that the appeal was originally listed  for  hearing
      on 9 September 2016. An application to adjourn that hearing  was  made
      two weeks prior to the scheduled date on the basis that the  appellant
      had an impending operation. The appeal was accordingly  adjourned  and
      was re-listed for hearing on 6 February 2017 [6].

   3. On 1 February 2017 there was a  further  application  to  adjourn  the
      hearing on the basis of the appellant's health. It was  asserted  that
      the appellant had an oophorectomy operation on 26  August  2016.  Over
      the last month she had a CT scan and stool test showing  a  recurrence
      of her right ovarian  cyst  and  an  abnormal  stool  sample.  She  is
      experiencing constant abdominal pain and  ongoing  nausea  and  reflux
      symptoms which recently  became  worse.  She  has  an  endoscopy  pre-
      assessment appointment on 14 February 2017. She was also  referred  to
      gynaecology to determine whether she needs a further operation.

   4. In their covering letter requesting the adjournment,  the  appellant's
      solicitor's stated that she has 'confirmed' to them that she  will  be
      unable to attend the office in the run up to the hearing so that  they
      can take instructions from her in order to prepare for the hearing, as
      she is "extremely unwell." She has also been distraught over the  past
      few weeks in relation to her deteriorating health. They have spoken to
      their client on 1 February 2017 and she confirmed  to  them  that  she
      does not feel physically or mentally fit to attend her  asylum  appeal
      hearing. The request was therefore made to adjourn the  hearing  until
      April  2017  when  she  has  fully  recovered  from  the  oophorectomy
      operation.

   5. The Judge also referred to a  letter  from  the  appellant's  GP,  who
      stated that the appellant "tells me"  that  the  abdominal  pains  are
      constant and become more severe at any time and long car journeys  and
      travel tend to make her symptoms worse. She feels she is not  in  good
      health at the moment. He understands that she has  an  appeal  hearing
      but does not  feel  well  enough  to  attend  it.  These  are  ongoing
      symptoms, to take into consideration, and her appeal hearing should be
      postponed until the time her health improves.

   6. Judge Anstis noted that the respondent's refusal letter recorded  that
      the appellant failed  to  attend  three  asylum  interviews  scheduled
      during December 2015,  January  and  February  2016  also  on  medical
      grounds before submitting a written  statement  for  consideration  in
      March 2016.

   7. Judge Anstis recorded  at  [10]  that  the  application  made  for  an
      adjournment on 1 February 2017 was refused by the Judge, who commented
      "in strong terms" that he has read the case. "....On the papers it  is
      weak - I decline to  devote  more  Tribunal  time  to  it.  I  am  not
      persuaded the appellant is not trying  to  avoid  having  to  put  her
      case".

   8. At the hearing on 6 February 2017, the appellant's  counsel,  (not  Ms
      Daykin), renewed the application for an  adjournment.  He  produced  a
      hospital  discharge  note  from  3  February  2017  showing  that  the
      appellant  had  self-referred  to  the  hospital  with  chest   pains,
      eventually being discharged for follow up to her GP.

   9. Counsel stated that she was too unwell to attend the Tribunal  hearing
      and too unwell to instruct her solicitors. It was contended that there
      were good reasons for her absence and the case could not be fairly and
      justly determined without her presence.

  10. That application was opposed. The  presenting  officer  was  concerned
      that there appeared to be no time frame given for when  the  appellant
      could be  expected  to  be  well  enough  for  the  hearing  and  that
      potentially any adjournments could go on for a  long  time  [13].  The
      appellant's Counsel acknowledged that this was a  concern  but  stated
      that the appellant was to have an endoscopy in a week's time and  that
      the case should be listed for a CMR.

  11. Before  deciding  under  the  Rules  whether  an  application  for  an
      adjournment should be  granted,  the  Judge  asked  counsel  what  the
      appellant's attendance would add to the evidence that she had  already
      submitted in her statement prepared for her asylum  claim.  He  stated
      that his only  instructions  were  what  is  in  that  statement;  his
      instructing solicitors had not been able to give him any indication of
      what additional evidence the appellant might give if  present  at  the
      hearing [15].

  12.  The  Judge  then  considered  whether  fairness  required   that   an
      adjournment be granted. He concluded that fairness did not require  an
      adjournment and it was not appropriate to allow  an  adjournment.  The
      appeal proceeded.

  13. He had regard to the appellant's unsigned statement dated 2 March 2016
      and also noted that there was no evidence  from  her  husband  despite
      there being no impediment to  his  attendance  at  the  Tribunal,  and
      despite the fact that he must have had  first  hand  knowledge  of  at
      least some of the matters referred to  in  the  appellant's  statement
      [29]. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Daykin was not able
      to give any explanation or reason why her husband had not attended the
      hearing or given a statement in support.

  14. Judge Anstis set  out  in  some  detail  the  appellant's  immigration
      history set out in her statement  where  she  described  marrying  her
      husband in January 2010 and the birth of their child in November  2010
      [30].

  15. He had regard to her description of her father as both influential and
      protective, and  had not allowed her to go to school on her  own.  She
      first met her husband in 2002 and spent time talking  to  him  at  her
      school.  Her father was then angry and  'banned  her'  from  going  to
      school, requiring her to stay at-home.  She lost touch with her future
      husband who moved to the UK but she spoke to him on  the  phone  [31].
      She met her future husband soon after arriving in the UK.

  16. The Judge noted that the refusal  letter  accepted  the  fact  of  the
      appellant's relationship with her husband but not that her  father  is
      influential or had an adverse interest in her. He  noted  that  it  is
      clear from the appellant's own evidence that she was permitted by  her
      father to leave India and study in the UK. He accepted the point  made
      in the  refusal  letter  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  what  the
      appellant says about her father - at one point not even  allowing  her
      to go to the local school. It did not make sense that a father who was
      so controlling as not to allow her to attend school would then  accept
      her studying in a foreign country [40].

  17. The Judge stated that he would have  expected  much  more  information
      about the extent of the father's influence and how it had arisen.  All
      there was in her statement was a general assertion that her father  is
      influential. No details are given. This was not satisfactory - [42].

  18. The Judge referred to (and  accepted)  country  material  'suggesting'
      that internal relocation and/or sufficiency  of  protection  would  be
      available to the appellant on return to India [43].

  19. He dismissed her appeal for asylum as well as under Article 8.

  20. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted the appellant permission  to
      appeal against the decision. The grounds in support asserted that  the
      Judge erred in refusing the appellant's  application  which  prevented
      her from the benefit of a fair hearing.

  21. Judge Osborne noted that whilst there was  '.....otherwise  a  careful
      and well reasoned decision and reasons in which the Judge took account
      of  the  correct  case  law  and  correct  legal  principles'  it  was
      nonetheless arguable that the Judge erred in failing  to  adjourn  and
      that justice should  not  only  be  done  but  should  manifestly  and
      undoubtedly be seen to be done.

  22. Ms Daykin relied on the grounds of appeal drawn by the former counsel.
      She referred to the history giving rise to the  adjournment.  Although
      it is accepted that the Judge applied the correct  test,  fairness  in
      this case necessitated that the appellant be granted an adjournment to
      ensure a fair hearing. The  appellant  should  have  been  afforded  a
      proper opportunity to prepare and prosecute her  appeal,  particularly
      as it was an asylum appeal. On account of her health difficulties, her
      representatives  had  not  had  the  opportunity  to  take  sufficient
      instructions from her to be able to prepare her appeal to  advance  it
      in her absence or to identify what further  information  and  evidence
      might assist her in discharging the burden of proof upon her.

  23.  I  inquired  from  Ms  Daykin  what,  if  anything,  the  appellant's
      representatives had done since the original adjournment in August 2016
      and February 2017 to take instructions from the appellant  to  prepare
      her appeal. She frankly  stated  that  she  had  not  been  given  any
      information in that respect and was unable to assist. There was  still
      no indication when the appellant would be able to participate  in  the
      appeal proceedings.

  24. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that  the  Judge  has
      had proper regard to the  underlying  considerations  under  the  2014
      Rules. There was in fact no evidence as to whether the appellant would
      ever be able to participate  at  a  hearing.  The  GP's  reference  to
      adjournment "until her  health  improves"  was  singularly  vague  and
      unhelpful.

  25. Nor had there been any evidence that the attendance at a hearing would
      affect her health. The Judge was aware of  the  overriding  objective,
      and in particular the proportionality principles.

  26. He submitted that fairness also requires certainty and completion. The
      appellant was not immobile. She was able to look after herself.

      Assessment

  27. Judge  Anstis  had  proper  regard  to  the  President  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  Fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
      00418 (IAC). The overriding objective was fairness. Delay must only be
      avoided so far as compatible with proper consideration of  the  issues
      and fairness is the supreme criterion [18].

  28. He has set out in some detail the history of the  appellant's  failure
      to participate in the asylum process, including the fact that she  did
      not attend the asylum interview on three occasions at the end of  2015
      and at the beginning of 2016. Nor did she attend the  hearing  of  her
      appeal listed in August 2016.

  29. The Judge noted in the balance that it was desirable that an appellant
      should attend the hearing of her case in order  to  be  able  to  give
      evidence.  On the other hand, he  took  into  account  the  overriding
      objective to seek to avoid delay and the public  imperative  for  such
      important cases to be heard without inappropriate delay [20].

  30. Nor was the Judge provided with anything to suggest that the appellant
      would add by her attendance  anything  to  what  was  already  in  her
      statement [23]. Nor was it clear whether she would be  in  any  better
      position to attend any resumed hearing than she  had  been  in  August
      2016 or February 2017.

  31. The Judge also noted that the appellant's husband did not  attend  the
      hearing and had not given  any  statement  in  support.  Nor  had  any
      additional written evidence been served which required explanation  by
      the appellant [19].

  32. The Judge satisfied  himself  that  counsel  had  no  instructions  or
      indication of what additional evidence the  appellant  might  give  if
      present at the hearing.

  33. It is evident that between the adjournment in August 2016 and February
      2017 there had been  no  preparation  of  the  appellant's  case.  The
      solicitors have given no evidence or any explanation  as  to  why  the
      appeal could not have been further prepared, if required, during  that
      lengthy period. There is  no  assertion  that  her  medical  condition
      prevented  the  holding  of  a  conference,  if  required,   for   the
      preparation of any further witness statement.

  34. The Judge found, having regard to the circumstances as a  whole,  that
      fairness did not require an adjournment in these circumstances.

  35. It is not asserted in the grounds of appeal that the Judge's  findings
      regarding the appellant's asylum claim as set out from  paragraphs  39
      onwards, were in any way flawed or unreasoned. Nor is there any appeal
      against any of the findings he made  with  regard  to  her  Article  8
      appeal.

  36. The Judge has had regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole.  He  has
      exercised his discretion judicially in finding that fairness  did  not
      require an adjournment in this case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.










      Signed                             Date 31 July 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









