
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03619/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 June 2017                         |On 12 June 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             bashir ahmad baburi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Bashir Ahmad Baburi, was born on 6 October 1992 and is a
    male citizen of Afghanistan.  The  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a business visa but  on  2  October  2015,  he  had  claimed
    asylum.  By a decision dated 31 March 2016, the respondent refused  his
    application.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    R Caswell) which, in a determination promulgated on 14  December  2016,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is one ground of appeal.  This arises out of the judge's findings
    at [19 - 20]:

         19.  The refusal  letter  claims  [the  appellant]  could  relocate
             safely  to  another  area  of  Kabul.   Mr  Hunt-Jackson  [the
             Presenting Officer] asks me to find that there are other areas
             of the country such as large cities where the appellant  could
             relocate to.  I am asked by him to find that the appellant  is
             known only to the local Taliban and is not of interest to  the
             Taliban in other areas.  By contrast, Ms Hussain  asks  me  to
             find that returnees are looked at with more suspicion  by  the
             Taliban and that young people especially  young  professionals
             are targeted.  She relies on an IRIN report dated 6 April 2016
             at page 117 of the appellant's bundle.  She also relies  on  a
             report [Voice of America] at page 46 of the appellant's bundle
             to the  effect  that  students  and  young  professionals  are
             targeted by militants.

         20.  I accept that Afghan society is different to  UK  society  and
             that networks and contacts are very important  as  Ms  Hussain
             submits.  However the appellant in my judgment cannot be  said
             to be a high  profile  target  for  the  Taliban  even  as  an
             educated returnee with  his  background,  particularly  as  he
             resigned from his job in August 2015.  His  case  is  that  he
             still has the knowledge they want but it will be out  of  date
             to some extent and I do not find that  he  would  be  of  such
             importance to the Taliban now that he  would  continue  to  be
             sought and identified by them as a target in another  area  of
             the country.  I  accept  the  conditions  in  Afghanistan  are
             variable and that there are suicide attacks  and  violence  in
             many areas.  However, there are large  populations  living  in
             the cities such as Jalalabad  and  I  do  not  find  that  the
             conditions  there  are  such  as  to  mean  that  there  is  a
             generalised threat to ordinary citizens of serious harm.   The
             appellant claims that he will be sought and  targeted  by  the
             Taliban wherever he goes and I reject that  claim  as  already
             set out above.  I find that as a young man in good  health  he
             speaks Dari, English and some Pushtu who is educated  and  has
             worked in his country and  who  has  family  members  who  are
             prepared  to  help  him  still  living  in  Afghanistan   that
             relocation within Afghanistan would not be unduly harsh.

 3. The sole ground of appeal is as follows:

         It is submitted that Judge Caswell erred, by making a finding which
         is contradictory to the  background  material  before  her.   Judge
         Caswell alludes to  the  said  material  in  paragraph  19  of  the
         decision which relates of  the  risk  of  harm  from  militants  to
         students and young  professionals.   It  is  submitted  that  Judge
         Caswell misdirects herself in finding that the appellant would  not
         attract such risk as he is no longer working for  the  US  company.
         The background material does not state the risk is  only  to  those
         who work for or have worked for foreign companies  but  notes  that
         all young professionals are targets.

 4. The challenge, therefore, is one of perversity (in the paragraph before
    that which I have set out above asserts that Judge Caswell  "has  erred
    in dismissing the appeal").

 5. Ms Hussain submitted that  at  [20]  where  the  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant as returning "even as an educated returnee ..." the judge had
    erred by considering the appellant's education  as  a  positive  factor
    rather than a negative one as indicated by the background material upon
    which she relies.  I do not read the judge's comments in that  way.   I
    found that the judge intended by her  choice  of  words  ("even  as  an
    educated returnee")  [my  emphasis]  to  stress  that  the  appellant's
    education is indeed a negative factor which might expose him  to  risk.
    I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  considered  all  the  relevant
    background material before reaching her decision.

 6. Ms Hussain submitted that the judge fails to refer in terms to  another
    document (at [19] of the appellant's First-tier  Tribunal's  bundle  of
    documents) which indicates that educated returnees are at  risk  partly
    because of the desire by the Taliban to minimise  the  numbers  of  the
    intelligentsia within Afghan society so  as  to  create  an  uneducated
    society which would be easier to control.  I do  not  find  that  Judge
    Caswell needed to refer to each and every document in  the  appellant's
    bundle; as I have said, I am satisfied that she has considered all  the
    relevant evidence.  I am satisfied that she has not  misunderstood  the
    relevance of the appellant's education  as  a  potential  risk  factor.
    Having considered the various  items  of  background  material,  whilst
    these may support the argument advanced by Miss Hussain,  they  do  not
    compel a different outcome in this appeal.  I consider that  the  judge
    was entitled to reach her finding that in large centres  of  population
    (such as Jalalabad) there would be sufficient numbers of other  Afghans
    of a similar educational and social background to the appellant  living
    and working there such that the appellant would be  able  to  integrate
    into that  society  without  drawing  attention  to  himself  from  the
    Taliban.  In short, I am not satisfied  that  the  background  material
    upon which Miss Hussain relies establishes that educated young  Afghans
    are at real risk of serious harm at the hands of the  Taliban  anywhere
    within Afghanistan.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. The appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


