
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/03950/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th March 2019                       | On 16th April 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                   m H M T
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petersen (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brookfield, promulgated  on  2nd  May  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on  23rd  April  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Sudan,  and  was  born  on  1st
    January 1989.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  a  29  year  old
    national of Sudan and is a member of the Bargo tribe.  He was  arrested
    in Khartoum on 3rd May 2015 and was detained until 24th May 2015.  This
    was because he had been  transporting  goods  in  a  vehicle.   He  was
    accused of supporting the Justice and Equality Movement (the JEM).   He
    faced physical abuse upon being detained.  His release was  conditional
    on him not leaving the country.  He  had  to  report  to  the  Sudanese
    authorities regularly.  The Appellant used to take goods from  Khartoum
    to Darfur.  He would be informed what was needed in Darfur.   He  would
    collect money from shopkeepers he knew in Khartoum.  He  purchased  the
    needed items with these funds.  He then took  them  to  Darfur  in  his
    vehicle.  On 12th June 2015, when he  was  collecting  the  money,  the
    government made the shopkeepers close their shops and as a result, they
    went to a demonstration to protest at their  businesses  being  closed.
    The Appellant decided to accompany  his  shopkeeper  friends  to  their
    demonstration.  He was arrested.  He was then detained until 25th  July
    2015 and accused of supporting JEM and tortured and ill-treated  during
    his detention.  He now claims that he is unable to return to  Sudan  as
    he is a non-Arab Darfuri and would face persecution on account  of  his
    ethnicity and imputed political opinion.


The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the existing country guidance cases, given that
    it was accepted that the Appellant was a member of a  non-Arab  Darfuri
    tribe (see paragraph 10(x)).  The cases referred to  are  AA  (Non-Arab
    Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 which concluded that
    all non-Arab Darfuri returnees would be at risk on return to Sudan  and
    that they could not  relocate  in  Khartoum.   Another  case  that  was
    considered was MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10, where it was held
    that in the country guidance case of AA, where it had been stated  that
    if the claimant from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri, he must succeed in an
    international protection claim, the term "Darfuri", is to be understood
    as an  ethnic  term  relating  to  origins,  and  not  to  geographical
    background.   As  the  judge  observed,  "accordingly  it  covers  even
    Darfuris who were not born in  Darfur  such  as  this  Appellant"  (see
    paragraph 10(xi)).

 5. However, the judge went on to then observe that since these cases  were
    decided, "there has been a report issued in August 2016 by the  UK  and
    Danish authorities which is at  page  49  onwards  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle" and that "this advises that a number  of  sources  have  stated
    that there is no information to indicate that failed asylum seekers  or
    returnees from Darfur would generally experience difficulties on return
    to Khartoum International Airport..." (see paragraph 10(xii)).  Towards
    the end of her consideration, the judge also had regard to the  country
    guidance case of IM and EI (Risks - membership of Beja tribe) CG [2016]
    UKUT 00188, which was to the effect that in order for a person to be at
    risk on return to Sudan there must be evidence known  to  the  Sudanese
    authorities which implicates the claimant in activity  which  they  are
    likely to perceive as a potential threat to the regime  (see  paragraph
    10(xx).  In the light of these considerations, the  judge  went  on  to
    dismiss the appeal on the basis that "the Appellant  has  not  provided
    any background information which disputes the information contained  in
    the August 2016  report  of  the  UK  and  Danish  authorities  or  the
    information in the 2017 Country Policy and Information Note on  Sudan",
    given that "these reports indicate there has been a durable  change  in
    Sudan" (see paragraph 10(xxii)).  The appeal was dismissed.


Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in failing
    to apply the country guidance case of AA  [2009]  UKAIT  00058  and  MM
    (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10, having  found  that  the  Appellant
    belonged to the Bargo tribe (see paragraph 10(x)).

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 24th May 2018 on the basis that the
    judge had failed to follow the Upper Tribunal  Guidance  Note  of  2011
    No.2.

 8. On 13th August 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey undertook a first
    stage hearing, the decision of which was promulgated on 10th  September
    2018, in the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal held that the  judge's
    analysis appears to be wanting on the issue of durability of change  in
    the absence of real risk so as to engage the  Refugee  Convention  were
    the Appellant to return as a person of Bargo ethnicity  to  Sudan  (see
    paragraph 8).


Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 6th March 2019, Mr Hussain argued that  the
    background evidence concerning the risk to  non-Darfuris  remains.   He
    submitted that the entire purpose of country guidance  cases  is  that,
    until such time as they are changed, they stand to be followed,  unless
    the factual circumstances suggest otherwise.  In his  case,  background
    evidence had been  provided,  showing  an  existence  of  risk  to  the
    Appellant, irrespective of  any  adverse  credibility  finding  in  the
    claim, and the country guidance cases properly fell to be applied.   Ms
    Petersen submitted that she would have nothing further to add  to  that
    submission because existing country guidance cases indicated which  way
    this Tribunal should go.  The  Secretary  of  State  had  not  produced
    evidence today that impelled the Tribunal to take a different view.


Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to  be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

11. First, this was a case where that the Appellant's evidence was that  he
    had been arrested twice.  He had been accused of working for  JEM.   He
    had been released after arrest.  The judge had held that this claim was
    not credible.  It could not be said that the Appellant  was  at  graver
    risk of serious harm.  The Appellant  had  not  been  involved  in  any
    active  regime  political  activities.   He  would  therefore  not   be
    perceived as having any great influence.  Since  the  Appellant  claims
    that he was not involved with the JEM, it  is  reasonably  unlikely  he
    would be targeted on  his  return  to  Sudan  (see  paragraph  10(xxi).
    However,  there  has  been  nothing  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
    Tribunal's country guidance case was not valid at the time.  The  cases
    of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and
    the case of MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 apply.  It is open to
    the Tribunal below to depart from existing country guidance  cases  but
    only if there is evidence that "circumstances  have  changed"  or  that
    "substantial new  evidence  which  warrants  a  re-examination  of  the
    position" has been presented.  This was not the case here.

12. Second, it  must  therefore  then  follow  that  the  settled  position
    regarding the status of the country guidance cases means that if such a
    decision is not followed then there will be a  material  error  of  law
    unless "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence" are  adduced.
    This is clear from Practice Direction 12.4 which suggests that

         "Because of the principle that like cases should be  treated  in  a
         like manner, any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable
         country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be  regarded  as  grounds  for  review  or
         appeal on a point of law".

13. In the instant case, the judge set out the country guidance  cases  (at
    paragraph 10(xi)) and then in the next breath went on to  consider  the
    August 2016 guidance issued by the UK and the  Danish  authorities  (at
    page 49 onwards of the Appellant's bundle), but the number  of  country
    guidance cases, which are followed one after the  other,  still  remain
    and the Court of Appeal's stricture in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA  Civ  940,
    which emphasises the process to which country  guidance  cases  emerge,
    must be followed.




14. These cases show that  the  Appellant's  membership  of  a  non-Darfuri
    tribe, which is accepted by the Secretary of State, exposes  him  to  a
    risk of ill-treatment and persecution.  I therefore proceed  to  remake
    the decision.  I have given consideration to the  evidence  before  the
    original judge, her decision, and the submissions  that  I  have  heard
    today.  For the reasons that I  have  already  given,  this  appeal  is
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I  remake
the decision.  This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th April 2019










