
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03605/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 August 2017                      |On 12 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    Mr WM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.




    The history of this case

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is stated to
    be 1 December 1991.  The appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student with a valid student visa on 23 September 2012.   On  29  April
    2013 the appellant made an asylum claim.  This was refused  on  29  May
    2013.  The appellant lodged an appeal against the refusal  on  14  June
    2013.

 3. The appellant's appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen) and was dismissed on 21 November 2013. Subsequent
    applications for permission to appeal were refused.

 4. On 12 August  2015  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  to  the
    respondent in support of a fresh application for asylum.  The basis  of
    the appellant's asylum claim is that he is at risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Pakistan as a result of his conversion to Christianity.

 5. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 18 March 2016.

 6.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  7  March  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Meah dismissed the appellant's appeal.   The  Tribunal
    found  that  the  appellant  had  genuinely  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity.  However, the Tribunal found that the appellant would not
    be at risk of persecution on return to Pakistan.   The  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant's conversion to Christianity was known  about
    in Pakistan and that there was no reason  why  he  could  not  relocate
    where he would be able to live openly as a Christian.  The  judge  also
    found  that  there  would  not  be  very  significant  hurdles  to  his
    reintegration into Pakistan and found that the removal of the appellant
    would be proportionate.

 7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 6 July 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    Submissions

 8. There are five separate grounds of appeal.  The  first  ground  asserts
    that the judge misdirected himself in  concluding  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk because people will only  realise  that  he  is  a
    convert if he volunteers that information.  It is submitted that in  HJ
    (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 it was made clear that  an
    individual cannot be  expected  to  conceal  aspects  of  their  sexual
    orientation  which  they  are  unwilling  to  conceal.   If  they  fear
    persecution and the fear is well-founded they  are  entitled  to  claim
    asylum however unreasonable their refusal to resort to concealment  may
    be.

 9. It is submitted that it is inevitable that at some point the fact  that
    the appellant was not born a Christian and has converted  would  become
    public knowledge if he were returned to Pakistan. Bearing in mind  that
    the appellant's family disowned  him  because  of  his  conversion  any
    questions about his family would  likely  lead  to  disclosure  of  his
    conversion.

10. It is submitted that an applicant does not have to show that they  must
    conceal or refuse to conceal a central  tenet  of  their  faith  to  be
    recognised  as  a  refugee  as  per  HJ  (Iran)  and   RT   (Zimbabwe).
    Concealment of an aspect of their faith is sufficient.

11. Ground 2 asserts that the judge erred by failing to take  into  account
    material evidence or to  make  findings  on  material  issues.   It  is
    submitted that the appellant relied on various documents in support  of
    his claim to have been disowned by his family and subject  to  a  fatwa
    because of his conversion.  Some of that evidence was before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen, who presided over the appellant's previous asylum
    appeal, some of it was not.

12. Judge Meah concluded that Judge Cohen's previous findings continued  to
    apply.  It is asserted that that reason was erroneously  relied  on  to
    reject the evidence that was not before Judge Cohen,  for  example  the
    fatwa and three newspaper articles that postdated the appellant's first
    appeal.  It is submitted that such evidence needed to be considered  on
    its own merits,  not  least  bearing  in  mind  matters  had  moved  on
    considerably since Judge Cohen made his findings.

13. It is submitted that crucially Judge Cohen  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had converted to Christianity, a finding  that  affected  his
    assessment  of  the  supporting  documents.   In  contrast  Judge  Meah
    concluded that the appellant was a convert, which equally  should  have
    affected how he viewed the documents.

14. It is also submitted that the above evidence corroborated the fact that
    the appellant's conversion to Christianity was publicly  known,  making
    him at risk on return.  The adverse findings made by Judge Cohen on the
    evidence before him related to the motive behind obtaining the evidence
    which he found was to bolster a weak asylum claim rather  than  whether
    it would put him at risk as  a  publicly  known  convert.   Judge  Meah
    failed to make  findings  on  whether  the  evidence  showed  that  the
    appellant was publicly  known  as  a  convert  and  therefore  at  risk
    irrespective of motive

15. Ground 3 sets out that the judge erred by failing to take into  account
    evidence and making irrational findings  in  relation  to  the  country
    expert report provided by QHM Legal.  The  appellant  relied  on  three
    country expert reports, one drafted by Muhammad  Hamza  Haider  of  QHM
    Legal Consultants, Lahore, Pakistan.   This  report  commented  on  and
    authenticated the fatwa,  the  newspaper  articles  and  the  affidavit
    relating to legal  proceedings  in  Pakistan  whereby  the  appellant's
    family disinherited him.

16. Prior to considering the report Judge Meah had already  concluded  that
    that evidence could not be relied upon due to  Judge  Cohen's  previous
    findings.  Prior to making any finding all the evidence  needed  to  be
    considered in the round including the  expert  report  as  per  Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 (STARRED).

17. It is submitted that the judge erred in treating the evidence as having
    no weight on the  basis  that  the  authentication  of  the  fatwa  was
    undertaken by a colleague of the author of  the  report  and  therefore
    hearsay evidence.  Further reasons were given by the judge as to why no
    weight should be attached to the report  -  it  had  no  authenticating
    embossment or mark on it and despite  listing  his  qualifications  and
    contact details there was no evidence to show that the expert is  truly
    qualified to the extent he claims and even if he is so  qualified  that
    makes him an expert in being able to verify fatwas and such like.

18. It is submitted that it is trite to say the Tribunal considers  hearsay
    evidence on a daily basis due to the very nature of the  claims  before
    it and that is therefore not a  basis  on  which  to  reject  evidence.
    There is no requirement for expert reports to contain an authenticating
    embossment or for  an  expert  to  provide  certificates  corroborating
    qualifications.  It is submitted that rejecting  the  report  on  those
    grounds is arguably irrational.

19. It is asserted that the report confirmed at source one of the newspaper
    articles.  The author of the report spoke directly with the  editor  of
    the paper who had access to the paper's archives.  It is also explained
    why the affidavit was written in English,  a  point  previously  relied
    upon by Judge Cohen to doubt its  authenticity.   Judge  Meah  made  no
    findings on these points and failed to  take  them  into  account  when
    determining whether the appellant was at risk on return to Pakistan.

20. Ground 4 asserts that the judge erred by failing to take  into  account
    material evidence, namely the country expert report of Professor Bluth.
     It is submitted that the report of Professor Bluth  concluded  amongst
    other matters that legal proceedings  for  disowning  a  family  member
    accompanied by supporting newspaper notices were in  keeping  with  the
    known procedures in Pakistan, the affidavit relied  upon  conformed  to
    the required format, relocation with Pakistan would  not  mitigate  the
    risks faced by the appellant, the authorities would not be  willing  or
    able to protect him if he returned, and that his account was consistent
    with the country background situation.  The judge fails to have engaged
    with the report and no findings were made in respect of it.

21. Ground 5 submits that for the above reasons Judge  Meah's  findings  in
    relation to Articles 3 and 8 are arguably also unsustainable.

22. In oral submissions Mr Sellwood submitted that the judge's approach  to
    the appellant's conversion and what should happen on return was flawed.
     He submitted that  the  principles  in  HJ  (Iran)  were  not  applied
    correctly by the judge.  The judge thought that the only principle  was
    that the appellant would be at risk if he had  to  conceal  his  entire
    faith or every aspect of it.  In HJ (Iran) the issue  was  much  wider.
    He submitted that the appellant would at some point inevitably be found
    to have converted and this would become public  knowledge.   The  judge
    simply states that the appellant can be discreet.  The appellant had  a
    Muslim name.  He would be required to obtain an identification document
    through electronic records.  This would  be  required  for  any  public
    services, accommodation and employment.

23. With regard to the country guidance case AJ (Risk - Christian  convert)
    Pakistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00040, although that case is not overruled the
    Home Office guidance indicates that this case cannot be  followed.   He
    referred to HJ (Iran) at paragraph 35 and submitted that  part  of  the
    appellant's identity as a Christian is the fact that he has  converted.
    The judge did not make a finding on this issue.  I referred Mr Sellwood
    to paragraph 60 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision where  the  judge
    did make a specific finding.  He submitted that the judge has failed to
    consider the test in paragraph 35 (d) of HJ (Iran) which is even if the
    appellant would  not  pronounce  his  conversion  the  question  to  be
    considered is why he would not pronounce  his  conversion.   The  error
    regarding the ratio in HJ (Iran) is further underlined in paragraph 61.

24. He  submitted  that  the  fact  of  conversion  is  an  aspect  of  the
    appellant's faith.   In  some  countries  conversion  will  not  be  an
    important issue but in Pakistan it is vital as it is a critical part of
    the appellant's case that his risk arises from the fact of  conversion.
    It is necessary to look  at  whether  any  aspect  is  required  to  be
    repressed or concealed.  If the reason for that concealment is fear  of
    persecution then the appellant would be  entitled  to  protection.   He
    reiterated his submission that it is inevitable that at some point  the
    appellant's conversion would become public knowledge.  This would  hang
    over the appellant for his entire life in all aspects including  social
    interaction.  He submitted that the social  mores  require  Muslims  to
    conform to norms such as fasting and prayer.  If he was employed his ID
    card would show that he is a Muslim, he has a Muslim name and therefore
    his  conversion  is  likely  to  become  known.   He  referred  to  the
    respondent's guidance at paragraphs 2.7.1 and 2.7.2.

25. He submitted that Judge Meah took the previous Judge Cohen's finding as
    the starting and the finishing point when considering the  authenticity
    of the documents.  There needed to  be  a  new  consideration  and  the
    documents needed to be looked at on the basis that  the  appellant  had
    converted to Christianity.  He submitted that Judge Cohen's  assessment
    of the documents focused on his finding that they were to embellish the
    claim.

26. When concluding that the fatwa was not genuine Judge Meah had not taken
    into account the expert report of Professor Bluth.  The fatwa  was  not
    before Judge Cohen.  In response to my questions about points raised by
    Professor Bluth that are not already generally known about he  referred
    to paragraph 6.1.6 where Professor Bluth provided  his  expert  opinion
    that an affidavit and court reports would always  be  in  English.   He
    referred to page 57 where Professor Bluth said that newspaper  articles
    are widely circulated and  therefore  would  create  a  risk  that  the
    appellant's conversion would be widely known.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge had not given any reasons for rejecting or accepting any  of  the
    evidence in the expert report.  At paragraph 51 the judge  had  already
    considered the fatwa so  he  could  not  have  taken  the  report  into
    account.

27. He submitted that it would be highly irregular to require  certificates
    in support of qualifications for country  expert  reports.   The  judge
    reached an irrational conclusion because the report did not outline the
    credentials and because the evidence of  the  fatwa  was  from  another
    person.  There was a clear chain of continuity.  The judge  had  failed
    to engage with the evidence.

28. Mr Tufan referred to paragraph 35(b) of HJ (Iran)  and  submitted  that
    the judge made a definitive finding that the appellant is  not  someone
    who wants to pronounce his conversion to Christianity.   The  appellant
    had a friend at school who had a Muslim name but who  was  a  Christian
    and there was nothing in the background evidence to  suggest  that  the
    fact of having a Muslim name  would  give  rise  to  a  risk  that  the
    conversion would thereby become known.  He referred to questions 36, 45
    and 48 of the interview record and the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  in
    2013.  He submitted if the appellant does not reveal his conversion no-
    one would know that he had converted.  He submitted the case is not  on
    all fours with HJ (Iran).  He submitted that the  appellant  would  not
    want to declare that he is a convert.  There are  5,000,000  Christians
    in Pakistan and 1,000,000 in Karachi.  The issue is can he relocate  to
    a cosmopolitan city.  The whole appeal turns on this point.   Would  he
    need to openly declare his conversion?

29. With regard to the newspaper articles he submitted  the  judge  applied
    Tanveer Ahmed.   The  appellant's  name  was  spelt  incorrectly.   The
    advertisements suggests that the father wants to disinherit his son and
    that is as far as they go.  How  would  the  appellant  be  identified?
    These are three small advertisements.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    considered the fatwa in several paragraphs of the decision.  He made  a
    finding against the appellant on  the  authenticity  of  the  document.
    With regard to the expert  reports  he  submitted  the  latest  country
    guidance case considered similar  evidence  although  there  is  little
    regarding conversion.  The expert was  an  evangelical  Christian.  The
    judge had considered the report sufficiently.

30. He submitted that if the  appellant  were  living  as  a  Christian  in
    Karachi why would the question be posed to him as  to  whether  he  had
    converted from Islam.  There were many different levels  of  commitment
    of Muslims not all of whom  will  commit  to  prayer  and  fasting  and
    therefore why would the appellant be singled out.   He  submitted  that
    aspects of sexual orientation are different to aspects of belief.   Why
    would it be an aspect of his belief to have  converted?   He  submitted
    that there are not different aspects of converts as to the practice  of
    Christianity.  Whether you have converted or have been practising since
    birth the practice of the religion would not be different.

31. In reply Mr Sellwood submitted that there is still the question as  set
    out in paragraph 35(d) of HJ (Iran) where an appellant will conceal  an
    aspect the question as to why must be posed.  The judge has not made  a
    finding as to why the appellant would  not  pronounce  his  conversion.
    With regard to the respondent's submission that  the  appellant  had  a
    friend with a Muslim name who was a Christian,  he  submitted  that  if
    anyone asked why he had a Muslim name he could answer honestly that  it
    was a name given to him at birth but he was born Christian.

32. He submitted that there were a number of newspapers which  referred  to
    the reason that the appellant's father was disowning him was because of
    his conversion to the Christian faith.  With regard  to  the  NADRA  he
    submitted that the expert evidence was  that  it  is  not  possible  to
    change a religion from Islam to Christianity.   That  was  set  out  in
    Professor Holden's report.

    Discussion

33. The first ground  of  appeal  in  essence  is  that  it  has  not  been
    ascertained why the appellant would conceal his conversion contrary  to
    HJ Iran

34. Having found that the appellant had converted to Christianity the judge
    considered risk on  return,  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation.  The judge set out from paragraph 57:

         57.  I duly noted Mr  Sellwood's  submissions  that  a  distinction
             existed between those who were born Christian in Pakistan  and
             those who  had  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity.   He
             acknowledged  the  case  of  AJ  (Risk  -  Christian  convert)
             Pakistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00040 in  this  regard  and  accepted
             that this  reported  case  said  that  Christian  converts  in
             Pakistan do not face a real risk of persecution,  however,  he
             referred to the respondent's Country Information  Guidance  on
             Pakistan entitled Christians and Christian Converts  where  at
             section 2.3.1,  2.3.3,  3.1.5  and  3.1.6  the  following  was
             stated:

                  "2.3.1 The situation is far more difficult  for  a  person
                      who  is  known  to  have  converted  from  Islam   to
                      Christianity,  than  for  a  person  who   was   born
                      Christian. However it is rare,  in  Pakistan,  for  a
                      person to convert to Christianity, especially openly.
                      It is likely that the fact of a  person's  conversion
                      will  be  well-known  within  their  community,  with
                      potential repercussions

                  2.3.3 As the  situation  has  deteriorated  for  Christian
                      converts since the country guidance case of AJ (Risk,
                      Christian Convert) Pakistan  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00040
                      (August 2003),, decision makers must no longer follow
                      this  guidance   which   found   that   converts   to
                      Christianity in general do not face a  real  risk  of
                      inhuman or degrading treatment (paragraph 36).

                  3.1.5 A person who fears persecution in Pakistan purely on
                      the basis of their Christian  faith  is  unlikely  to
                      qualify  for  a  grant  of  asylum  or   humanitarian
                      protection although full account must be taken of the
                      individual circumstances of each case.

                  3.1.6  People  who  are  known  to   have   converted   to
                      Christianity are likely to face and be at  real  risk
                      of attacks by non-state actors. Effective  protection
                      and  internal  relocation  will  generally   not   be
                      available. Christian  converts,  depending  on  their
                      particular circumstances, i.e. if they are  known  to
                      have converted to Christianity, are likely to  be  at
                      real risk of persecution on return..."

         58.  Mr Sellwood argued that this guidance is  sufficient  to  show
             that Christian converts faced a risk over and above those  who
             were born into  the  Christian  faith  in  Pakistan  and  this
             therefore meant that the appellant, as a convert,  would  also
             be at risk where there would be insufficient state  protection
             and no viable internal  relocation  alternative  available  to
             him.

         59.  I do not accept this line of contention as it is  clear,  even
             in this policy  guidance,  that  the  situation  is  far  more
             difficult for those who it is known have converted from  Islam
             to Christianity  and  thus  a  distinction  is  made  on  this
             particular   point.    Accordingly,   having   rejected    the
             appellant's evidence regarding the claimed fatwa and newspaper
             articles, I do not  find  that  it  is  necessarily  known  in
             Pakistan that he is someone who has converted to Christianity.
              It was his claim that he is not in contact with his family in
             Pakistan, who are all from Sialkot, hence there is  no  reason
             why he could not relocate to another area  such  as  Islamabad
             where he could live openly as a Christian.

         60.  It was not the appellant's evidence that he wishes  to  either
             pronounce his conversion or to either  preach  or  proselytise
             the Christian faith.  Indeed it is not a basic  tenet  of  the
             faith to have to do any of these things, hence the  fact  that
             he has converted from Islam to Christianity will not be  known
             by those in any  alternative  area  to  which  he  may  viably
             relocate  unless  he  volunteers  this  information  to  them.
             Concomitantly, I therefore do not find the fact  that  he  may
             have to hide that he has  converted  to  raise  any  potential
             arguments akin to that which was raised  in  HJ  (Iran)  &  JT
             (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 as a clear distinction can  be  made
             here given that the appellant is not expected to  conceal  his
             Christian religion.

         61.  In other words, not having to divulge the  fact  that  he  has
             converted from Islam to Christianity is very different from  a
             requirement to conceal one's entire  faith  where  the  latter
             will be covered by the  protection  envisaged  in  HJ  (Iran),
             whereas the former does not, and a clear distinction  must  be
             made here bearing in mind there is no requirement  in  any  of
             the Christian tenets to have to reveal the fact that one might
             have converted into the faith, hence if the appellant  decides
             to do this, it will be out of choice and not  by  a  necessity
             borne out of something which might be said  to  be  an  innate
             part of the faith to which he has converted.  I therefore also
             do not find that to relocate  to  another  part  of  Pakistan,
             where his conversion will not be common knowledge will  either
             be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

         62.  It was clear in AK and AS (Pakistan) (at paragraph 225 and  6)
             that a sufficiency of protection  will  be  available  to  the
             appellant, when taking into account that he is not facing  any
             blasphemy or other charges, hence he should be able to live in
             an alternative area of Pakistan as a Christian without  facing
             a risk of  serious  harm  and  a  level  of  redress  will  be
             available to him should he require the assistance of the state
             in any new area he may relocate to."

35. In HJ (Iran) the 'test 'as set out in paragraph 35, and as is  relevant
    to this case, is:

         (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which  are
             directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of
             the inquiry is directed to what will happen in the future. The
             Home Office's  Country  of  Origin  report  will  provide  the
             background. There will be little difficulty in holding that in
             countries such as Iran and Cameroon gays or  persons  who  are
             believed to be gay are  persecuted  and  that  persecution  is
             something that may reasonably be feared. The question  is  how
             each applicant, looked at individually, will  conduct  himself
             if returned and how others will react to what he  does.  Those
             others will  include  everyone  with  whom  he  will  come  in
             contact, in private as well as in public. The way he  conducts
             himself may vary from one situation to another,  with  varying
             degrees of risk. But he cannot and must  not  be  expected  to
             conceal  aspects  of  his  sexual  orientation  which  he   is
             unwilling to conceal,  even  from  those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be.  The
             question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
             inquiry.

36. In this case the judge has adopted a careful and detailed  analysis  of
    the situation for converts to Christianity on return  to  Pakistan  and
    has concluded that there may be a  risk  if  the  fact  of  a  person's
    conversion is known. The judge found that the appellant's evidence  was
    that he would not pronounce his conversion. As is clear from  paragraph
    35(c) of HJ (Iran) it is not the purpose of the Convention to guarantee
    an applicant the same level of freedoms as enjoyed in the UK. The  next
    issue that a tribunal must consider is:

          (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in fact
             conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned,  is  to
             consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in response
             to social pressures or for cultural or  religious  reasons  of
             his own choosing and not because of a fear of persecution, his
             claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the  reason  why  he
             will resort to concealment is that  he  genuinely  fears  that
             otherwise he will be  persecuted,  it  will  be  necessary  to
             consider whether that fear is well founded.

         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
             founded fear that he  will  be  persecuted?  If  he  has,  the
             causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  2  AC  426,
             para 5 will have  been  established.  The  applicant  will  be
             entitled to asylum.

37. Mr Sellwood argued that the judge had not asked the essential question,
    that is, why would the appellant not pronounce his conversion. In order
    for this to be relevant the conversion must amount to  an  'aspect'  of
    his faith. The judge considered that it was not a basic  tenet  of  the
    faith to have to acknowledge or reveal conversion. Mr Tufan argued that
    conversion is not  an  aspect  of  religion  because  the  practice  of
    Christianity will not differ whether a person was born a  Christian  or
    converted  to  Christianity.  Mr  Sellwood  argued  that  in   Pakistan
    conversion from Islam  is  a  risk  over  and  above  the  practice  of
    Christianity.  I  consider  that  generally  conversion  will  not   be
    considered to be an aspect of a person's faith.  Therefore  concealment
    of conversion does not fall within the ambit of the 'test' in paragraph
    35(b)  of  HJ(Iran).  This  issue  in  the  context  of   Pakistan   is
    inextricably linked to whether or  not  it  would  be  known  that  the
    appellant is a convert. The Respondent's guidance, in addition  to  the
    paragraphs cited by Judge Meah sets out:

         2.7.1 Where a person's fear is of ill-treatment/persecution at  the
             hands of the state or non-state actors on the basis that  they
             are a Christian convert, they will not be able to relocate  to
             escape that risk.

         2.7.2  Given  that  ill-treatment  towards  Christian  converts  is
             prevalent throughout Pakistan, internal relocation  to  escape
             such treatment is unlikely to be a viable option, particularly
             where the person is known to have converted to Christianity.

38. The judge found that the appellant would not be at risk if he relocated
    because his conversion  would  not  be  known.  The  judge  based  that
    conclusion on his findings on the documentary and expert evidence  that
    had been submitted. Some of that evidence had been before Judge  Cohen.
    The appellant argues that Judge Meah erred by relying on  the  findings
    of Judge Cohen. It is worth setting out in full the careful analysis of
    Judge Meah:

         "34. Firstly, it is important to state that whilst I have  accepted
             the appellant's claim to have genuinely converted  from  Islam
             to Christianity, it does not automatically follow that I  find
             that he will necessarily face a real risk of persecution  upon
             his return to Pakistan.  In other words, this is  not  a  fait
             accompli.  I accept  that  even  though  there  will  be  some
             correlation  between  the  acceptance  of  his  conversion  to
             Christianity from Islam and his claim to be at  risk  on  this
             count,  this  aspect  of  his  claim  must   nevertheless   be
             considered in the light of the relevant  laws  and  provisions
             applicable to his case and distinctly from his claim  to  have
             converted to Christianity being accepted.

         35.  Ms Bassi contended that even if I found the  appellant  to  be
             telling the truth regarding his claim to have  converted  from
             Islam to Christianity, he would not be at any risk upon return
             to Pakistan hence his case was not made out.   She  relied  on
             the country guidance  case  of  AK  &  SK  (Christians:  risk)
             Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569.  This was cited in  the  RFRL  at
             paragraphs 17 to 19.  The following is stated in the head note
             of this case:

                  '1.  Christians in Pakistan are a religious minority  who,
                      in general, suffer discrimination  but  this  is  not
                      sufficient to amount to a real risk of persecution.

                  2.   Unlike the position of Ahmadis, Christians in general
                      are permitted to practise  their  faith,  can  attend
                      church, participate in religious activities and  have
                      their own schools and hospitals.

                      ...'

         36.  Ms Bassi argued that the  appellant  would  need  to  show  an
             individualised risk for him to  be  able  to  succeed  on  his
             asylum claim, if I were to accept his claim to have converted.
              She further stated that in following AK  &  SK  Pakistan  the
             appellant needed to show that he had been accused of blasphemy
             and there was no viable internal  relocation  option  open  to
             him.

         37.  The appellant claimed that there was a fatwa in his  name  and
             that his name had also been published in  newspaper  articles.
             This was considered by the respondent from paragraphs 30 to 42
             of the latest RFRL.  Judge Cohen dealt with the  fatwa  and  a
             newspaper article at paragraph 26 of  his  determination.   He
             rejected  these  documents  in  the  light  of   the   adverse
             credibility findings he had made against the appellant...'

              ...

         39.  The respondent contended at paragraph 38 of the RFRL that  the
             appellant had not stated what had  changed  to  have  made  it
             easier  for  the  fatwa  to  be  obtained  than  it  had  been
             previously, and who had sent the document to him.  He had also
             failed to state when he received the fatwa or who had sent  it
             to him.

         40.  The appellant responded to this in  his  most  recent  witness
             statement where he explains that the fatwa was sent to him  by
             a friend in Pakistan called [A].  Ms Bassi asked the appellant
             what had changed for [A] to have sent this to  him  since  his
             last appeal was dismissed, where many issues  were  raised  on
             this point and where Judge Cohen rejected this and  the  other
             documents   comprising   newspaper   articles   showing    the
             appellant's father disinheriting him.

         41.  The appellant stated that he did not  know  why  [A]  had  now
             decided to send the fatwa document to him and  that  he  could
             not ask [A] either because he had passed away.  The  appellant
             stated that [A's] dead body was  found  in  an  unrecognisable
             condition on a road in Pakistan, and that  he  had  discovered
             this from [A's] mother when she answered a call he had made to
             [A].  He claimed that during this  call  she  blamed  him  for
             [A's] death and stated that he died in the process of  helping
             him to obtain documents such as the fatwa.

         42.  The issue surrounding  the  claimed  fatwa  and  the  previous
             newspaper extracts has been considered  extensively  from  the
             time the appellant's original asylum claim was  considered  by
             the respondent, and then by Judge Cohen in  his  determination
             in the previous appeal, and then again by  the  respondent  in
             the latest RFRL.  Judge Cohen also had before him a copy of an
             expert report dated 1 October 2013, from a Dr Holden.

         43.  I have noted the appellant's claim now that he could  not  say
             why [A] changed his mind and took  the  risk  of  sending  the
             fatwa document to him and that [A] died a  horrible  premature
             death for reasons unknown, however, I do not find that this is
             sufficient to outweigh the significant consideration  afforded
             to this matter already by both the respondent and Judge Cohen,
             and I therefore, in following what is  stated  in  Devaseelan,
             approach this particular evidence with circumspection.

         44.  There is no evidence why [A] had had a change  of  heart,  and
             why he would have gone out of his way to send these  documents
             to the appellant and to put himself at risk  in  the  process,
             and there is no evidence that [A] has  genuinely  passed  away
             making it impossible for the appellant to  seek  clarification
             regarding  why  he  decided  to  send  the  documents  to  the
             appellant at this late stage.

         45.  It was made clear in Devaseelan that it  is  not  the  judge's
             role to consider arguments to undermine the findings  made  by
             the first judge, and I find that given  the  gaps  that  still
             prevail in relation to this claimed fatwa, that to now  accept
             this aspect of the claim  at  this  late  stage  when  it  has
             already been comprehensively considered and rejected, would be
             to go against exactly that  which  is  stated  in  Devaseelan,
             especially given that the evidence  in  this  regard  and  the
             attempt to make good what was evidently a flaw in the previous
             appeal remains questionable, hence I  do  not  find  that  the
             fatwa can be accepted as being genuine. [emphasis added]

         46.  In other words, the fact that I have accepted  his  conversion
             and thus decided to take a different view from Judge Cohen  on
             that aspect of the appellant's claim, does not mean that  this
             does away with the gaps identified in his evidence in relation
             to his fears of returning to Pakistan as was  found  by  Judge
             Cohen, and I cannot see that there is enough before me on  the
             latter count to justifiably depart from Judge Cohen's findings
             in this regard.  I therefore find the new  newspaper  articles
             submitted  to  support  the  fresh  claim  which   were   also
             considered extensively by the respondent from paragraphs 39 to
             42 of the RFRL, must also be viewed in light of  this  and  in
             light of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 (STARRED).

39. There is no error in the judge's approach to analysing the  appellant's
    evidence in respect of the fatwa and how the appellant had obtained it.
    As set out by the judge there were significant gaps in the  appellant's
    evidence regarding the purported fatwa when his  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge Cohen. Judge Meah has not simply adopted the reasoning  of  Judge
    Cohen without further consideration in light of the  finding  that  the
    appellant was a genuine Christian convert.  Judge  Meah  has  carefully
    evaluated the evidence.

40. It was asserted that Judge Meah did not take the expert  evidence  into
    account before reaching his conclusions. The judge set out:

         47.  Mr Sellwood argued that  there  was  now  further  documentary
             evidence from experts by the name of QHM Legal who are a  firm
             based in Lahore, Pakistan, who had been instructed to find out
             details regarding the authenticity  of  the  fatwa.   Evidence
             from them  had  been  provided  at  pages  32  to  42  of  the
             appellant's main bundle in which they conclude at the  end  of
             an extensive report, that in their opinion and following their
             own investigations, that the appellant would face a real  risk
             upon return to Pakistan.

         48.   Mr  Sellwood  further  stated  that  this  should  be  viewed
             alongside  the  original  expert  report  submitted   to   the
             respondent from Christopher Bluth  which  was  considered  and
             noted at paragraph 1 of the latest  RFRL,  together  with  the
             expert report placed before Judge Cohen, and  that  the  fatwa
             and newspaper article should therefore be accepted as  genuine
             as showing  that  there  is  an  individualised  risk  to  the
             appellant.

         49.  The experts at QHM Legal claim to have spoken directly to  the
             imam who had issued the fatwa, who apparently  confirmed  that
             the appellant should be punished.  Full details of the  mosque
             where the fatwa was issued  is  provided  extensively  in  the
             report and this is  contained  at  pages  35  and  36  of  the
             appellant's  bundle.   Further  clarification   was   provided
             regarding the affidavit claimed to  be  from  the  appellant's
             father  that  he  had  submitted  to  a  court   in   Pakistan
             disinheriting  the  appellant  due  to   his   conversion   to
             Christianity, and again, the experts in  Pakistan  state  that
             this is genuine and they purport to  provide  details  of  the
             process involved in how this might have been issued.

         50.  I have noted the entire contents of the reports and especially
             that which was provided by QHM  Legal.   The  author  of  this
             report purports to set out his experience  and  qualifications
             under the heading 'background of expert' and he  states  here,
             inter alia, that the contents of the report were true  to  the
             best of his knowledge.

         51.  I, however, do not find that this report takes the appellant's
             case any further given  my  findings  based  on  what  I  have
             already stated above, certainly in  relation  to  the  claimed
             fatwa, and I  therefore  find  that  this  and  the  newspaper
             extracts relied upon by the appellant in both his previous and
             renewed claims, must also be viewed in this  light.  [emphasis
             added]

41. It is not clear that the judge considered the evidence from  QHM  Legal
    before  reaching  his  conclusions  on  the  fatwa  and  the  newspaper
    extracts. It is often the case that reference  to  certain  aspects  of
    evidence are set out in a manner that provides an orderly  and  logical
    narration. This does not inevitably lead to the conclusion that all the
    evidence was not considered before a conclusion was arrived at. In this
    case, however, I cannot be sure  that  Judge  Meah  did  consider  this
    evidence before discounting the newspaper articles and  concluding  (in
    paragraph 45) that the fatwa cannot be accepted as genuine. As this  is
    an asylum claim and  there  is  the  potential  for  this  evidence  to
    significantly affect the analysis of his risk on return (in so saying I
    do not suggest that a  positive  finding  on  these  matters  would  be
    determinative of an appeal in the appellant's favour) I find that there
    is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision in  this
    regard.

42. I will deal briefly with the submissions is relation  to  Judge  Meah's
    approach to the QHM report. The judge set out:

         52.  Mr Sellwood made much about a colleague of the author of  this
             report stating at section 6 (page  36  AB)  claiming  to  have
             spoken face to face with  the  imam  of  the  mosque  who  had
             purportedly confirmed that he had issued the fatwa, and stated
             that this therefore was first-hand evidence that the fatwa was
             genuine.

         53.  Ms Bassi challenged this assertion and stated that  there  was
             absolutely no  way  to  verify  this  third-hand  claim  being
             reported second-hand by the author of  the  report,  and  that
             this therefore amounted essentially to hearsay evidence  which
             could not be relied upon and should not therefore be accepted.

         54.  I am persuaded by Ms Bassi's argument on this critical  point.
             There is no statement from the  colleague  of  the  author  to
             confirm that he genuinely had such  a  conversation  with  the
             claimed  imam  of  the  mosque.   There  is  also  no   proper
             verification provided regarding the authenticity of this claim
             apart from the assertion made by the  author  of  the  report,
             hence I am not prepared to accept this at face value given  my
             finding that the report in its  entirety  does  not  take  the
             appellant's case any further.

         55.  Another point worth noting is that this report appears to have
             no authenticating embossment or mark on  it,  and  the  headed
             paper on which it is printed could have been typed  by  anyone
             on any home printer.  Whilst I have noted what the author says
             about his qualifications in Pakistan there is no  evidence  to
             show that he is truly qualified to the extent  he  claims  and
             that even if he is so qualified, that this makes him an expert
             in being able to verify fatwas and such like.  In other words,
             this is a document which comes from a purported legal firm  in
             Pakistan whose details cannot in reality be  verified  to  any
             real extent, hence  I  find  that  these  are  all  additional
             factors to those mentioned above already, which lead me to the
             conclusion that no real weight  should  be  attached  to  this
             document.

         56.  It therefore follows that I do not find that there is a  fatwa
             in place in the appellant's name and I therefore do  not  find
             that he will be at risk on  such  a  count.   In  relation  to
             whether the appellant  will  face  persecution  on  the  other
             potential counts highlighted in AK and AS (Pakistan), Ms Bassi
             argued that the appellant has not been charged  for  blasphemy
             and there is  no  evidence  that  there  are  any  outstanding
             charges against him in Pakistan, and there is no evidence that
             he will be proselytising or preaching given that this  is  not
             what he has claimed, and there is no  evidence  to  show  that
             this is what he has done or been doing, hence he will not face
             a risk on return on account of merely being a Christian, hence
             he can return to Pakistan.   In  short,  I  find  considerable
             merit in Ms Bassi's argument on this point.

43. The judge was entitled to take into consideration that the evidence  of
    the fatwa was third hand when attaching  weight  to  that  evidence.  A
    statement could have been provided. However, what is of concern is that
    the judge appears to have relied on his earlier finding that the report
    in its entirety does not take the appellant's case  any  further.  That
    conclusion appears to have been based on an earlier findings  that  the
    fatwa was not genuine. Although this may simply have been the structure
    of the writing up of the decision, the judge  may  have  erred  in  not
    considering all the  evidence  in  the  round  before  considering  the
    report. The judge was entitled to take into account the fact  that  the
    document could have been printed form anyone's computer as part of  his
    analysis. He did not suggest that a document is  required  to  have  an
    authenticating embossment or mark on it rather this was a factor  taken
    into account. Similarly with regard to the qualifications and degree of
    expertise these are factors that the judge was entitled  to  take  into
    account when assessing the weight to place on the report.

44. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

45. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. However, the finding of
    Judge  Meah  that  the  appellant  is  a  convert  to  Christianity  is
    preserved.

46. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor house before any  judge  other  than
    Judges S Meah and Cohen pursuant to section 12(2)(b)  and  12(3)(a)  of
    the TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The decision is set aside and the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Taylor House to be heard before any judge other  than  Judges  S
Meah and Cohen. The finding that the appellant is a convert to  Christianity
is preserved.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 10 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

