
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03900/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Determination and reasons promulgated|
|on 21st July 2016                     |On 4th August 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    S H S
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Knox, of Hamilton Burns & Co., Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in 1947.  He came  to  the
    UK as a student in 1975 and was granted extensions of leave until  30th
    April 1985.  He applied for asylum on 29th April 1985.  He  claims  not
    to have been aware that his claim was refused on 24th October 1988.  He
    was offered the chance to be interviewed further about it in 2015,  but
    did not then wish to revisit the issue.  During the current proceedings
    he made a rather half-hearted attempt to revive it, but the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge found in her determination that any such claim  did  not
    succeed.  He has not sought to contest that finding.

 3. On 14th February 1986 in the High Court in Glasgow  the  appellant  was
    convicted of rape and of attempted rape, and sentenced to  four  years'
    imprisonment.  He was released from prison in 1988.   He  continues  to
    deny any guilt.

 4. On 23rd July 2010 the appellant was encountered by Immigration Officers
    and served with notice as an overstayer.  Various  procedure  followed,
    which it is not necessary to rehearse  here.   On  9th  June  2015  the
    respondent made a decision to deport the appellant.

 5. Section 117C of the 2002 Act states:


        Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
        criminals


        (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


        (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
        the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


        (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
        public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
        Exception 2 applies.


        (4) Exception 1 applies where-


        (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
        C's life,
        (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
        and
        (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
        into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


        (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
        C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


        (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
        requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
        2.


        (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
        into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
        deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
        the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
        been convicted.

 6. The terms of paragraph 399A of the Rules are  to  the  same  effect  as
    Exception 1.

 7.  The  respondent's  decision  analyses  the  question  of   "compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A
    of the Immigration  Rules"  thus  (paragraph  numbers  taken  from  the
    decision):

        77, significant public interest in deportation, given  the  offence
        and sentence;

        78, a very strong article 8 claim would be required, over and above
        the circumstances described in the exceptions;

        79,  residence  in  UK  since  1975  and  nearly  30  years   since
        conviction,  in  appellant's  favour;   accepted   he   will   have
        established some private life here;

        80, no evidence of relationships which might not be  maintained  by
        modern  communications  or  by  meeting  friends  in  Pakistan   or
        elsewhere;

        81, appellant unmarried,  with  no  children;  his  representations
        showed no social and cultural integration to a level at  which  his
        removal would adversely affect the community;

        82, no valid leave since 1985, so any  relationships  formed  while
        status precarious;

        83, some contact with brother  in  Pakistan;  retained  familiarity
        with culture of that country;

        84, some weight given to delay in considering representations  made
        in 2014 -2015; consideration of representations  since  deportation
        decision made within reasonable timescale;  delay  significant  but
        not such as to  outbalance  the  criminal  record  and  the  public
        interest;

        85, absence of further convictions noted, but deterrence  of  other
        foreign nationals and  social  revulsion  also  to  be  taken  into
        account, and not a significant mitigating factor; adherence to  the
        law does not reduce public interest in deportation;

        86, no very compelling circumstances.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 4th May 2016.  At paragraph 21 she said she was
    satisfied that the appellant was no danger to the community.  She  went
    on to reject the asylum claim.  She referred to the test posed  by  the
    rules, and to some case  law.   She  said  at  paragraph  29  that  the
    appellant had relatives in Pakistan who would be  able  to  offer  some
    help on his return.  She dealt  with  his  health  problems  but  found
    nothing which had any significant bearing on the outcome of  the  case,
    another point which (again rightly) was not  disputed  on  his  behalf.
    The decision then goes on:

         34.  The appellant has produced limited evidence as to  the  extent
             to which he has integrated  into  the  UK  and  in  particular
             Glasgow during the  last  40  years.   There  are  no  witness
             statements from friends and members of the  community.   There
             is little evidence to indicate how he spends his time on a day-
             to-day basis.  It is difficult to build up a  picture  of  the
             extent to which he has socially and culturally integrated into
             UK society ... [he] is not married, does not  have  a  partner
             and has no children.

         35.   Against  these  factors  I  have  taken  into   account   the
             considerable period of time the appellant has resided  in  the
             UK.  He was aged 28 when he entered the UK and is now aged  69
             ... the mere fact that he has resided in the UK for  the  last
             40 years without being able to formalise his stay  ...  or  be
             removed by the respondent is  exceptional.   He  has  spent  a
             considerably longer period living in the UK than  in  his  own
             country.  He has not returned to his home country of  Pakistan
             in 40 years and it is not unreasonable  to  conclude  that  he
             identifies culturally with the UK as opposed to his country of
             birth given that he was only 28 years old when he  last  lived
             there.  His only links with Pakistan  are  through  occasional
             contact with his brother and his brother's family.

         36.     The Home Office places reliance  on  s.117B  (2)  ....  The
             appellant speaks excellent English ... the  Home  Office  also
             places  reliance  on  s.117B  (3)  ....   The   appellant   is
             financially independent ... no evidence that he  is  dependent
             on public funds ...

              ...

         40.  The appellant has maintained the same address for a number  of
             years, has been registered on the electoral  roll,  registered
             with various utility companies, has  a  bank  account  and  is
             responsible for paying all household bills.

         41.  In conclusion I am satisfied that for all of the above reasons
             there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  as  to  why  this
             appellant should not be deported.

 9. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds  that  the  judge
    failed to adopt the correct legal approach to the issue of  "compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A
    of the Immigration Rules."

10. There is no difference between the parties as to the applicable law, to
    be found in the paragraphs of the Immigration Rules referred to  above,
    in the 2007 Act, in Part 5 of the 2002 Act, and in a  series  of  cases
    most recently including NA (Pakistan) and Others  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ, where the overall position is conveniently summarised.

11. It was acknowledged that the nature of the appellant's  conviction  and
    the length of his sentence place him  in  the  category  of  a  serious
    offender, as that categorisation is used in NA.  The  particular  point
    added by that case is that very compelling circumstances upon which  an
    appellant might rely include reference back to other  factors  relevant
    to Article  8  but  not  falling  within  the  terms  of  the  relevant
    exceptions.

12. The Court in NA said at paragraph 37:

         In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible  first
         to  see  whether  his  case  involves  circumstances  of  the  kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because the circumstances  so
         described set out particularly  significant  factors  bearing  upon
         respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect for family  life
         (Exception 2) and because that may provide a helpful basis on which
         an assessment can  be  made  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2" as is required under Section 117C(6).  It will then be necessary
         to look to see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions
         1 and 2 are of such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
         conjunction with any other relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the
         circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy  the
         test in section 117C(6).

13. To succeed under Exception 1, all of its conditions must be  met.   The
    appellant does not satisfy Exception 1(a).  He has  not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life.  The judge does appear to have
    thought that he  met  part  (b),  although  her  finding  is  a  rather
    qualified one, based on length  of  time  only  and  on  a  paucity  of
    evidence.  There was no evidence of very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Pakistan.  The evidence and  findings  are
    all to the contrary.     He  fell  well  short  of  the  "private  life
    exception".

14. The court in NA said at paragraph 33:

         Although there is no "exceptionality"  requirement,  it  inexorably
         follows  from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in   which
         circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
         public interest  in  deportation  will  be  few.   The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as aging parents and poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient.

15. Mr Knox drew attention submitted that the judge did apply  the  correct
    approach.  He said that the very compelling circumstances test had been
    set out, and applied at the point of decision.  He  drew  attention  to
    the first sentence in paragraph 33 of NA, and  argued  that  the  judge
    correctly identified this case as one of the few  instances  where  the
    test was met.

16. I am not persuaded by those submissions.

17. The judge said that the respondent founded on  s.  117B  (2)  and  (3),
    relating to ability to speak English and financial independence.  I was
    not referred to and have found no record that the respondent  did  make
    such a submission.   The  judge  plainly  thought  both  those  factors
    counted significantly in the appellant's favour.  That  was  an  error.
    There is no  rule  in  the  statute  or  elsewhere  that  those  points
    positively advance a case very far.

18. As Mr Matthews pointed out, the judge did not refer  to  the  following
    provisions in s. 117B, at (4) and (5), to the effect that little weight
    is to be given  to  private  life  formed  during  residence  which  is
    unlawful or precarious - a strong indication against the appellant.

19. It was up to the appellant to assert and  prove  any  positive  private
    life features.  As submitted by Mr Matthews and indeed as  acknowledged
    by the judge, despite her eventual decision,  there  was  a  dearth  of
    evidence to show what makes up the appellant's private life.

20. The second sentence of paragraph 33 of NA is illustrative.  Even strong
    family life claims are not likely to  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, and of serious
    offenders in particular.  This case is based on private life only.  Its
    one unusual factor is the long  period  which  has  elapsed  since  the
    conviction.  That time has been spent in the UK, but with no  right  to
    be here, and subject to a statutory rule that it carries little weight.

21. I am persuaded by the respondent's grounds  and  submissions  that  the
    judge failed to ask herself, as she should  have  done,  whether  there
    were very compelling circumstances requiring the strong presumption  in
    favour of deportation of a foreign criminal to be overridden.  She lost
    sight of the overall scheme of deportation as set  out  in  Immigration
    Rules, statute and case  law.   The  respondent's  decision  follows  a
    rational scheme of analysis,  within  the  legal  framework,  which  is
    missing from the judge's decision.

22. The judge erred in her legal approach.  She  did  not  specify  in  her
    decision any circumstances which  either  by  themselves  or  taken  in
    conjunction  with  any  other  relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the
    circumstances described in Exception 1 satisfied the  test  in  section
    117C(6).

23. The evidence does not yield any circumstances  sufficiently  compelling
    to outweigh the high public interest in deportation.  There is  nothing
    but a private life, of which the sketchiest of  evidence  is  provided,
    and to which little weight is to be given.

24. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order, on the rather  tenuous
    grounds that its decision touched on matters regarding the  appellant's
    health.  Neither party mentioned the matter in the Upper Tribunal.   In
    the circumstances, I have preserved anonymity in this decision.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted:  The appeal,  as  originally  brought  by  the
    appellant to the First-tier Tribunal, is  dismissed  on  all  available
    grounds.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
2 August 2016
