
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03045/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd February 2018                 |On 8th March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     m g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Tobin (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 9th May 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen who claimed  asylum  on  the  basis
    that he had converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity.   His  claim  for
    international protection, and human rights claim, was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 10th March 2017.  His appeal was heard by the FtT on 25th
    April 2017.

 3. The judge did not accept that the Appellant had genuinely converted  to
    Christianity and the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds which are summarised below.

 5. Ground 1 contends that the judge erred in his treatment of  documentary
    evidence.  The judge found in paragraph 27 that the Appellant's brother
    and his wife had not lodged a complaint against  the  Iranian  Security
    Forces.  It was  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  set  out
    accurately the correct context to the complaint and failed to take into
    account the documentary evidence that had been provided in support. The
    complaint was in relation to the  unlawful  death  of  the  Appellant's
    father as a consequence of the actions of a particular  member  of  the
    security forces.  The Appellant had provided a  Death  Certificate  and
    Burial Licence, but these documents had  not  been  considered  by  the
    judge.  The judge had not considered the court summons  that  had  been
    issued.  The judge had not taken  into  account  the  detailed  account
    regarding  the  death  of  the  Appellant's  father,  provided  by  the
    Appellant's brother in a letter.

 6. Ground 2 contends the judge erred  by  giving  inadequate  reasons  for
    finding the Appellant's account not to be "convincing", and  failed  to
    take into account relevant evidence.  It was contended that  the  judge
    had not referred to or analysed the explanation that the Appellant gave
    for his commitment to Christianity.  The judge had  failed  to  explain
    why the Appellant's account was inherently unconvincing.

 7. Ground 3 contends that the  judge  erred  by  giving  no  weight  to  a
    statement of Reverend Pybon  a  Minister  in  the  Appellant's  church.
    Reverend Pybon was unable to attend the hearing so a colleague attended
    to give oral evidence.  Reverend Pybon had  however  submitted  a  very
    detailed statement on the Appellant's behalf.  It  was  contended  that
    the judge had erred by in effect giving no weight to  Reverend  Pybon's
    statement on the basis that it appeared to exceed matters of  fact  and
    strayed  into  effectively  advocating  for  the  Appellant.   It   was
    contended that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  particularise  or
    properly justify such an adverse finding.

 8. Ground 4 contends that the judge erred by  relying  on  irrelevant  and
    potentially prejudicial reasons which caused an adverse finding.   This
    ground related to paragraph 24 in which the  judge  made  reference  to
    "convincing" and "unconvincing" and referred to being aware of  similar
    stories to that put forward by the Appellant, in  other  claims,  which
    the judge described  as  weak.   It  was  submitted  that  it  was  not
    appropriate for a judge to make a finding against an Appellant, on  the
    basis of the judge's attitude to other claims.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused  by  Judge  O'Garro,  but  a
    renewed application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  It is at least arguable that the judge might  have  failed  to
             make findings in relation to evidence that was material  to  a
             proper determination of the appeal.  It is also arguable  that
             the judge may have placed undue reliance on  the  plausibility
             of various aspects of the Appellant's account  without  taking
             into account relevant evidence.  It is arguable that he  might
             have applied too  high  a  standard  of  proof  in  apparently
             needing to be 'convinced' by the Appellant's account.   It  is
             also arguable that the judge may have been  unduly  influenced
             by irrelevant matters regarding his view of the credibility of
             'very similar stories' in other cases."

10. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended, in summary, that the judge had not  materially
    erred but had made findings open to him on the evidence,  and  provided
    sustainable reasons.  It was not accepted that  the  use  of  the  word
    "convincing" identified a wrong standard of proof, as the judge had  at
    paragraphs 16 and 31 referred to the appropriate standard of proof.  It
    was submitted that the FtT decision should stand.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. I heard oral submissions from both representatives  which  are  set  in
    full in my Record of Proceedings and summarised in brief below.

13. Mr Hodson relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted that a great deal  of  evidence
    had been presented on behalf of the Appellant, and the judge had  erred
    by failing to address key parts of the evidence.

14. It was contended that in relation to documentary evidence the judge had
    not applied the principles in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 and this
    applied in particular to the documents relating to  the  death  of  the
    Appellant's father.  Mr Hodson submitted  that  the  use  of  the  word
    "convince" indicated an incorrect standard of proof, as this  indicated
    that initially the judge did not believe the account.

15. It was contended that inadequate reasons had  been  given  for  adverse
    findings.

16. It was submitted that it was legitimate for Reverend Pybon  to  comment
    on matters that were relevant to the Appellant's Christian  faith,  and
    this should not diminish the weight that the judge gave to her  written
    evidence.

17. It was submitted that in making findings, the judge should not refer to
    other cases which he contends are similarly weak.

18. Mrs Pettersen relied upon the rule 24 response.  It was submitted  that
    the judge did not have to refer or set out  each  individual  piece  of
    evidence, and the judge gave an accurate summary of the evidence  which
    was sufficient.  Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge had  considered
    all relevant matters, made findings open to him, and given  sustainable
    reasons for those findings.  It was unfortunate that the judge had made
    reference to  the  word  "convincing".   This  did  not  mean  that  an
    incorrect standard of proof had been applied.

19. With reference to Reverend Pybon it was submitted that  the  judge  was
    entitled to give less weight to her evidence because she did not attend
    the hearing. Mrs Pettersen submitted that Reverend Pybon  had  in  fact
    advocated on behalf of the Appellant which also entitled the  judge  to
    give less weight to her evidence.

20. It was submitted that the judge had referred to other  cases,  but  had
    not dismissed the Appellant's appeal because of those other cases.  Mrs
    Pettersen submitted that the judge analysed the  Appellant's  case  and
    did not accept that it was credible based upon the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant relied upon.

21. In response Mr Hodson accepted that the judge had referred  to  Tanveer
    Ahmed, but submitted that the principles had not been applied.  It  was
    accepted that a judge does not have to recite all the evidence  or  all
    the documents, but does need to engage and make findings upon  relevant
    evidence, and evidence that is in dispute.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. I deal firstly with ground 1 which relates to paragraph 27 of  the  FtT
    decision.  I find an error  of  law  as  contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant for the following reasons.

24. There was documentary evidence before the FtT, in the form of  a  Death
    Certificate and Burial Licence which related to the Appellant's father.
     Those documents indicated a violent death.  There were also  documents
    indicating that legal proceedings had been issued  against  a  specific
    member of the security forces.  The Appellant's  brother  had  provided
    written evidence setting out in some detail the complaint that had been
    made.

25. Documentary evidence is not specifically referred to at  paragraph  27.
    I find no analysis of the documentation in that paragraph,  and  in  my
    view inadequate reasons are given for not attaching any weight  to  the
    documents.  The principles in Tanveer Ahmed are  that  it  is  for  the
    person producing documents to show that the  documents  can  be  relied
    upon, and the decision maker must consider the evidence in  the  round.
    If no reliance is placed upon documents, it is incumbent upon  a  judge
    to provide adequate reasons.  In this case  I  do  not  find  that  the
    guidance in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC)
    has been complied with.  That guidance, very briefly, is that judges do
    not need to rehearse every detail or issue raised in  a  case  as  this
    leads to decisions becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases.  Judges must however identify
    and resolve key conflicts in the evidence  and  explain  in  clear  and
    brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can understand why  they
    won or lost.

26. It is not clear from reading  paragraph  27  that  the  documents  were
    analysed, and it is not clear why no weight has been attached to  them.
    I do not find the judge's  conclusion  that  if  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine  Christian  convert,  his  brother  and  wife  would  not  draw
    attention to themselves by challenging the security forces through  the
    courts is an adequate reason for disregarding the documentary evidence.

27. I think it is appropriate to deal with grounds 2 and 4 together.  These
    grounds relate to paragraphs 22 and 24 of  the  FtT  decision.   It  is
    unfortunate  that  the  word  "convincing"  is  used  in   both   those
    paragraphs.  Elsewhere in the decision the  judge  does  refer  to  the
    correct standard of proof, but in my view, it is not clear from reading
    these paragraphs, that the judge has considered whether  the  Appellant
    has proved his case to a reasonable degree of likelihood.

28. I conclude that inadequate reasons have been given  for  not  accepting
    the Appellant's explanation of his  conversion  to  Christianity.   The
    following phrase in paragraph 24 gives an impression that the judge has
    not concentrated solely on the evidence in the Appellant's  claim,  but
    has been influenced by other claims of which he is aware;

         "This and very similar stories  are  constantly  advanced  in  such
         claims to establish how  asylum  claimants  were  put  at  risk  by
         inadvertently leaving laptops, mobile phones and address  books  in
         the care of others.  I do not find the story is convincing in other
         weak claims, and I also find this story  particularly  unconvincing
         in this instance."

29. There is an impression given that the  judge  has  been  influenced  by
    irrelevant matters and failed to take into account  relevant  evidence,
    which is an error of law.

30. Finally I deal with ground 3 which relates to the written  evidence  of
    Reverend Pybon.  The judge did not diminish the weight to  be  attached
    to  her  evidence  because  she  did  not  attend  the  hearing  as  he
    specifically stated at paragraph 20 that he drew no  adverse  inference
    from her non-attendance, but the  judge  found  that  Reverend  Pybon's
    statement  appeared  to  exceed  matters  of  fact  and  strayed   into
    effectively advocating for the Appellant which  diminished  the  weight
    that he placed upon her evidence.  It would appear that  the  judge  in
    fact placed very little weight upon her evidence.  I do not  find  that
    adequate reasons have been given for placing very  little  weight  upon
    this evidence.   Reverend  Pybon  did  comment  upon  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter but only commented upon issues  relating  to
    Christianity, and in my view Reverend Pybon was perfectly  entitled  to
    make comments upon that aspect.  Paragraph 33  of  the  refusal  letter
    refers to the Appellant's  knowledge  of  the  Protestant  church,  and
    questioned why the Appellant had only read small sections of the Bible.
     Those are matters upon which the  Reverend  is  entitled  to  comment.
    Paragraphs 34 and 35 of the Respondent's refusal decision contend  that
    the Appellant had demonstrated inability to speak clearly or  in  depth
    about his faith, and again that is something upon  which  the  Reverend
    was perfectly entitled to comment in her capacity as  the  Minister  of
    the church attended by the Appellant.  I therefore do not find  that  a
    satisfactory or adequate reason was given not attaching weight  to  the
    written statement of Reverend Pybon.

31. For the reasons given above, I find that the FtT decision does  contain
    errors of law, and is unsafe and must be set aside.

32. When I indicated at the hearing that I was  reserving  my  decision  in
    relation to error of law, both representatives  indicated  that  if  an
    error was found as contended by the Appellant, the  appropriate  course
    would be to remit the appeal back to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

33. I have taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements, and because credibility is in issue, and there  is
    a substantial fact-finding undertaking, I consider  it  appropriate  to
    remit this appeal back to the FtT to be decided afresh with no findings
    preserved.

34. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Tobin.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

I have decided to make an anonymity  direction  because  the  Appellant  has
made a claim for international protection.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of their family.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings. This direction is made pursuant  to  rule  14
of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date: 3rd March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date: 3rd March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
