
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03222/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 October 2017                         |On 23 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                              Mr Zillur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative, Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In July 2005 the appellant applied for  a  visa  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  He did so claiming that he was a musician.  On 14 August 2005
    the visa was issued.  In 2005 he travelled to the United Kingdom and on
    8 October 2005 his visa expired.  It is clear that his  application  to
    enter the United Kingdom was  made  fraudulently  because  on  his  own
    evidence he was not there in order to act as a musician and he made  no
    attempt to regularise his position.  Indeed, on 1 February 2015 he  was
    encountered by immigration enforcement and was  arrested  and  detained
    but then failed to report.   He  did  not  return  to  Bangladesh,  the
    country of which he is a national.

 2. On 9 September 2016  he  was  once  again  encountered  by  immigration
    enforcement.  At that time he was working illegally.  Once again he was
    arrested and detained.  It was only then when his fate was obvious that
    he claimed asylum.  That resulted in his release from detention  on  31
    October 2016.

 3. The judge considered the claim that had been advanced by the  appellant
    and did not accept the claim.  She rejected  it  as  being  incredible.
    The reasons provided by her are found in paragraphs 16  to  23.   I  am
    quite satisfied that those reasons are lawful reasons and  make  out  a
    compelling case that the appellant was  not  telling  the  truth.   The
    assessment of credibility was of course carried out in the  context  of
    his appalling immigration history and the fact that  he  had  only  one
    last chance to remain in the United Kingdom and  that  was  to  make  a
    claim for asylum.  There was no  other  basis  that  he  has  ever  put
    forward which might provide him with an entitlement to remain.

 4. The judge said in paragraph 16 of the determination in relation to  his
    claim that he joined the BNP in 1999  and  that  his  father  was  Vice
    President in the local area and it was this that influenced him to join
    that despite claiming he was a member of the party but  that,  when  he
    came to the United Kingdom in 2005, his  knowledge  of  the  party  was
    extremely limited.  That is something that the decision  maker  in  the
    decision letter clearly set out.

 5. The judge used paragraph 17 to provide a number of examples as to  just
    how lame his claim was to be involved in the BNP.  He claimed that  its
    function was 'to serve common people' but he did not have any  or  much
    knowledge of the party.  Although he said his father used to  take  him
    to meetings, he was not active and that was something he  confirmed  in
    cross-examination.  Quite reasonably the judge went on to find that, if
    the appellant was a committed member of the BNP, he would have a  basic
    knowledge of the party.  On the evidence, he did not  have  that  basic
    knowledge.

 6. The judge went on to deal with an attack at a demonstration 1997.   The
    evidence about this was provided by the appellant  himself  in  answers
    that he gave in interview.  He said in answer to question 61  that  the
    incident involved an injury he sustained as a result of an attack  upon
    him by the police and 'my skull was fractured'.  There is no  ambiguity
    about that.  A fracture means there was a break.  Subsequently when  it
    was apparent that this injury could not be supported, he sought to  say
    that this was a cut but this was not what he had said in interview  and
    the judge rightly said 'I find that if his skull was fractured, that is
    a very serious injury and would warrant hospital  admission',  and  all
    that occurred, according to him, was that a bandage was put around  his
    head whilst he was in detention and that after a few days the  fracture
    was 'cured'.  The judge did not accept this piece of  evidence.   There
    was not any corroborative evidence that the appellant suffered a  skull
    fracture.  The judge did not accept that account, as was properly  open
    to her.

 7. In paragraph 18 the judge refers to what the appellant claimed  was  an
    attack upon his father in July 2014 by a group  of  people  wielding  a
    machete.  In the  course  of  the  interview  he  made  once  again  an
    unequivocal assertion as to what happened.  In answer to question 39 he
    said the Awami League attacked his father and 'chopped  off  his  leg'.
    There again, that is an unequivocal assertion of what occurred but  the
    discharge  certificate  which  was  later  produced  shows   that   the
    appellant's father was apparently in hospital for a week in  July  2014
    with a 'sharp cut in his left leg'.   It  is  not  a  detailed  medical
    report, as the judge pointed out,  and  it  does  not  state  that  the
    patient's leg was amputated, as the appellant claimed in his statement,
    but clearly this was at variance with what he had  said  in  interview.
    So the judge reasonably concluded there was no credible  evidence  that
    the appellant's father was attacked in the way that he had claimed.

 8. There was then reference to a newspaper report dated 16 July 2014 and a
    reference to the appellant's father  being  attacked  in  a  'terrorist
    attack'.   However,  the  situation  described  in  the   article   was
    significantly different from the evidence that the appellant gave.  His
    evidence was that there was  no  mention  of  weapons  being  fired  or
    pedestrians taking his father to hospital and so,  unsurprisingly,  the
    judge took the view that this did not materially support his claim  but
    rather undermined it.

 9. The judge also considered the provenance of the document  and  did  not
    accept that this documentation, which the appellant had  said  was  not
    available to him until 2016, was not available at an earlier stage  and
    could have formed an earlier asylum claim.

10. In paragraph 20 the judge refers to a First Information Report dated 10
    February 2014 in which he and his father are both named in relation  to
    an incident which took place in Bangladesh on 10 February  2014.   That
    incident involving the appellant is, and it  is  accepted,  a  complete
    fabrication because the appellant was indubitably in the United Kingdom
    in 2014.  It could not therefore conceivably be made the subject of any
    adverse attention on the part of the authorities in Bangladesh  because
    it could be shown to be transparently false.  The judge  therefore  did
    not accept that it  was  a  credible  document  or  that  the  document
    entitled 'Order Sheet' from the  Judicial  Magistrates'  Court  or  the
    warrant  of  arrest  were  reliable  documents  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant was at risk.

11. The judge also looked at the letter from the Bangladesh National  Party
    dated 1 March 2017, years after his departure  from  Bangladesh,  which
    provided an inconsistent account of his leaving Bangladesh as a  result
    of 'nasty circumstances by suffering the force and bogus cases'.  There
    were no cases lodged against him in 2005 and the document therefore  is
    palpably incorrect in its content.

12. The judge goes on to find that the  appellant  had  used  deception  in
    entering the United Kingdom and in saying that he was part of  a  group
    of musicians.  He admitted that he only attended one programme with the
    group and he joined the group as his way of  getting  into  the  United
    Kingdom by deception.

13. Those reasons are more than adequate to establish that  the  judge  was
    fully entitled to accept that the appellant was not telling the  truth.
    The grounds of appeal make a host of allegations that the judge got  it
    wrong  but  in  going  through   the   relevant   paragraphs   of   the
    determination, as I have done with Mr Bhuiyan  in  the  course  of  the
    hearing, he  accepted  that  the  contents  of  these  paragraphs  were
    factually accurate and they are  supported  by  the  answers  that  the
    appellant himself provided in interview, albeit significantly different
    from the statement the appellant subsequently made.

14. In these circumstances I do not find that any  of  the  allegations  of
    unlawfulness set out in the grounds of appeal are made  out  nor  am  I
    supported by the grant of permission by the judge who  found  that  the
    matter should be looked at again.  I have been able to look at the case
    again and I am quite satisfied that the decision made by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was properly open to her.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  on  a  point  of  law  and  her
determination of the appeal shall stand.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

