
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03033/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  We  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an order. We make clear that the order is  not  made  to
protect the appellant's reputation following  his  conviction  for  criminal
offences. Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:     In person
For the respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 15 August 2002 and was  granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor until 13 September 2002. He was 16 years  old  on
    arrival in the UK. Subsequent applications for leave  to  remain  as  a
    student were refused. On 26 November  2003  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain as a dependent of a person  who  was  settled  in  the  UK  (his
    mother).

2.    The appellant has a list of criminal convictions in the  UK.  In  2005
    he was convicted of several different counts of possessing a  blade  or
    sharply pointed weapon in  a  public  place  and  was  given  community
    punishment orders for those offences.  In  2006  he  was  convicted  of
    several driving offences including using a vehicle while uninsured  and
    without a licence for which he received fines and endorsements. In 2007
    he  received  a  six-month  conditional  discharge  for  possession  of
    cannabis. In 2008 he was given a  12-month  conditional  discharge  for
    shoplifting. Further convictions followed in early 2009 for a breach of
    the conditional discharge and  possession  of  cannabis  for  which  he
    received small fines. By the time he was 23 years old the appellant was
    well known to the criminal courts, but none of his convictions were for
    offences serious enough to justify a custodial sentence. His history of
    relatively minor  criminal  convictions  was  not  deemed  sufficiently
    serious for the Secretary of State to consider deportation.

3.    The picture changed in  2011.  On  03  June  2011  the  appellant  was
    convicted of five counts of supply of Class  A  drugs  including  crack
    cocaine and heroin. On 08 September 2011 he was sentenced to 18 months'
    imprisonment for each offence to be served concurrently. A  deportation
    order was signed on 21 August 2012. His appeal against the decision was
    dismissed on 13 March 2013.  Further  applications  for  permission  to
    appeal were refused and his appeal rights became exhausted on 22  April
    2013.

4.    The appellant became liable to removal  pursuant  to  the  deportation
    order. It is unclear whether the Secretary of State took any  steps  to
    remove him the period immediately after the appeal. Even though he  had
    been released from prison and was  facing  deportation,  the  appellant
    continued to commit offences. Several motoring  and  insurance  related
    offences were  recorded  against  him  in  April  2013.  The  sentences
    included a community order with a curfew  requirement  and  an  interim
    disqualification from driving. By July  2013  he  was  recorded  as  an
    immigration absconder because he failed to report when required. He was
    encountered on 05 November 2015 by the police when  they  arrested  him
    pursuant to a warrant for failure to comply with a curfew order.

5.    Further submissions  were  made  to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  08
    December 2015, which were rejected with reference to paragraph  353  of
    the immigration rules in a decision dated 07 January 2016.  It  is  not
    necessary to set out the details of the subsequent litigation, save  to
    note that the Secretary of State agreed to make a fresh decision.

6.    While the Secretary  of  State  was  reconsidering  the  decision  the
    appellant applied to the Family Court for  a  finding  that  he  was  a
    British citizen by descent. He claimed that his father was born in  the
    UK. If the appellant was a British citizen the Secretary of State would
    have no power to deport him. On  09  February  2018  the  Family  Court
    dismissed the application in quite damning terms. The judge found  that
    the issue of his paternity had already been  considered  in  the  first
    First-tier Tribunal decision, and that the application was  "manifestly
    abusive". There was no DNA evidence to establish paternity.

7.    Despite his precarious position in the UK  the  appellant  received  a
    further conviction for possessing cannabis and received a small fine on
    23 December 2016.

8.    The Secretary of State made a fresh decision dated  14  February  2018
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim made in  the  context  of
    the original application to revoke the deportation order put forward in
    further representations on 24 December 2015.  The  Secretary  of  State
    considered the appellant's claim  to  have  a  family  life  with  four
    children in the UK. His son with his former partner was born on 02  May
    2008 ("A"). His daughter with his current partner was born on 08 August
    2015 ("B"). He also claimed to have a parental  relationship  with  his
    current partner's twin sons from a previous relationship ("C" and "D").
    The Secretary of State accepted that he had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with British children and that it would be unduly
    harsh to expect them to continue their family life with their father in
    the country to which he would be deported. However,  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    children to remain in the UK without him  because  their  mothers  were
    their primary carers and could continue to provide  the  children  with
    the necessary care.

9.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane ("the judge") allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 06  March  2019.  The
    appellant did not pursue the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.  The
    judge began his  findings  by  acknowledging  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's criminal history and emphasised that deportation is in  the
    public  interest.  The  appellant  was  sentenced  to   a   period   of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months but under four years. It was open to
    him to argue that he came within the exception to deportation contained
    in section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") (also reflected in paragraph 399(a)  of  the  immigration
    rules). The judge made  the  following  findings  in  relation  to  the
    children:

         "15.     I find that the [witnesses] each gave credible accounts of
             events. Of course, the  respondent  in  his  letter  had  made
             unequivocal  concessions  that  [the  children]  are   British
             citizens, the respondent made unequivocal concessions that the
             appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  each
             child and without amounting  to  an  explicit  concession  the
             respondent tacitly conceded that the appellant is a party to a
             relationship with [his current partner]. In the light of those
             concessions scope for  fact-finding  in  respect  of  evidence
             which  necessarily  and  perhaps  unavoidably  amplified  such
             contentions was limited. The evidence  of  the  appellant  and
             [his current partner] was consistent with each other and  with
             the available documentary evidence. Dr Halari, albeit as  long
             ago as 23 December 2015, had assessed in detail  the  relevant
             family relationships. Dr Halari had not  expressed  doubts  or
             concerns. Mr Bose notwithstanding  close  and  probing  cross-
             examinations of the appellant and [his  current  partner]  did
             not submit that their  evidence  was  not  truthful.  Mr  Bose
             surely refrained from making such a submission for good, sound
             reasons. Documentary evidence comprises  documents  which  are
             generated in the life of a family such as that  to  which  the
             appellant is a party.  There  were  testimonials,  there  were
             letters from schools and nurseries, and  documentary  evidence
             of cohabitation and maternity leave. All  such  evidence  fell
             easily  into  the  category  of  corroborative   evidence   of
             contentions plainly established by the evidence  and  subject,
             as I have already mentioned, to unequivocal  concessions  made
             by the respondent. I make findings of fact in  line  with  the
             witness statement, oral and documentary  evidence.  if  it  be
             necessary for me to  approbate  the  respondent's  unequivocal
             concessions, referred to earlier in this decision, I do so.

         16.      The respondent had unequivocally conceded that it would be
             unduly harsh for [the children] to live  in  Jamaica.  I  have
             accordingly considered whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect the children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without
             the appellant.

         17.      The reality, in the light of those  findings  of  fact  to
             which I have arrived, is  that  the  appellant,  [his  current
             partner] and [the children] comprise a tight-knit family unit.
             The appellant, save during his incarceration, has remained  in
             contact with [A]. At the date of the hearing the appellant was
             living with [his current partner], [B], [C]  and  [D].  Having
             considered all the evidence I find that the  circumstances  of
             the appellant's children mean  that  it  is  unduly  harsh  to
             expect them to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
             appellant. In so finding, I  rely  on  the  findings  of  fact
             mentioned earlier but also on account  of  particular  factors
             which I now recite concisely. The appellant is  a  caring  and
             committed father to all of his children. Being unable to  work
             ([his current partner] is employed as a teacher's  assistant),
             the preponderance of the family's tasks and duties have fallen
             on his shoulders and he discharges them. There was  no  reason
             to doubt his  protestation,  expressed  whenever  he  had  the
             opportunity to do so, that all four children love  him  dearly
             and would be distraught if he  was  removed  from  the  family
             unit.

         18.      I  find  accordingly  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
             exception to deportation in paragraph 399(a) of the Rules. The
             effect of this is that the appellant's circumstances  outweigh
             the  public  interest  in  deportation   of   the   appellant,
             notwithstanding his convictions ..."

10.   The Secretary of  State  sought  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  the
         separation of the family went over and  above  the  usual  negative
         effects of deportation. The judge failed to make clear findings  to
         explain why he thought the  consequence  of  deportation  would  be
         'unduly harsh' on the children.

     ii) The judge wrongly treated the  children's  best  interests  as  the
         primary consideration rather than a primary consideration.

    iii) The judge failed to take into account the fact that  the  appellant
         absconded as a matter  that  gave  further  weight  to  the  public
         interest.

     iv) The judge failed to determine the  appeal  with  reference  to  the
         relevant immigration rules relating to  applications  to  revoke  a
         deportation order.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

11.   Mr Tarlow made clear that  the  focus  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision was the first ground.  In
    our assessment the second ground amounted to nothing more than  a  bare
    statement and  is  subsumed  into  the  first  ground  challenging  the
    adequacy of the judge's findings relating to the  children.  The  third
    ground is immaterial to the assessment of whether it would  be  'unduly
    harsh' for the children to remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant
    following the Supreme Court decision in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  WLR
    5273. The fourth ground makes no material difference to the outcome  of
    the appeal because the effect of paragraphs 390-390A of the immigration
    rules is to direct the assessment  back  to  the  'unduly  harsh'  test
    contained in paragraph 399(a) in any event.

12.   It is not disputed that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  qualifying  children.  The   public   interest   in
    deportation is outweighed if the effect of deportation would be 'unduly
    harsh' on his children. Given  the  concession  made  in  the  decision
    letter that it would be 'unduly harsh' for the children to live in  the
    country to which the appellant would be deported, the only issue before
    the judge was whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for  the  children  to
    remain in the UK without him. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] 1 WLR  5273
    the Supreme Court confirmed that the assessment must be focussed on the
    position of the children but emphasised the elevated threshold in cases
    involving the deportation of foreign criminals.

         "23.     On the other hand  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
             clearly intended to introduce a higher  hurdle  than  that  of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of  the  Court  of  Appeal
             in IT  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras  55,
             64) can it  be  equated  with  a  requirement  to  show  "very
             compelling reasons". That would be in effect to replicate  the
             additional test applied by section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
             sentences of four years or more."

13.   The only findings made by the judge in relation to  whether  it  would
    be 'unduly harsh' for the children to remain in the  UK  without  their
    father are at [17] of the decision. It seems clear that the judge  took
    into account the evidence of Dr Halari and heard evidence from  several
    witnesses. However, he  merely  stated  that  he  had  "considered  the
    evidence"  without  explaining  what  aspects  of  the  evidence   were
    sufficiently compelling to  meet  the  elevated  threshold  of  'unduly
    harsh'. The judge failed to explain what evidence  persuaded  him  that
    the effect on the children in this case would be  something  more  than
    the usual negative effect of deportation.   Failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons to explain findings on material issues is an error of law:  see
    MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641. We set aside  the
    decision and will remake it.

Remaking

14.    The  factual  circumstances  are  not  in  dispute.  The  appellant's
    immigration history  and  criminal  history  are  set  out  above.  The
    Secretary of State accepts that the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with British citizen children and that
    it would be 'unduly harsh' for those children to live in the country to
    which he is to be deported. The only issue for determination is whether
    it would be 'unduly harsh' for the children to remain in the UK without
    their father.

Best interests of the children

15.   It is not possible to assess the exceptions to  deportation  contained
    in section 117C(5)  and  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  immigration  rules
    without an evaluation  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children.  An
    assessment must  be  conducted  in  every  case  where  an  immigration
    decision is likely to impact on the welfare of a child.

16.   In assessing the best interests of the children in this case, we  have
    considered the principles outlined  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of children are a  primary
    consideration although they may be outweighed by the cumulative  effect
    of other considerations.

17.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". We take into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

18.   The appellant produced a  clinical  psychology  report  of  Dr  Rozmin
    Halari as part of the body of evidence sent  with  further  submissions
    made on 24 December 2015. Although the report is dated 23 December 2015
    there is no evidence to suggest  that  the  family  circumstances  have
    changed in any material way since Dr Halari prepared the report. It  is
    not disputed that  the  appellant  continues  to  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with all four children  who  would  be
    affected by the deportation decision.  The  passage  of  time  is  only
    likely  to  have  strengthened  and  deepened  the  family  bonds   she
    describes. For these reasons, we find that it is reasonable  to  assume
    that Dr Halari's opinion, as it then stood, is likely  to  continue  to
    represent the position as it stands at the date of this hearing.

19.   Dr Halari is a Chartered Consultant Clinical (Neuro) Psychologist.  No
    submissions were made to challenge her expertise. We are satisfied that
    she is  qualified  to  comment  on  the  impact  that  the  appellant's
    deportation might have on the children. The first half  of  the  report
    outlines the outcomes of various assessment tools. The outcome of those
    assessments were generally within normal limits.  Dr  Halari  explained
    that the appellant plays  a  significant  role  in  the  lives  of  the
    children and is involved in their day to day  upbringing.  He  provides
    emotional and social support to A on a consistent  basis.  He  plays  a
    pivotal role in ensuring that A spends time with  his  sister  and  his
    step-brothers. A said that he would be very sad if his  father  had  to
    leave the country. A spends time with his father after  school  and  on
    weekends. A felt that his father played a positive role in his life. He
    was worried that he would not be able to see his sister and  "brothers"
    if his father had to leave the country. Dr Halari said that  the  twins
    also view the appellant as a father figure although they  have  regular
    contact with their own father. Dr Halari commented:

         "79.     In my opinion, removing [the appellant] from the UK  would
             have  a  significant  detrimental  impact  on  [A's]   social,
             emotional, academic and behavioural wellbeing. It  would  also
             have a detrimental impact on the other children and the family
             unit as a whole.

         80.      ... In my opinion if [the appellant] were to be  deported,
             this would have significant negative impact on  [A's]  overall
             emotional and psychological wellbeing. [A] has formed a strong
             attachment with his father and disruption of  this  attachment
             can have quite serious consequences  to  a  child's  on-going,
             emotional, social and  cognitive  development.  A  significant
             negative change in [A's] life  at  such  a  delicate  age  can
             precipitate a traumatic experience and impact on  his  ability
             to relate with people at school and home.

         ...

         83.      It is  important  to  note  that  [A]  has  witnessed  the
             separation of [the appellant]  with  is  mother.  He  has  now
             formed a very close  bond  with  his  half-sibling  and  step-
             brothers whom he is in regular contact with.  He  has  already
             endured a significant negative  life  event  and  for  him  to
             suffer yet another traumatic event  (i.e  if  [the  appellant]
             were to be removed), this would have  a  significant  negative
             impact on his overall psychological wellbeing. I believe  that
             he would be extremely vulnerable, low in his mood,  and  would
             not be able to maintain his current level of social, emotional
             and education development.

         ...

         101.     [A] and the twins have a very close relationship and  they
             consider themselves as brothers. The boys spend a  significant
             amount of time  together  on  the  weekends  participating  in
             activities both together and with [the appellant].

         102.     In my opinion, a disruption of the attachment between  [A]
             and the twins  and  [B]  would  have  a  significant  negative
             emotional impact on both [A] and the other children. [A] would
             not be able to experience  a  sibling  relationship  with  his
             sister and  the  twins  and  this  is  important  to  consider
             particularly in light of the fact that [A] has had to  witness
             a previous separation (between his mother and father)."

20.   A letter from  [A's]  mother  dated  12  November  2015  outlined  the
    history of her relationship with the appellant and the role he plays as
    a parent since their relationship came to an  end.  She  described  the
    appellant as "the strongest leg in my support system" in terms  of  the
    assistance he provided with child care. She went on to say:

         "As the mother of  [A]  I  feel  that  he  would  experience  great
         distress in not having the ability to visit him and spend time with
         him which may affect him just as much as a  death.  [A]  has  never
         lost anyone close to him and I cannot imagine the loss  of  glimmer
         in his eyes with him knowing that he cannot see his father  because
         he is not here. [A] although just a child has a  very  kind-hearted
         and caring personality which is  expressed  through  everything  he
         does, he holds those he cares about very near to him and doesn't go
         a day without remembering and mentioning to me everything  that  he
         cares about.

         I have chosen not to tell [A] about the current situation that  his
         father is in because I  do  not  feel  that  he  would  understand,
         growing up believing that things can always change for  the  better
         and things will always be fine in the end or work out for the best.
         I also feel that when he does come to an understanding he  will  be
         very suppressive with his feelings and it will affect him not  only
         now, but so heavily in his years to come. In the  worst  case  that
         contact does become limited due to deportation I feel [A]  will  be
         resentful, disappointed and also lost, with so many children around
         him who will speak of their fathers and so many situations to  come
         in which he will  need  a  father  figure  where  a  mother  cannot
         substitute, I fear that he will end up on a path which  most  young
         black boys without fathers end up on. I have therefore continued to
         allow [A] to visit his father in detention because I  want  him  to
         continue  his  usual  routine  for  as  long  as  possible  without
         disruption with hopes for the best outcome with also  knowing  that
         in the worst outcome [A] was able to spend all possible  time  with
         his father.

         [A] has something which his father did not  have,  and  that  is  a
         father that will be there for him no matter what the  occasion  is,
         he needs this stability and he needs to grow with something that  I
         also did not have, a dependency and trust in that his  parents  are
         always going to be there for him.  I  grew  up  a  very  timid  and
         reserved child because I did not know how to trust people when  all
         they did was leave. The thought  of  [A]  growing  up  without  his
         father puts me in tears any time that I have to think about it."

21.   The appellant's current partner  provided  a  witness  statement.  She
    confirmed  that  they  started  living  together  in  April  2014.  The
    appellant developed an instant bond  with  her  sons  from  a  previous
    relationship. The appellant disclosed his convictions and the fact that
    he had problems with his immigration status. In  her  opinion  "it  was
    clear to me that he felt a  deep  sense  of  shame  and  remorse."  She
    described the level of involvement  the  appellant  had  with  all  the
    children. She went on to say:

         "18.     I am terrified of [the appellant] being  deported  because
             he is the life and soul of our family. I am  really  concerned
             that if he is deported..., the children will lose their strong
             bond with him, especially [B], because that is  what  extended
             absence does to families. I would not be able to afford  trips
             to [the appellant's country of origin] and there would  be  no
             physical family relationship. Our family life will be  limited
             to telephone calls, which is far from ideal. In fact, it would
             not be a family life at all.

         19.      Such an arrangement cannot work for our  family,  as  [the
             appellant's] role in the family is the cement  that  binds  it
             together. We are a close-knit  family,  and  without  him  our
             family will not be complete. His absence will leave  a  vacuum
             in our family and adversely impact on our family life and  the
             development of the children. The  twins  are  adolescents  who
             need  a  strong  and  positive  father,  [A],  is  approaching
             adolescence and also needs a positive role model,  which  [the
             appellant] is, having turned his back on crime, and [B]  is  a
             tiny person who loves her father  deeply  and  would  also  be
             affected by her absence. I also rely on him, especially when I
             am ill [NB: his  current  partner  suffers  from  sickle  cell
             disease]. I could not cope with bringing up the children on my
             own. His help and assistance are indispensable to me."

22.   The appellant's stepson C wrote a letter to the Tribunal:

         "I am writing this letter in regards  to  my  step  father...  [The
         appellant] and my mother has been together  for  over  four  years.
         Since being apart of our family  [he]  has  also  been  loving  and
         caring towards all of us.

         He always helps me with my homework and gives me good advice  about
         everything. He treats my brother and I like we are his own  and  he
         plays a good father role to my little sister [B] and  his  son  [A]
         our step-brother.

         [The appellant] has a huge impact on our family. He... cooks  every
         day and he always makes sure we eat healthy. [He] always  helps  my
         mum with the shopping and cleaning.

         If he was to leave our family wouldn't be complete as  he  plays  a
         big role in it. We would all miss him especially [A] and my  little
         sister [B]. [B] truly is a daddies girl,  she  always  follows  him
         around he house and without fail he is always there to comfort  and
         calm her down when she's upset. So please  take  into  account  the
         harsh impact it would have on our whole family  if  he  was  to  be
         taken out of our lives. (sic)"

23.   D also wrote a letter to the Tribunal:

         "I am writing to inform you  of  the  very  significant  role  [the
         appellant] plays in not only my life but the lives of  my  siblings
         also. [He] is the father of my younger sister [B]  and  is  like  a
         father to my brother and I.

         [The appellant] and my mother have been together for around 4 years
         and ever since his arrival he  has  been  a  father  figure  to  my
         brother and I and a good man to look up to. [He] does  most  of  if
         not all the cooking in the house and goes out of his  way  to  make
         sure we are all eating right, and if he weren't there we would most
         likely be eating unhealthy junk foods, so we are extremely lucky to
         have him. In addition as I enjoy sports and play football, [he]  is
         very supportive and helpful, he's always giving advice on how I can
         improve and come to almost all of my football games, cheering me on
         and without [him] I wouldn't be the player I am now.

         Another thing about [him] is that he is a great family  man  and  a
         father to my younger sister. Ever since birth she has  always  been
         clinging to her dad and is truly daddy's little girl. [He]  is  the
         only one that can truly calm my little sister down and without  him
         her life would be ruined before it's really begun. [He] is  also  a
         great father to his older son [A] who always comes to stay with his
         dad every holiday and almost every weekend, and  [he]  always  does
         everything he can to make sure his son has the best  childhood,  by
         taking him out places and bringing him football.

         To conclude [the appellant] is like a father to me and the  man  of
         our house and is a large piece in the  puzzle  of  our  family  and
         without him our family  is  incomplete,  so  I  hope  you  see  how
         important he is to us."

24.   In light of this evidence we have no hesitation in finding that it  is
    in the children's best interests to be brought up by both  parents  and
    for the appellant to continue to  be  involved  in  the  lives  of  his
    stepsons. The evidence shows that the  appellant  is  likely  to  be  a
    positive influence in their lives and takes an  active  role  in  their
    upbringing. The evidence shows that, aside from a fairly  short  period
    in prison, the appellant has been an involved and supportive father  to
    his children. The family bonds between the appellant and  the  children
    are strong. The separation of the appellant from  the  children  for  a
    prolonged period would have a detrimental impact upon them. As  British
    citizens the children have a right to remain in the UK and to  all  the
    benefits and advantages that this status brings. We conclude  that  the
    best interests of the children point strongly towards  the  status  quo
    i.e. being brought up by both parents in the UK.



Findings in the context of the legal framework

25.   Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful for a  public
    authority to act in a way that it incompatible with a Convention right.
    This duty is placed on the Secretary of State as  well  as  courts  and
    tribunals. The requirements of the immigration rules and the  statutory
    provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position on  Article  8
    of the European Convention.  The  complicated  provisions  relating  to
    private and  family  life  and  the  separate  provisions  relating  to
    deportation bear little  resemblance  to  the  approach  taken  by  the
    European Court of Human Rights when  conducting  a  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8. The Strasbourg court conducts a holistic assessment of
    all the relevant circumstances of  a  case  weighing  the  individual's
    circumstances  against  the  public  interest  considerations   without
    separating different aspects of a claim. We are  bound  to  assess  the
    appeal with reference to the immigration rules and  relevant  statutory
    provisions, but it must always be remembered that those provisions  are
    intended to give effect to, and are said to  be  compatible  with,  the
    underlying  principles  enshrined  in  Article  8   of   the   European
    Convention: see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] WLR(D) 662 [38-39].

26.   Part 5A of the  NIAA  2002  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches a person's right to private  or  family  life  and  as  a
    result is unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In considering  the
    'public interest question' a court or tribunal must also have regard to
    the issues outlined in section 117C in cases concerning the deportation
    of foreign criminals. The 'public interest question' means the question
    of whether interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  their
    private or family life is justified under Article 8(2) of the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

27.   The statute makes clear that deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in
    the public interest and that the more serious the offence committed the
    greater is the public interest in deportation. However,  the  statutory
    scheme also sets out circumstances in  which  the  public  interest  in
    deportation is outweighed because a person  meets  one  of  the  stated
    exceptions.

28.   The appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  18  months
    and is eligible  to  argue  that  he  comes  within  the  exception  to
    deportation outlined in section 117C(5) of the NIAA  2002.  It  is  not
    disputed that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with  qualifying  children.  The  public  interest  in  deportation  is
    outweighed if the effect of deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on  the
    appellant's children. The starting point for  this  assessment  is  our
    finding that it would be contrary to the best interests of the children
    to be separated from their father. However, the Court of Appeal  in  NA
    (Pakistan) noted that the inevitable consequence of deportation is  for
    children to be separated from a parent even though it  is  contrary  to
    their best interests. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) made clear that
    something more than the usual harsh effect of deportation on a child is
    needed to reach the elevated threshold of 'unduly harsh'  to  meet  the
    requirement of section 117C(5). However, the test is not so  high  that
    it can  never  be  surmounted.  Because  the  exceptions  are  said  to
    represent the Secretary of State's view of  where  a  fair  balance  is
    struck between the level of offending and the interests of the children
    a decision to deport must still be proportionate to avoid a  breach  of
    Article 8.

29.   The evidence shows that the  appellant  forms  part  of  a  close-knit
    family unit. It seems that he has maintained a good  relationship  with
    the mother of his first child. He is the conduit  for  A  to  know  and
    spend time with his sister B and her half-brothers. The  appellant  has
    not been convicted of  any  serious  offences  attracting  a  custodial
    sentence since his release from prison. In his statement he  says  that
    he stopped using Class A drugs when he was in prison although  we  note
    he has a more recent conviction for possession of cannabis for which he
    received  a  small  fine.  He  undertook  rehabilitation  courses   and
    understands how drugs have a negative  impact  on  society.  Since  his
    release from prison, it seems that he has concentrated  on  his  family
    life with his current partner and the children. However, the reason why
    the appellant is facing separation from his family is  because  of  his
    past actions. The appellant's family members give  moving  evidence  of
    the effect that deportation would have on the cohesion  of  the  family
    and the lives of the children involved.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA
    (Pakistan) recognised that in  most  deportation  cases  involving  the
    removal of a caring  and  supportive  parent  there  will  be  negative
    effects upon the family.

30.   In this case we find that there are additional compassionate  elements
    over and above the usual harsh effects of deportation which elevate the
    effect to 'unduly harsh' in relation to  A.  Dr  Halari's  evidence  is
    compelling. A is at a crucial age between childhood and adolescence. He
    has already suffered a traumatic event when his parents separated. With
    the assistance of his father he has been able to forge bonds  with  his
    half-sister B and his stepbrothers. The evidence indicates that the two
    families are melded by the presence of the appellant. A would suffer  a
    further traumatic upheaval if he were to be separated from his  father.
    His father's absence is likely to lead to fewer opportunities for A  to
    continue and to develop the bonds he  currently  has  with  B  and  the
    twins. Dr Halari's opinion that such  upheaval  is  likely  to  have  a
    "significant negative impact on his  overall  psychological  wellbeing"
    such that he would be "extremely vulnerable"  outlines  concerns  about
    the child's wellbeing that, in our  assessment,  go  beyond  the  usual
    harsh effects of deportation. In our assessment, the effect of  further
    significant upheaval, at such a crucial stage in his  young  life,  and
    having found some equilibrium following the separation of his  parents,
    is likely to have severe and  long-lasting  consequences  for  A.  This
    conclusion is supported by the compelling evidence given by A's  mother
    outlining concern for her son's future welfare and development.

31.   The evidence relating to the other children shows that the  fracturing
    of the family would have harsh effects, but  those  effects  would  not
    appear to go beyond the usual negative impact of deportation.  However,
    given our findings relating to the 'unduly harsh' effect that it  would
    have on A given his past history, and the particular way in  which  the
    family dynamic currently works, we conclude that it is  sufficient  for
    the purpose of section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 and paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    immigration rules that deportation would have an 'unduly harsh'  effect
    on at least one of the children. For these reasons we conclude that the
    appellant comes within  one  of  the  exceptions  to  deportation.  His
    removal  in  consequence  of   the   decision   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with  his  right  to  family  life  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

32.   At the hearing, the appellant raised the issue of his claimed  British
    nationality by descent. This was not previously a  live  issue  in  the
    appeal. The appellant was represented at the hearing before the  judge.
    The issue did not appear to be argued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and was not determined. The appellant did not cross-appeal  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's failure to determine the issue. The issue  had  already
    been considered and rejected by the First-tier Tribunal in 2013.  In  a
    more recent  application  to  the  Family  Court  the  application  was
    rejected in robust terms. The stumbling block appears to be the refusal
    of the appellant's father  ("LD")  to  take  a  DNA  test.  The  bundle
    includes a copy of LD's British passport and his birth certificate. The
    evidence includes a copy  of  the  death  certificate  of  LD's  father
    ("SD"). The death certificate records his son as the informant  ("AD").
    The appellant's bundle contains a DNA test which confirms  that  he  is
    related to an uncle ("ED"). However, the missing link is  any  evidence
    to show that the appellant's uncle, ED, has common parentage  with  LD.
    No copy of his uncle's birth certificate seems to have  been  produced.
    The death certificate does not establish  a  link  between  SD  and  ED
    because the death was reported by a different son.

33.   For the reasons given above we conclude that removal of the  appellant
    would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

34.   On this occasion the appellant has succeeded in  his  appeal.  Subject
    to any subsequent determination of his claimed British nationality, the
    applicant should be aware that if  he  commits  any  further  offences,
    especially offences of a  serious  nature,  it  will  be  open  to  the
    respondent  to  review  whether  it  is  appropriate  to  take  further
    deportation action. We trust that this will act as an incentive to  the
    appellant not to commit any further offences if he wishes  to  continue
    his family life in the UK.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   26 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
