
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/03250/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 June 2021                     |On 15 June 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     DB

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr R Parkin, instructed  by  Barnes  Harrild  &  Dyer
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity, emanating
    from the IKR, with date of birth given as  1.1.96,  has  appealed  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated 4.3.20 (Judge Evans), dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    21.3.19, to refuse his claim for international protection on the  basis
    of his conversion from Islam to Christianity.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  2.4.20.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission on 24.6.20  on  each  ground,
    finding arguable merit in the challenge to the judge's conclusion  that
    whilst there is 'some' risk of the appellant being both ostracised  and
    persecuted but not that there is a 'real'  risk  of  such  persecution.
    Judge Perkins was "concerned that the Judge may not have considered how
    the appellant will practise his new religion in Iraq and/or his reasons
    for practising it in a way that will not attract attention."

 3. I note that in granting permission, Judge Perkins considered that [106]
    of the decision may be pivotal to the challenge to the decision.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the helpful submissions of both  representatives  and  the
    grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.



 5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted at  [98]  that  the  appellant  was  a
    genuine Christian convert by the date of the  appeal  hearing  and,  by
    implication, that this conversion took place in the UK. It follows that
    he is a convert from Islam to Christianity, which may  be  regarded  by
    Islam as apostacy. The judge also found that he would not  proselytise.
    The  real  question  was  whether  he  would  be  at  risk   on   these
    circumstances on return to the IKR.

 6. The grounds complain that the judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant might face risk on  'passive'  disclosure  of  his  religious
    beliefs and conversion from Islam by that  reason  alone.  It  is  also
    argued that the judge  failed  to  ask  why  the  appellant  would  not
    actively proselytise or  even  tell  others  about  his  belief  unless
    prompted, whether  this  would  be  out  of  fear  or  simple  personal
    preference. Finally, it is argued that the  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether even if any treatment may not amount to  persecution  it  might
    amount to a very significant obstacle  to  reintegration,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE.

 7. Mr Parkin advanced three main submissions, consistent with the  grounds
    as drafted. First, that the judge failed to address the risk  that  the
    appellant may face a real risk  through  'passive'  disclosure  of  his
    Christian conversion from Islam, his willingness to be open about it if
    asked. Second, that  the  judge  failed  to  ask  why  the  appellant's
    behaviour would change on return,  in  particular  that  he  would  not
    proselytise. Third, the admittedly narrow issue as to  whether  if  not
    persecution, there would be very significant obstacles to  integration.



 8. It is clear from the judge's summary of the country background evidence
    at [104] of the decision that the judge considered  that  whilst  there
    was some risk of being killed, much depended on  the  attitude  of  the
    community and family members. The IKR was generally  more  tolerant  of
    converts than the rest of Iraq and violence against Christians is  less
    common there. At [104.4] the judge noted, "Converts tend to keep  their
    faith secret for fear of ostracism and violence.  There  is  widespread
    animosity towards converts  from  Islam.  Conversion  can  be  seen  by
    families and tribes as an affront to their collective honour.  Further,
    open conversion would "likely result in ostracism  and/or  violence  at
    the hands of  the  individual's  community,  tribe  or  family...""  At
    [104.5] the judge noted, "There is sufficiency of protection  generally
    in the KRI but this  would  be  unlikely  to  provide  a  convert  with
    protection from their own tribe if they needed it."

 9. It was for those reasons that the judge concluded at ]105] that  whilst
    a Christian convert might be at risk of persecution on  return  to  the
    IKR, much depended on the individual circumstances of the case  "as  is
    emphasised in particular by the UNHCR report referred to  at  paragraph
    88 above and the EASO guidance at paragraph 89 above."

10. As far as whether the appellant would proselytise, the judge  noted  at
    [99] that when asked, the appellant answered that he would be open  and
    would not hide his faith but at no point in evidence or in any  of  his
    witness statements did the appellant indicate that  he  would  wish  to
    proselytise, and, apparently, had not done so in the UK. At  [100]  the
    judge noted that the evidence of his faith witness and minister was  to
    the effect that proselytising was not a necessary part of the  form  of
    Christianity practised by the Bethel Church. It  was  for  that  reason
    open to the judge to conclude at [101] that  on  return  the  appellant
    would wish to be open about his faith "in the sense that he  would  not
    deny being Christian if the matter arose in conversation and  would  be
    content to speak about his faith." However, the  judge  found  that  he
    failed to establish to the lower standard of proof that he  would  wish
    to proselytise, which the judge found unsurprising.

11. At [106] the judge summarised  the  position  that  the  appellant  was
    likely on return to be open about his  faith  when  such  matters  were
    discussed with friends and  family.  However,  he  was  not  likely  to
    proselytise in public. "Therefore, whether  he  will  be  a  risk  will
    depend on the attitude of friends and family (and so his  wider  family
    and tribe). It is of course possible in light of the country background
    evidence above that their attitude will be such  that  he  will  be  in
    danger (I note in particular the reference to  collective  "honour"  in
    the possibility of violence and ostracism)."

12. In summary, given  the  general  evidence  of  tolerance  of  Christian
    conversion within the IKR, the judge considered that whether there  was
    a risk to the appellant on return to the IKR from being open about  his
    religion, (as opposed to  from  proselytising),  would  depend  on  the
    attitude of friends and family. That is  consistent  with  the  country
    background information available to the Tribunal.

13. However, on this essential point the judge bemoaned  the  lack  of  any
    evidence advanced by the appellant to assist  his  resolution  of  that
    issue. At [102] of the decision, the  judge  stated,  "Turning  to  the
    attitude of the appellant's family and his tribe to his  conversion,  I
    conclude in the light of my  findings  above  that  the  appellant  has
    failed to prove anything at all in relation to  these  matters  to  the
    lower standard." At [103] the  judge  stated  that  the  appellant  had
    "proved nothing relevant about the  circumstances  to  which  he  would
    return on a personal level other than that he is an Iraqi Kurd  from  a
    village near Sulaymaniyah in the KRI. I must therefore rely  above  all
    on the  country  background  evidence."  At  [106]  the  judge  stated,
    "However, the appellant has simply failed to put forward any account of
    substance of the matters I have referred to in paragraph 102 above.  He
    has also provided  no  reasonable  explanation  for  this  family.  His
    failure in this respect is all the more notable in light  of  the  fact
    that he and his advisors  were  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  2017
    judgement. What he needed to prove at the hearing was clear."

14. Mr Parkin submitted that the judge should have addressed whether  there
    was a risk to the appellant from 'passive disclosure' of his conversion
    to Christianity from Islam. Mr McVeety submitted that, according to the
    country information and as summarised by the judge, the  risk  depended
    on the particular circumstances of the appellant and  the  attitude  of
    friends, family and tribe. As the judge stated at  [106],  "whether  he
    will be a risk will depend on the attitude of friends and  family."  At
    [104.5] the judge found that  there  was  generally  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in the IKR "but this would be unlikely to provide a  convert
    with protection from their own tribe if they needed it."

15. It is clear that the judge considered the establishment of  a  risk  on
    return to depend  on  evidence  of  the  attitude  of  the  appellant's
    friends, family and tribe.  However,  there  was  a  total  absence  of
    evidence as to what these would take, individually or collectively,  to
    his Christian conversion in the circumstances where he would on the one
    hand be open about his faith if asked but on the other would  not  seek
    to proselytise it. As the judge pointed out, the  appellant  knew  from
    the previous decisions what he had to prove but entirely failed  to  do
    so. As Mr McVeety pointed out, there had  been  two  previous  Tribunal
    decisions which had rejected the factual basis  of  claimed  events  in
    Iraq. Proving risk on return requires the appellant to establish a real
    risk to the lower  standard  of  proof;  a  hypothetical  risk  is  not
    sufficient. In the absence of evidence upon which establishing  such  a
    risk could be founded, I can find no error of law in  respect  of  this
    ground. I am satisfied that the approach and finding was  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence and is cogently reasoned. It cannot be said  that
    the finding was perverse or irrational.

16. Turning to the second submission, in reality this was little more  than
    a variation of the first ground. Mr  Parkin  relied  on  WA  (Pakistan)
    [2019] Civ 302 and submitted that the  judge  failed  to  ask  why  the
    appellant would change his conduct on return. It is  correct  that  the
    judge did not ask why the appellant would not proselytise on return but
    the answer to that is obvious from the  decision,  that  the  appellant
    does not do so now, it is not an essential part of his religious faith,
    and the clear finding was that he would not do  so  on  return.  As  Mr
    McVeety submitted, on  the  evidence  there  would  be  no  "change  of
    conduct" on return. Other than attending church, Mr McVeety  submitted,
    the appellant had done nothing in the UK that would be different in the
    IKR. In the premises, there was no need to ask why  there  would  be  a
    change in behaviour when it is clear there would in  fact  be  no  such
    change. In the circumstances, I find that no error of law is  disclosed
    by this ground.

17. In  relation  to  the  admittedly  narrow  alternative  argument  under
    paragraph 276ADE and very significant obstacles, I found  no  merit  on
    the particular facts of this case  in  attempting  to  distinguish  and
    identify very significant obstacles that would not otherwise amount  to
    persecution. Mr Parkin submitted that the appellant would be very  much
    an outsider because of his faith but the  issue  raised  by  276ADE  is
    whether he could integrate into the society  from  which  he  came,  or
    whether there were very significant obstacles to doing so.   I  do  not
    accept the proposition that because there would be no church to  attend
    or because he would not proselytise or behave more  openly  this  would
    amount to  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration.  In  the
    premises, this weak ground discloses no error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.



Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       1 June 2021





Anonymity Direction


I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       1 June 2021





