
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/03390/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |           Decision & Reasons      |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 27 September 2017               |           On 19 October 2017      |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DEANS

                                   Between


                                     L T
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L McCrorie, Loughran & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kempton
      dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant is a nineteen-year-old woman from Eritrea.  She arrived
      in the UK in October 2016 and claimed asylum the day after her
      arrival.  The appellant claims to be a Pentecostal Christian and to
      have been detained for this reason after reporting for national
      service.  She claims to have escaped from the training camp at Sawa
      and to have left Eritrea illegally by crossing the border to Sudan.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied neither that the
      appellant was a Pentecostal Christian nor that she escaped from Sawa.
      The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that she had married in
      Eritrea and that she was allocated by the authorities to a group
      undertaking a commercial course.  According to the judge, this implied
      that the appellant was not chosen for military training.

   4. The judge observed from MST (national service - risk categories)
      Eritrea CG UKUT 00443 that national service is compulsory in Eritrea
      for those aged between 18 and 50.  Evading or deserting from national
      service was not likely to be perceived as a political act but might
      result in arbitrary punishment.  According to the judge the appellant
      would be able to regularise her position by paying a "diaspora tax"
      and signing a letter of apology.  As the appellant would be able to
      regularise her position in this manner she would not be at risk on
      return.

   5. The application for permission to appeal challenged the judge's
      findings in relation to risk on return.  The grounds contended that
      the appellant was eligible for national service and would not be able
      to pay the diaspora tax.  Permission to appeal was granted because it
      was arguable that the judge did not give adequate reasons for finding
      that the appellant would not be at risk arising from these particular
      aspects of her claim.


Submissions
   6. For the appellant Miss McCrorie submitted that the judge had not fully
      engaged with the decision in MST.  The judge erred by finding that the
      appellant could pay the diaspora tax and submit a letter of apology.
      Ms McCrorie referred to the headnote of MST at 7(i), where it was said
      that a person who was perceived as a deserter or evader would not be
      able to avoid a real risk of harm by paying the diaspora tax or
      signing a letter of regret.  The judge did not find the appellant was
      a deserter, but the draft age was from 18 to 47 and the appellant was
      now aged 19.  In addition the judge had failed to undertake an
      assessment of the consequences of illegal exit, as summarised in the
      MST headnote at 10.  This was a crucial issue.  The judge failed to
      look at humanitarian protection.  The appellant's partner remained in
      Eritrea.


   7. For the respondent, Mr Matthews submitted that the appellant was
      likely to have had an exemption from national service.  This was a
      point addressed in the respondent's refusal letter at paragraph 31.
      The appellant had been at school and was sent to a different town for
      training of a nature which was other than military.  As a married
      woman she might be exempt, such as exemptions mentioned in the
      headnote of MST at 7(iii).  Mr Matthews further submitted that in MST
      all the appellants were men and the position of married women did not
      feature greatly in the decision.  It was said at paragraph 253 of the
      decision that married women might be exempt but in its conclusions at
      paragraph 431 the Upper Tribunal said nothing about married women.  In
      KA (Eritrea) CG [2005] UKAIT 00165 married women were found not to be
      in a risk category, as also in MA (Eritrea) CG [2007] UKAIT 00059.


   8. Mr Matthews acknowledged that there might be some confused points in
      the judge's decision.  For instance, at paragraph 32 the judge
      referred to the appellant paying the diaspora tax although the judge
      had previously found the appellant was not undergoing military
      training.  According to the decision in MST, at paragraph 345, illegal
      exit was no longer enough to place an individual at risk.  In
      addition, if an appellant was found not to be credible it could not be
      assumed he or she had left illegally.  In the present appeal the Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal did not consider illegal exit one way or
      another but the position was that if the appellant was not an evader
      or deserter there was no risk factor.

Discussion
   9. In my view the findings made by the judge are not adequately supported
      by the evidence accepted in MST and the judge did not adequately
      address the issues relating to risk on return.  In her consideration
      of these matters the judge erred in law and the decision should be set
      aside.


  10. In relation to risk on return the judge relied on the possibility of
      the appellant avoiding punishment by payment of a diaspora tax.
      Although the Upper Tribunal heard evidence in MST about payment of
      this tax, the Tribunal concluded at paragraph 334 that the evidence
      did not establish that payment of this tax and signing a letter of
      regret would protect draft evaders and deserters.  Indeed, signing
      such a letter might mount to an admission of guilt in the eyes of the
      Eritrean authorities.  The judge misdirected herself as to the
      evidence which was accepted by the Upper Tribunal in MST and as a
      result she did not properly apply the findings made in that decision.
      This in itself amounted to an error of law sufficient to result in her
      decision being set aside.

  11. Mr Matthews' submissions depended to a considerable extent upon the
      assumption that as a married woman the appellant was exempt from
      national service.  The findings and reasoning of the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal were, however, not sufficient to support such a
      conclusion.  Although the judge referred at paragraph 32 to the
      appellant's marital status, it was not on this account that the judge
      found the appellant was not at risk.  The finding to this effect was
      made, wholly erroneously, on the possibility of paying the diaspora
      tax and signing a letter of apology.  Indeed the judge referred at
      paragraph 32 to the compulsory requirement of national service for
      those aged between 18 and 50 and made no mention of exemptions.

  12. The position of the respondent appears in part to be that even if the
      judge erred, the error was not material because of the likelihood of
      the appellant being exempt from national service and because the
      appellant's lack of credibility meant it could not be assumed she had
      left Eritrea illegally.  Even if this were so, these were matters the
      judge should have addressed and made findings upon if her decision was
      to stand.  As it is the findings and reasons on which the judge's
      decision is based are not sufficient to support it.

  13. There were two issues in particular that the judge should have
      considered.  The first was whether it was reasonably likely the
      appellant would have been exempted from national service as a married
      woman.  The second was whether the appellant left Eritrea illegally
      and, if so, what consequences might arise from this on her return.

  14. There are no adequate findings in relation to risk on return and
      because of this the appeal will be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal
      for proper findings to be made at a hearing before a different judge.
      It has been pointed out both by the respondent and in the grant of
      permission to appeal that the judge's adverse credibility findings on
      the appellant's religious faith and alleged detention and escape from
      Sawa camp have not been challenged.  Nevertheless, as there is to be a
      fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal I consider it both
      appropriate and desirable that the new tribunal should be able to
      consider all the evidence afresh and make findings on all the matters
      germane to the appellant's protection claim.  Accordingly none of the
      findings made by Judge Kempton are preserved.

Conclusions
  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  16. The decision is set aside.

  17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a
      different judge with no findings from the earlier decision preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  As the asylum
appeal is to be reheard I will make such a direction to preserve the
positions of the parties until the appeal is decided.  Unless or until a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her family.
This direction applies to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Deans
     18th October 2017


