
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03576/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2019                 |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Azmi, Counsel, instructed by Central England
Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this decision we shall refer  to  the  Appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal as "the Secretary of State" and to MA as "the Claimant".

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howorth ("the judge"), promulgated on 26 June
    2019, in which he allowed the Claimant's appeal on the basis that there
    was  a  real  risk  of  him  suffering  serious  harm  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan by virtue of indiscriminate  violence,  with  reference  to
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.

 3. The Claimant had based his protection claim on the  alleged  activities
    of his father and the fact that these had created an  adverse  interest
    from the Taliban.  It was said that the Claimant himself  would  be  at
    risk by virtue of the familial connection if he were to be returned  to
    that country.  In respect of a possible relocation  to  Kabul,  it  was
    said that a combination of personal characteristics would make this  an
    unreasonable option.

The judge's decision

 4. The judge found a number of core aspects of the Claimant's case  to  be
    incredible.  In particular he  rejected  the  account  of  the  Taliban
    having been interested in his father.   It  was  also  found  that  the
    Claimant's father and brother had not been killed, as claimed, and that
    there was no risk from the Taliban anywhere within Afghanistan.

 5. The judge did accept that photographs of  the  Claimant  together  with
    what are described as "girls" had been apparently seen  by  members  of
    the Taliban.  It was also accepted that in  June  2019  the  Claimant's
    family home had been "bombed".

 6. Having concluded that the Claimant was not a refugee, the judge went on
    to consider the issue of humanitarian protection.   He  reiterated  the
    absence of any risk in Kabul emanating from the Taliban and at para  25
    said as follows:-

         "I must take into  account  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
         Appellant including his age, nature and quality of support  network
         or connections  with  Kabul/Afghanistan,  physical  mental  health,
         language, education and skills.  The Appellant has  no  connections
         in Kabul, is suffering from mental health problems and is receiving
         counselling and medication for depression."

 7. In the following paragraph the judge makes reference to  the  existence
    of the photographs of the Claimant and  concludes  that  he  "could  be
    perceived as westernised on return".  Finally, brief reference is  made
    to two items of country information emanating from UNHCR  and  the  BBC
    News website.  The judge took the  view  that  the  security  situation
    "generally" in Afghanistan had worsened over time.

 8. Ultimately, the judge found there to be a real risk, with reference  to
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive,  and  duly  allowed  the
    appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. In her grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State asserts that the judge
    had been wrong to purportedly depart from the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 and had
    failed to provide any or any adequate reasons in respect of the matters
    relied on as showing there to be a real risk to the Claimant in  Kabul.



10.  Permission  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Woodcraft on 30 July 2019.

The hearing

11. Mr Singh relied on the grounds.  He submitted that  an  aspect  arising
    out of AS which the judge had failed to grapple with was the fact  that
    the Upper Tribunal had reaffirmed  the  validity  of  previous  country
    guidance  relating  to  Article  15(c),  namely  AK   (Article   15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC).  Given that the judge had  based
    his decision in this appeal on Article 15(c ), it was an error  not  to
    have specifically addressed  AK.   In  addition,  the  various  factors
    relied on by the judge with  reference  to  paras  25  and  26  of  his
    decision were inadequately reasoned and no cogent basis  had  been  put
    forward for purportedly departing from AS.

12. Mr Azmi (quite rightly in our view) accepted that  the  judge  had  not
    made an express finding on whether there was a risk in  the  Claimant's
    home area.  To this extent he accepted that there was a lacuna  in  the
    decision (we note that this particular  issue  is  not  raised  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal).  He also accepted that AK  had
    not been specifically mentioned by the judge. However, the various  the
    factors taken into account in paras 25 and 26 were all relevant and the
    overall conclusion had been open to the judge.

Decision on error of law

13. We conclude that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

14. Having decided to base his decision on Article 15(c) and  the  apparent
    existence of a real risk of serious harm  arising  from  indiscriminate
    violence in Kabul, it was incumbent upon the judge  to  deal  with  the
    relevant legal framework.  This included dealing with the guidance  set
    out in AK.  AK is not referenced in the decision. Whilst it is  correct
    that it does not expressly feature in the grounds of appeal either,  it
    is clearly stated in AS that  the  guidance  on  Article  15(c)  in  AK
    remained valid and that validity applied as  at  the  date  of  hearing
    before the judge.  As the judge relied on AS, we are satisfied that the
    grounds of appeal properly encompass the submission put forward  by  Mr
    Singh.  AK  clearly  states  that  absent  certain  relevant   personal
    characteristics which would, in effect, stand an individual out,  there
    was no risk of indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan as  a  whole.  In
    turn, the judge's failure to consider AK is an error.

15. The judge identified a number of  personal  characteristics  which,  if
    relevant and adequately reasoned, may potentially render the failure to
    have referred to AK  immaterial  on  the  ground  that  an  alternative
    conclusion that residing in Kabul would be unduly harsh may  have  been
    open to him. However, we conclude that there are errors in  respect  of
    the personal characteristics identified and relied on.

16. The judge relies on the photographs of the Claimant  and  the  possible
    perception as being "westernised".  There  are  two  difficulties  with
    this issue. First, although the photographs had apparently been seen by
    the Taliban (and only them) and this had caused  an  adverse  interest,
    the judge has then gone on to expressly state that there was no risk to
    the Claimant from the Taliban anywhere within Afghanistan.  There is an
    inconsistency on the face of the  decision.   Second,  AS  specifically
    rejects the issue of perceived westernisation as being  a  risk  factor
    (see para 187).  The judge may on one view  have  purported  to  depart
    from the guidance in AS (which we note had already by  that  time  been
    remitted by the Court of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  albeit  on  a
    narrow ground), but at no stage does he set out or apply  the  relevant
    test for such a departure as expressed in, amongst  other  authorities,
    SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940.  On either view, there is an error here.

17. The two items of country information cited in para 26 do not apparently
    deal with Kabul and there is, in our view, inadequate reasoning  as  to
    why that evidence (and that alone) justified a departure  from  country
    guidance.

18. The judge has also relied on the absence  of  any  connections  of  the
    Claimant in Kabul itself. However, on the judge's findings, all members
    of the Claimant's family still resided in Afghanistan.  The judge fails
    to provide any reasons as to the effect of this fact in  terms  of  any
    potential support from the family, notwithstanding that  they  did  not
    themselves reside in the capital.  Further, we know from  AS  (and  the
    country information underpinning it)  that  the  absence  of  a  social
    network would not in the normal run of events be a  significant  factor
    making internal relocation to Kabul an unreasonable option,  let  alone
    form part of a basis of a real risk of indiscriminate violence.

19. In respect of the Claimant's mental health, the only evidence  that  we
    can see that may have been before  the  judge  was  a  letter  from  an
    organisation called Elysian Field dated 14 June 2017:

         "In a general meeting with [MA]'s  lead  professional,  staff  made
         them aware of the  concerns  regarding  [MA]'s  mental  well-being.
         Staff were advised to book [MA] a doctor's appointment.  Staff then
         booked this appointment and supported [MA] to  attend  on  the  7th
         June. [MA] has been referred for counselling at the Refugee  Centre
         in Coventry by the doctor.  [MA] has also been started on a  course
         of Sertraline 50gm once  a  day  for  depression.  This  is  to  be
         reviewed every 2 weeks."

20. With respect to the author of the letter, it is brief in nature and did
    not emanate from a medical professional.  It was also  some  two  years
    old at the time of the hearing before the judge.  He did not  refer  to
    this item of evidence at all, and in  our  view  there  is  a  lack  of
    adequate reasons as to why, on the basis of this  evidence  alone,  any
    mental health problems as at the date of hearing would have  created  a
    material personal characteristics for the purposes of  showing  a  real
    risk, or indeed of rendering internal relocation unreasonable.


21. On a cumulative basis, the errors identified above are  material,  with
    the result that the judge's decision should be set aside.

Disposal


22. Given the nature of the errors and the need  for  relatively  extensive
    fact-finding (including whether there is in fact a risk to the Claimant
    in his home area),  we  have  decided  that  the  appropriate  form  of
    disposal is to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Whilst
    there have been adverse credibility findings against the  Claimant,  it
    would be artificial and  potentially  a  hindrance  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal if we were to preserve any of the findings made by the  judge.
    Therefore,  the  appeal  will  be  reheard  afresh  with  no  preserved
    findings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1) The remitted hearing shall not be heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howorth;

 2) There are no preserved findings of fact;

 3) There will be a need for a Pashtu interpreter;

 4) There is a 4-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.


Signed   [pic]             Date: 30 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
