
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03407/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 HASSAN [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jones, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born and 25 October 1956 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Yemen. He is currently serving a life prison sentence for the murder of
    his father. He first entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  March  1997  as
    visitor and then claimed asylum. The appellant appealed on human rights
    (Article 2/3 ECHR)/asylum grounds against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State dated 5 October 2016. The First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 December 2018, dismissed his appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to fear the authorities in Yemen. He  claims  that
    he was a security officer for a state-owned plant in Aden. He claims to
    become aware of acts perpetrated by the authorities which  led  to  his
    dismissal from work and threats, made on the part of  the  authorities,
    to kill him. The appellant initially gave an account of  these  matters
    to the United Kingdom authorities when he claimed asylum in March 1997.
    He was interviewed again in July 2017. The record of that interview  is
    in the Tribunal file and is referred to extensively by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge [35-39]. At [36], the judge records the interview record
    indicates that there had been a break for lunch and that  'after  lunch
    the appellant then claimed he was confronted and  accused  of  being  a
    separatist but not harmed.' Judge considered that this claim  indicated
    an 'evolution' of his account of past events. Use of the word 'then' at
    [36] clearly indicates that the judge  believed  that  the  appellant's
    account changed or 'evolved' over the lunch break. The judge considered
    that the changed account showed that the  appellant  is  a  'completely
    unreliable witness' who had 'invented' his asylum claim.

 3. I agree with Mr Jones, who appeared for the appellant  at  the  initial
    hearing, that this part of  the  judge's  analysis  is  problematic.  I
    acknowledge that the judge was right to consider that  the  appellant's
    evidence should be treated with great caution given  the  very  serious
    criminal offending which he has been convicted in the  United  Kingdom.
    Notwithstanding that starting point, the judge was required to  conduct
    a careful and objective analysis of the appellant's claim. Even  though
    she may have been justified in having a low opinion of the appellant as
    a witness of truth, I consider that there can be little doubt that  the
    judge's belief that the appellant changed his asylum claim  over  lunch
    during an interview in July 2017 weighed heavily in  her  rejection  of
    that claim as credible. The problem in the judge's analysis is that  in
    the July 2017 interview  the  appellant  was  doing  no  more  than  to
    reiterate details of his asylum claim which he had  advanced  in  1997.
    Whether or not the account is true, the appellant  did  not  invent  or
    'evolve' his account over lunch in the course of an interview nearly 20
    years later.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. I preserve the  judge's
    conclusions regarding the notice under section 72  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; permission to challenge these findings
    was not given by the  Upper  Tribunal  (see  grant  of  permission,  14
    February 2019).  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.  In  the
    circumstances, I do not propose to deal with the remaining  grounds  of
    appeal in any detail. However, I find that there is considerable  force
    in Mr Jones's submissions regarding the judge's treatment of the expert
    witness whose evidence the judge has largely rejected for reasons which
    are unclear. The will, in any event, need to be a hearing  de  novo  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside. None of the findings
    of fact shall stand, save that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    uphold the certificate under Section 72 of Nationality Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and the consequent dismissal of the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds shall stand. The decision in respect of the appeal on Article 3
    ECHR grounds shall be remade in the First-tier Tribunal at or following
    a hearing on a date to be fixed.


Signed                              Date 1 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
