
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/03165/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2017                |On 6 February 2018                |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Solicitor (Elder Rahimi)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS











      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  on  18  September   2017   against   the
           determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  who  had
           dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the refusal of his
           international protection claim to which an Article 8 ECHR  claim
           was appended.  The decision and reasons was  promulgated  on  31
           May 2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Cote d'Ivoire, born on [ ]  1966.
           He had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  25  September
           2002, overstayed and had done nothing  to  regularise  his  stay
           until 15 April 2015 when he applied for leave to remain  on  the
           basis of his family and  private  life.   That  application  was
           rejected  on  3  June  2015.   The  Appellant  made  a   similar
           application on 17 February 2016, which was refused with  an  out
           of country right of appeal  only.   On  16  September  2016  the
           Appellant claimed asylum on the basis of his political  opinion.
           He asserted that he was an active member  of  the  FPI  in  Cote
           d'Ivoire, had fled in fear and had joined the London branch. His
           father had  been  beaten  up  in  2015  by  people  seeking  the
           Appellant.  The Appellant's name was on a wanted list.


      3.    Judge O'Garro found that the Appellant had failed to prove  that
           he had any political profile in Cote d'Ivoire nor  had  he  been
           threatened.  No part of his claim as to events in Cote  d'Ivoire
           was credible.  The Appellant's delay in claiming asylum  further
           detracted from his credibility. The judge  accepted  that  there
           was evidence that showed that the Appellant had joined  the  FPI
           in London, but found that the Ivorian authorities would have  no
           means of knowing of his activities which  were  minimal  in  any
           event.  Nor was the Appellant subject to any real risk on return
           because he had no significant political profile.


      4.    Permission to appeal was granted because it  was  held  arguable
           that the judge had  not  assessed  the  Appellant's  credibility
           adequately, in her approach to the documents and otherwise.


      5.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice in letter form dated 31 October 2017 opposing the  appeal
           was filed by the Respondent.


      Submissions


      6.    Mr Gayle for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary, he submitted that the  judge  had
           failed to provide a properly reasoned decision.  The analysis of
           the country background  evidence  was  flawed.   The  judge  had
           failed to show that she understood who was at risk.   There  was
           evidence  of  the  Appellant's  activities   sur   place.    The
           authorities were likely to be interested in the Appellant.   The
           Appellant would be likely  to  have  to  declare  his  political
           opinion and allegiance and hence was at risk.  The determination
           should be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


      7.    Mr Kandola for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice  and
           submitted that there was plainly no material error of law.   The
           judge had examined the evidence and had found that the  majority
           of the Appellant's claims were not credible.  The delay  in  the
           claim was very significant.  The Appellant had been found not at
           risk in 2002 when he left Cote d'Ivoire.  He had since  been  in
           the United Kingdom for 14 years.  Any profile he  had  developed
           sur place was insufficient to place him at risk,  as  the  judge
           had been  entitled  to  find.   The  onwards  appeal  should  be
           dismissed.


      8.    In reply, Mr Gayle submitted  that  background  evidence  showed
           that there were problems for FPI members and the judge  had  not
           addressed that adequately.


      No material error of law finding


      9.    In the tribunal's view, the grant of permission  to  appeal  was
           excessively generous, and failed to place the Appellant's  claim
           into its proper context of enormous delay.  As  noted  by  Judge
           O'Garro, the Appellant had claimed to have  been  at  risk  from
           2002 onwards, certainly at the point he left Cote d'Ivoire.  Yet
           it was made only after the Appellant's belated  other  steps  to
           obtain leave to remain had  failed.  The  protection  claim  can
           properly be described as abusive.


      10.   The experienced judge examined the whole of  the  evidence  with
           appropriate care, in the round, and gave  multi-faceted  reasons
           for finding  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  largely  not
           credible,  having  studied  the   current   country   background
           materials.  Given the  lack  of  substance  to  the  Appellant's
           story,  placing  weight  on  the  alleged  list  of   pro-Gbagbo
           sympathisers liable to detention (see Home Office bundle, H3) he
           produced would have  been  difficult  to  justify.   It  had  no
           connection to the Appellant.  The only evidence which the  judge
           accepted was that of  local  party  membership  which  had  been
           corroborated  by  a  United   Kingdom   witness,   i.e.,   local
           corroboration which  was  safely  available  and  was  provided.
           There was no satisfactory evidence that a very poor country such
           as Cote d'Ivoire has the resources  to  monitor  its  nationals'
           activities abroad.  The Appellant failed to prove otherwise,  as
           the judge found.  There  was  no  reason  to  accept  the  other
           limited assertions about him made by the local witnesses,  since
           if true they could and should have been made long ago.


      11.   Mr Gayle's submissions, like the onwards grounds, amount  to  no
           more than disagreement with the judge's decision.  The  tribunal
           finds that the onwards appeal has no substance  and  that  there
           was no material error of law in the decision challenged.


      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
      material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




      Signed                                  Dated 2 February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




