
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03497/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 9th April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     A Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Harris of Counsel instructed by Ata & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Devittie (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 26th November 2018.



 2. The Appellant is an Afghan citizen who claimed asylum  on  2nd  October
    2015  on  the  basis  that  he  feared  the  Taliban  if  returned   to
    Afghanistan, because he had worked as an interpreter in Afghanistan for
    a company called CISS.

 3. The application was refused on 24th February 2018 and  the  appeal  was
    heard by the FtT on 18th October 2018.

 4. The judge found the Appellant to be an incredible witness and  did  not
    accept that he had  worked  as  an  interpreter  for  CISS  as  claimed
    although it was accepted that CISS had operated as a  security  company
    in Afghanistan.  The judge did not accept that the  appellant  was  the
    subject of adverse interest by the Taliban and the appeal was dismissed
    on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch  in
    the following terms;

         "It was arguably procedurally unfair to find that  the  Appellant's
         credibility was undermined when he said that he had not  been  able
         to obtain any corroborative evidence from CISS but at the same time
         to accept that  the  Respondent  was  not  able  to  establish  the
         veracity of the signature on the documents said to be signed by the
         CISS and relied upon by the Appellant.

         The judge also failed to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant was able to give oral evidence in very good English  when
         assessing whether he had shown that he was previously  employed  as
         an interpreter.  He also failed to take into account the fact  that
         the Appellant explained that he did not immediately resign from his
         post, when threatened, as his  family  were  financially  dependent
         upon him and working as an interpreter was the only way in which he
         could earn a similar amount of money.

         The judge began his assessment of the  Appellant's  credibility  by
         considering whether some of his answers were plausible.  He did not
         take into account all of the evidence in a holistic  manner  before
         reaching a decision  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
         account.

         As a consequence, it is my judgment that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Devittie's decision and reasons did contain arguable errors of  law
         and, therefore, permission to appeal should be granted."

 6. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

My Consideration and Conclusions

 7. At the oral hearing Mr McGirr relied upon a rule 24 response dated 26th
    March 2019 in which it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately and made findings which were open to make on  the
    evidence.

 8. Miss Harris relied and expanded upon the  Grounds  of  Appeal  together
    with the grant of permission.

 9. The judge listed unsatisfactory features of the Appellant's evidence at
    paragraph 10 (1)- (6) and paragraph 11.

10. At paragraph 10(1) and (2) the judge found that the Appellant  had  not
    been able to give a satisfactory explanation as to why he  remained  at
    work after receiving the  first  threat  by  the  Taliban.   The  judge
    records the Appellant's explanation as being that he did not  take  the
    threat seriously, partly because he was not within reach of the Taliban
    as he  was  working  in  Kandahar.   The  judge  did  not  accept  this
    explanation as credible.

11. In my view  inadequate  reasons  have  been  given  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's  explanation,  and  the  judge  has  concluded   that   the
    Appellant's explanation was not plausible.  Caution must  be  exercised
    when considering plausibility as was emphasised in HK [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1037, at paragraphs 28 and 29.  In very brief summary the  guidance  in
    that case was that in many asylum cases an Appellant's story  may  seem
    inherently unlikely but that does not mean it is  untrue.   Ingredients
    of the story must be considered against available country evidence  and
    reliable expert evidence, together with factors  such  as  consistency.
    Inherent probability may be a dangerous, even  a  wholly  inappropriate
    factor to rely on in some asylum cases.

12. The Appellant's witness statement dated 17th October 2018  formed  part
    of the Appellant's evidence before the FtT.  At paragraph  18  of  that
    statement the Appellant gave quite a full explanation as to why he  had
    not resigned immediately.   He  explained  that  it  was  not  an  easy
    decision to leave a job immediately, hoping that the threat would never
    be implemented.  Working as an interpreter was his livelihood and  even
    if he left CISS he would have worked  for  a  similar  organisation  to
    utilise his skills and experience, and the only organisations that paid
    good wages were international organisations.  He  also  explained  that
    the international forces were still in Afghanistan at  that  time,  and
    the situation was not as bad as after the departure of those forces  in
    December 2014.  He described Kabul as being less insecure.

13. I find that that the judge's decision does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    Appellant's  explanation  had  been  taken  fully  into  account,   and
    inadequate reasons were given for making an adverse credibility finding
    based on plausibility on this point.

14. At paragraph 10(5) and  (6)  the  judge  makes  a  significant  adverse
    credibility finding as to why the Appellant was  not  able  to  provide
    verification of his employment with CISS, and makes  reference  to  the
    Appellant being asked repeatedly in cross-examination what  efforts  he
    had made to contact his former employees.  The reference  to  employees
    is clearly a typing error and the judge meant  to  refer  to  employer.
    The judge found that the Appellant's responses significantly undermined
    his evidence and this caused the judge to receive the  impression  that
    he was making up his evidence as he went along.

15. I find that it was a material error of law to make such  a  significant
    adverse credibility finding on this point.  The judge does not  mention
    in his findings, the Respondent's inability to contact CISS and  verify
    the documentation submitted  by  the  Appellant  said  to  confirm  his
    employment  with  that  organisation.   At  paragraphs  26-27  of   the
    Respondent's refusal decision, the Respondent notes that CISS no longer
    have an official website because their domain has been taken  over  and
    comments that consequently there is no way to  confirm  that  the  logo
    printed on the documents produced by the Appellant is the same  as  the
    official company logo.  Due to the lack of an official CISS website the
    Respondent comments that it is virtually impossible to  establish  what
    relation the signatory of the documents has to CISS.

16. There is no indication that the judge has taken into account  paragraph
    2 of the Appellant's witness statement in which he explains that it  is
    difficult for him to submit corroborative evidence  of  his  employment
    with  CISS  because  the  company  was  dissolved  because  of  corrupt
    activities  and  the  managers  went  into  hiding.   This   tends   to
    corroborate what is stated by the Respondent at  paragraph  26  of  the
    refusal decision.

17. I find that the judge erred by failing to take into account potentially
    material evidence, that being the  Respondent's  inability  to  contact
    CISS  as  outlined  in  the  refusal  decision,  and  the   Appellant's
    explanation in his witness statement, and inadequate reasons were given
    for making such an adverse credibility finding.

18. At paragraph 11 the judge refers to  a  report  by  a  country  expert,
    accepting that the Appellant's account is not  in  itself  inconsistent
    with country background  conditions.   The  judge  then  considers  the
    documentary evidence submitted by the Appellant,  in  the  form  of  an
    identity card and a  letter  from  his  former  employers.   The  judge
    correctly confirms that documentary evidence must be considered in  the
    round in the light of the totality of the  evidence.   However,  in  my
    view the judge does not follow that approach.  The  judge  goes  on  to
    record  that  "The  unsatisfactory  features  I  have  identified   are
    compelling and they significantly undermine the weight to  be  accorded
    to the documentary evidence showing him to have been in the employ of a
    private security company."

19. The judge therefore has not shown that he has looked at the evidence in
    the round.  The only reason given for  not  accepting  the  documentary
    evidence as reliable, are findings that the judge has made in  relation
    to credibility on other issues.  The impression given is that the judge
    has already found the  Appellant  incredible,  before  considering  the
    documentary evidence.  I find this to be an error of approach.

20. For the reasons given above I am persuaded that  the  judge  materially
    erred in law, and made findings which are unsafe.   In  my  view  those
    findings infected other findings.

21. The decision of the FtT is set aside with no  findings  preserved.   It
    was suggested that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back  to
    the FtT to be heard afresh.  Having considered the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements, in particular paragraph 7.2  I  find  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  FtT  because  of  the
    extensive judicial fact-finding required.

22. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Devittie.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 4th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FtT.


Signed   Date 4th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
