
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03326/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Remotely        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2021                     |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    D P I
                         (ANONYMITY order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel instructed by Hallmark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:  Ms B Karimi attended to interpret the Kurdish Sorani and
                    English languages
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I have already found that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and set
      aside its decision.  My "Reasons for Finding Error of Law" are dated 9
      November 2020 and have been sent to the parties but  I  set  them  out
      below by way of introduction to this decision and reasons.  I  confirm
      that the anonymity order made there stands.

   2. When I found an error of law and set aside the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal I said:

                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

  3  Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
  2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of  any
  matter likely to lead members of the public to  identify  the  Appellant.
  Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make  this
  order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and  so  is  entitled  to
  privacy.

  4  This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran against  the  Decision  of  the
  First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  Decision  of  the
  respondent refusing him asylum.

  5  Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Stephen  Smith
  on a limited basis.  I set it out below.   It  is,  with  respect,  self-
  explanatory:

    "It is arguable, however, that the judge  erred  when  considering  and
    applying HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC),  given  the
    heightened scrutiny of Kurds at the  border,  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant cannot be expected to lie if asked about  attendance  at  any
    pro-Kurdish events in this country.  See [29].  Although the judge said
    that she had considered  the  'hair  trigger'  approach,  arguably  the
    reader is left wondering why attendance at a  pro-Kurdish  event  would
    not  cause  the  notoriously  hypersensitive  Iranian  Authorities  any
    concerns if it  were  revealed  during  routine  questioning  upon  the
    appellant's return.  Arguably, the findings of the Upper Tribunal in HB
    (Iran) do not justify a finding that the Iranian Authorities  would  be
    unconcerned about sur place  activities  that  were  conducted  in  bad
    faith.  I grant permission to appeal solely in relation to this  ground
    of appeal, as raised in the renewal grounds."

  6  Subsequently, in the light of the well-known strain on resources as  a
  result of the COVID-19 crisis, Directions were given suggesting that  the
  Tribunal could determine without  a  hearing  whether  the  Decision  and
  Reasons involved the making of an error of law and,  if  so  whether  the
  Decision should be set aside.  Mr T Melvin for the respondent produced  a
  respondent's written submissions Rule 24 reply.  As  far  as  I  can  see
  neither party took the opportunity of making  representations  about  the
  need for a hearing.  I assume that is because neither party thought there
  was a pressing need for a hearing.  As is made clear at Rule  34  of  the
  Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, in statutory appeals they
  impose no obligation on the Upper  Tribunal  to  have  a  hearing  before
  making a Decision but the Upper Tribunal must have  regard  to  any  view
  expressed by a party when deciding whether or  not  to  hold  a  hearing.
  Here no view has been expressed.  Provided that it can  be  done  justly,
  the Tribunal has decided to determine some appeals without a  hearing  in
  an effort to use  efficiently  the  restricted  hearing  space  which  is
  diminished by the needs of adapting to the Corona-19 virus.  Whilst there
  may be some cases before the Tribunal where the  claimant  has  a  vested
  interest in delay, excessive delay is not fair to the public interest  or
  to many claimants and is something to be avoided when possible.   I  have
  read the papers in the case and I am satisfied that this  appeal  can  be
  determined justly without a hearing and that is what I  have  endeavoured
  to do.

  7  It is important that the appellant understands that the scope  of  the
  grant of permission to appeal is limited  and  most  certainly  does  not
  require a challenge to the adverse credibility findings.  The  First-tier
  Tribunal was clearly  very  unimpressed  with  the  appellant  and  found
  unequivocally that the appellant had  no  adverse  history  of  political
  activity in Iran but was reasonably  likely  to  have  left  the  country
  illegally.  He had taken part in one demonstration in the United  Kingdom
  but the judge, after reminding herself of the  "hair  trigger  approach",
  did not accept that the Iranian Authorities would have  any  interest  in
  the appellant as a political opponent and said that  "being  Kurdish  and
  having left illegally is not enough".

  8  The Tribunal then decided that "the appellant is an  economic  migrant
  who seeks to take advantage of  a  refugee  process."   That  is  a  very
  emphatic finding but it is consistent with the findings as a whole but it
  may be helpful if the judge chose not to use phrases  such  as  "economic
  migrant" as these are highly pejorative in some contexts and can be  seen
  as offensive.

  9  I am entirely satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.
  The route to the Judge's conclusion is just not explained.  I  set  aside
  the conclusion that the appellant is not entitled to protection.

  10 The Secretary of State's Rule 24 notice reminds me, rightly, that  the
  country guidance of the Tribunal is that  a  Kurd  who  returns  to  Iran
  having left illegally will not for those reasons alone risk  persecution.
  The difficulty here  is  that  there  has  been  a  degree  of  political
  activity.  The judge has decided that it does not create a risk  but  not
  explained why it does not create  a  risk.   Mr  Melvin's  arguments  are
  interesting, particularly his suggestion that only  a  sincere  objection
  would cause a problem.  It may be there is support for this  view  in  PS
  (Christianity - risk) Iran CG  [2020]  UKUT  46  (IAC)  but  that  is  an
  observation on my part, not a ruling.  Far from persuading me that  there
  is no error of law it illustrates the importance of  a  further  hearing.
  The appellant must not assume that it is  a  smooth  passage  from  these
  findings to being seen recognised as a refugee.

  11 The Directions that led to the  decision  without  a  hearing  do  not
  permit a final disposal if an error of law has been established.

  12 There has been no application to serve further evidence and I  see  no
  need for further evidence.  The hearing will be in the Upper Tribunal and
  it is suitable for remote hearing.  If either party objects to  a  remote
  hearing and the case is listed for remote  hearing  then  the  objections
  should be made forthwith when they will be considered. It  is  likely  to
  assist  the  Tribunal  if  the  parties  each  serve  skeleton  arguments
  explaining why the appeal should be allowed or dismissed  with  reference
  to adverse credibility finding and the material before the Tribunal.

  Notice of Decision

  13 The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside this Decision and I
  direct the case be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.

   3. Mr Brown had previously applied to rely on additional evidence  served
      in a short statement dated 8 February 2021.  I  consider  it  in  more
      detail below but the  gist  of  it  is  that  the  appellant  attended
      demonstrations in February, March and July 2020.  He also asked on the
      morning of the hearing to permit the  admission  of  further  evidence
      tending to show that he had planned to attend another demonstration in
      April 2021 in front of the embassy of the Islamic Republic but it  was
      called off in the light of coronavirus restrictions.   Mr  Melvin  did
      not object to this additional evidence going in and I admitted it.

   4. The statements supported photographs which again I  consider  in  more
      detail below but which tend to support the appellant's claim  to  have
      been involved in demonstrations.

   5. The paperwork has rather spread in this  case  and  the  parties  were
      careful to make sure that the written submissions that I ought to have
      I in fact did have before me.

   6. Mr Melvin wanted to rely on three written  documents.   The  first  is
      dated 17 August 2020 and is entitled "Respondent's Written Submissions
      Rule 24 reply".  The second is dated 10 February 2021 and is  entitled
      "Respondent's Skeleton Argument".  The third is dated 9 April 2021 and
      is entitled "Respondent's Final Skeleton argument".

   7. Mr Brown relied particularly on "Appellant's Outline Arguments"  dated
      10 February 2021.

   8. The appellant adopted his statement signed 8 February 2021.  There  he
      said that since the hearing in September 2019 at Bradford he had  been
      to three further demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in  London
      against the Iranian regime.  They had taken place on 3 February  2020,
      1 March 2020 and 30 July 2020.

   9. He believed the Iranian regime to be responsible for  the  persecution
      and displacement of Kurds.  He had left Iran and his family  in  order
      to save his life.   He  said  how  Kurds  in  Iran  were  not  treated
      properly.  They were not given the rights of Iranians  and  they  were
      targeted and killed if they expressed their views.

  10. He said he would continue to voice his thoughts in opposition  to  the
      Iranian regime for as long as he lived or until the regime toppled.

  11. He attached photographs showing him taking part in demonstrations.

  12. He said that how it came to be understood  that  people  who  attended
      demonstrations were particularly vulnerable to catching coronavirus so
      planned demonstrations were cancelled.

  13. In answer to supplementary questions he said he had a train ticket for
      an event in April but it was cancelled.

  14. The appellant was cross-examined.

  15. He was reminded that he had claimed to have attended an  indoor  event
      in 2019.  He said that event  had  been  organised  to  celebrate  the
      formation of the Kurdish Democratic Party of  Iran.  He  attended  the
      meeting but he did not  make  a  speech.   He  said  everyone  present
      renewed their pledge to the  Democratic  Party  in  its  struggle  for
      liberation.

  16. He was asked directly if he was  a  member  and  he  replied  that  he
      supported the party and continued to be sympathetic for  the  sake  of
      Kurdish liberation.

  17. He was asked if anybody was supporting his claim to be a supporter  of
      the party.  He replied that many people were there who  could  confirm
      that he was a supporter of the party but nobody was coming  to  attend
      to support him.

  18. He was reminded that he had provided a photograph  which  appeared  to
      show him attending a demonstration.  He agreed that  that  was  right.
      He asked if there was any independent proof of the dates that  he  had
      given.  Again the appellant  was  reluctant  to  answer  the  question
      claiming  the  photographs  were  evidence   he   had   attended   the
      demonstration.  He was asked if he had got  evidence  other  than  the
      photographs.  Yet again the appellant seemed reluctant to  answer  the
      question and referred to having many colleagues and brothers there.

  19. I asked the appellant  if  anyone  was  coming  to  support  his  case
      "today", that is at the hearing before me.  He replied:

  "Today no-one to give evidence many brothers  aware  of  my  attending  a
  demonstration  always   in   dialogue   usually   informed   about   this
  demonstration."

  20.  Mr  Melvin  asked  the  appellant  if  he  knew  who  organised   the
      demonstration and he replied that many  organise  such  events  mainly
      from the networks and those  were  Iranian  Kurds.   He  talked  about
      having a duty to represent the cause.

  21. He was asked if there was any evidence of a network  of  activists  in
      the United Kingdom.  He said there were many activists they  come  and
      talk about the prospects of Kurds.

  22. It was then suggested that  in  the  photographs  he  appeared  to  be
      holding posters. He agreed that was correct. He was and  asked  if  he
      could read what was written on the posters.  He said he could  not  he
      was illiterate, but he understood them to be posters showing the  flag
      and identifying martyrs.

  23. He was asked if the photographs were published anywhere such as  on  a
      website or in a magazine.

  24. The appellant said posters were published "everywhere,  social  media,
      college, friends many places" and  said  the  Iranian  government  had
      hidden cameras so they can collect information "in case we go back".

  25. He was asked if there were any photographs of him published  anywhere.
      He replied, "No doubt about it all over social media in UK and  Iran".



  26. He was asked if there were any photographs of him  published  anywhere
      that he had seen. He replied "No, but friends have told me that  I  am
      there".  I thought this answer possibly significant and checked that I
      had recorded it correctly.  I had.  He said his concern  was  to  take
      part in the liberation of his people not to have his photograph taken.

  27. He had produced a letter from the KPDI UK.  He obtained that  he  said
      from a friend of his.   They  met  face  to  face  and  discussed  the
      situation.

  28. He was asked about evidence  of  his  links  with  the  KPDI  UK.   He
      replied, "All the people who saw me are the evidence".

  29. He was asked about family in Iran.  He has had  no  contact  with  his
      family in Iran since he arrived in the United  Kingdom  because  every
      contact is monitored in Iran.  He  did  not  want  to  exacerbate  the
      situation by contacting them.  He  did  not  know  if  they  had  been
      punished or not.

  30. Mr Melvin suggested that possibly a friend in the KPDI  network  could
      get  information  secretly.   The  appellant  said  that  he  had  not
      contacted his family because international  communications  with  Iran
      are monitored and so contact could make problems for  his  family.  Mr
      Melvin asked him if standing outside the embassy protesting would have
      any impact on the family and he replied "Yes, very much  possibly  but
      they are not aware who I am, or name or address or story".

  31. He was then asked why he did not think he  would  be  recognised  from
      standing  outside  the  embassy.   He  had  decided  that  they  might
      recognise him because it was spread all over social media  and  if  he
      were sent back his life would be in danger he risked execution.

  32. He was asked again how the authorities in Iran would  know  about  his
      activities in the United Kingdom.  He said that  it  was  because  his
      pictures  were  all  over  social  media.   He  believed  the  Iranian
      government had pictures of "all of us".   He  then  thought  that  his
      family would be at risk already because of things he had done  if  the
      picture had been noticed.

  33. He explained he left Iran on a forged  passport  that  his  uncle  had
      obtained for him.

  34. Mr Melvin addressed me but relied also on the written documents.

  35. I consider now the "respondent's written  submissions  Rule  24  reply
      dated 17 August 2020".

  36. This began by  drawing  attention  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Stephen
      Smith's grant of permission.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had  found
      that the appellant had only attended one event in Manchester  and  had
      not satisfied her that he was a member of any Kurdish political  group
      in the United Kingdom. The appellant had  not  been  involved  in  any
      online activity and was simply trying to bolster a claim.

  37. Mr Melvin contended that the decision in HB (Iran) was  not  authority
      for the contention that a Kurdish applicant who was not  credible  and
      had no political  profile  would  be  at  risk  simply  by  reason  of
      attending one pro-Kurdish event in the United Kingdom.   He  made  the
      point that the appellant had no known links with pro-Kurdish political
      activity in Iran through his family and what  he  did  in  the  United
      Kingdom could not even be described properly as  low  level  political
      activity.  It was not a question of his being expected to lie  because
      he had not shown he was a serious  supporter  of  Kurdish  separatism.
      Rather he was dishonest and an opportunist and had  no  principles  to
      hide in the event of his return.

  38. I consider now Mr Melvin's skeleton argument dated 10  February  2021.
      This is described as "Further to the written submission served ...  on
      17 August 2020".

  39. There Mr Melvin emphasised that the appellant  lacked  credibility  as
      his claim of past persecution was not believed.  He set  out  in  full
      the headnote of the decision in HB (Iran) where it was emphasised that
      the decision in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seekers)  Iran
      CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) remains authoritative guidance. Kurds in Iran
      face discrimination but not generally at a level that entitles them to
      international protection. I find it  helpful  to  follow  Mr  Melvin's
      example and set out the entire headnote in  HB  (Iran).  The  Tribunal
      said:

                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE

  (1)         SSH and HR (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
  [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country  guidance  in  terms  of  the
  country guidance offered in the headnote. For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
  that decision is not authority for any proposition  in  relation  to  the
  risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-seekers  on  account  of  their
  Kurdish ethnicity alone.

  (2)         Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does
  not support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at such
  a level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

  (3)         Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have  become  increasingly
  suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish  political  activity.  Those  of
  Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded  with  even  greater  suspicion  than
  hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened scrutiny
  on return to Iran.

  (4)         However, the  mere  fact  of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
  ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and  even  if  combined  with
  illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
  treatment.

  (5)         Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor  which,  when
  combined with other factors, may create a real  risk  of  persecution  or
  Article 3 ill-treatment. Being  a  risk  factor  it  means  that  Kurdish
  ethnicity is a factor of particular  significance  when  assessing  risk.
  Those "other factors" will include the matters identified  in  paragraphs
  (6)-(9) below.

  (6)         A period of residence in the KRI by  a  Kurdish  returnee  is
  reasonably likely to result in additional questioning by the  authorities
  on return. However, this is a factor that will  be  highly  fact-specific
  and the degree of interest that such residence will excite  will  depend,
  non-exhaustively, on matters such as the length of residence in the  KRI,
  what the person concerned was doing there and why they left.

  (7)         Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
  risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical  abuse  by  the  Iranian
  authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful  dissent  or  who  speak  out
  about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution  or  Article  3
  ill-treatment.

  (8)         Activities that can be  perceived  to  be  political  by  the
  Iranian authorities include social welfare and charitable  activities  on
  behalf of Kurds. Indeed,  involvement  with  any  organised  activity  on
  behalf of or in support of Kurds can be perceived as political  and  thus
  involve a risk of adverse attention by the Iranian authorities  with  the
  consequent risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

  (9)         Even 'low-level' political  activity,  or  activity  that  is
  perceived to be  political,  such  as,  by  way  of  example  only,  mere
  possession  of  leaflets  espousing  or  supporting  Kurdish  rights,  if
  discovered, involves the same risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
  treatment. Each case however, depends on its own facts and an  assessment
  will need to be made as to the nature of the material possessed  and  how
  it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian authorities in the context
  of the foregoing guidance.

  (10)   The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described  as  a
  'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be involved
  in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights. By  'hair-
  trigger' it means that  the  threshold  for  suspicion  is  low  and  the
  reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme.

  40. I find paragraph (3) of the headnote  highly  pertinent.  The  Iranian
      authorities are wary of Kurds  and  the  appellant  is  likely  to  be
      interrogated in the event of his return.

  41. Having recognised this position Mr Melvin argued that the risk factors
      do not apply to this appellant.  The appellant will  not  be  able  to
      show the Tribunal that he risked being perceived to be a supporter  of
      Kurdish activism.  He had no  political  affiliations  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  He had not relied on any postings on  Facebook  or  similar.
      He has no known political affiliations or profile who attended at that
      time one pro-Kurdish event in the United Kingdom which, he  submitted,
      was not enough.

  42. The respondent's final skeleton argument,  also  from  Mr  Melvin,  is
      dated 9 April 2021.  There he recognised, as is clearly the case, that
      insincerity is no protection for a political activist  but  he  argued
      that the case was analogous to the risks facing Christians  that  were
      considered in PS (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT  46  (IAC).
      He particularly drew my attention to headnote (4) which  is  set  out.
      It states 4:

  In cases where the claimant is found  to  be  insincere  in  his  or  her
  claimed conversion, there is not a real risk of persecution 'in-country'.
  There being no reason for such an individual to  associate  himself  with
  Christians, there is not a real risk that he would come  to  the  adverse
  attention of the Iranian authorities. Decision-makers  must  nevertheless
  consider the possible risks arising at the 'pinch point' of arrival:

  i)     All returning failed asylum seekers are subject to questioning  on
  arrival, and this will include questions about why they claimed asylum;

  ii)         A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a Christian  is
  reasonably likely to be transferred for further questioning;

  iii)         The  returnee  can  be  expected  to  sign  an   undertaking
  renouncing his claimed Christianity. The questioning  will  therefore  in
  general be short and will not entail a real risk of ill-treatment;

  iv)         If there are any reasons why the detention becomes prolonged,
  the risk of ill-treatment will correspondingly rise. Factors  that  could
  result in prolonged detention must be determined on a case by case basis.
  They could include but are not limited to

     a)       Previous adverse contact with the Iranian security services;

     b)       Connection to persons of interest to the Iranian authorities;

     c)       Attendance at a church with perceived connection  to  Iranian
  house churches;

      d)   Overt  social  media  content  indicating  that  the  individual
  concerned has actively            promoted Christianity.

  43. The point made there is that a claimant found to be insincere  in  his
      claimed conversion to Christianity would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution in-country.  He would have no  reason  to  associate  with
      Christians or do anything that would  attract  the  attention  of  the
      authorities.  Nevertheless he might be  interrogated  on  arrival  and
      could be required  to  sign  an  undertaking  renouncing  his  claimed
      Christianity.

  44. It was argued that similar tolerance could be extended to an insincere
      token activist such as this appellant.  Unlike the appellant in HB the
      present appellant is someone whose family members are not known to  be
      politically active.  There is no independent evidence of any sincerity
      in his activism in the United Kingdom and it is the respondent's  case
      that his attendance at demonstrations is an attempt to create a  claim
      for asylum  that  "should  be  rejected  as  it  is  clear  that  [the
      appellant] has no real political opinion and his only interest  is  to
      secure leave to remain in the UK."

  45. Mr Melvin's written submissions added nothing of substance to the  apt
      and full written submissions outlined above.

  46. Mr Brown  based  his  case  substantially  on  his  outlined  skeleton
      argument  dated  10  February  2021.   This  asserts  that  "case  law
      establishes that there is no tolerance by the Iranian regime  for  any
      kind of activities with connection to the  Kurdish  political  parties
      and any affiliation".

  47. He contended that it was unlikely that the Iranian  authorities  would
      dismiss the appellant's political activities as a cynical  attempt  to
      bolster a weak asylum claim.

  48. He referred to passages in SSH  v  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
      seeker) Iran CG  [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC)  particularly  paragraph  23
      suggesting  strongly  that  persons  who  left  irregularly  or  whose
      passport documentation suggests they left irregularly could expect  to
      be interrogated on return.

  49. That of itself is not persecutory.  The difficulty would come  if  the
      authorities became aware of the  appellant's  involvement  in  Kurdish
      separatism.  It is trite law that he cannot be expected to  lie  about
      what he did and trite law that bad motives do not deprive him  of  the
      status of refugee if in fact he would be persecuted for his  perceived
      political opinion in the event of his return or at least  there  is  a
      real risk that he would.

  50. I have looked at the photographs that were produced  in  evidence.   I
      can summarise them as showing the appellant at a demonstration.   Some
      of the photographs lend themselves to the criticism that only a  small
      number of people were shown and it is possible that the appellant  had
      taken with him some friends to give the impression of a crowd but that
      is not a fair description of the evidence as  a  whole  which  clearly
      shows the crowd too numerous to count all those whose image is in  the
      picture. The photographs clearly show a police  presence  and  clearly
      shows the appellant in a position of  some  prominence  in  the  crowd
      either with a small poster or acting as a marshal and generally  being
      someone who would be noticed.

  51. I have no  hesitation  in  rejecting  Mr  Melvin's  argument  that  an
      insincere political activist is some way  analogous  to  an  insincere
      Christian convert of the kind considered in PS (Christianity  -  risk)
      Iran CG [2020] UKUT 46 (IAC). That is a decision that must  be  looked
      at for its own terms and effects but the role  of  a  "disclaimer"  in
      preventing the risk of further persecution had to be understood in the
      face of evidence that, although Christian converts  who  assert  their
      Christianity may well risk persecution, there was clear evidence  that
      persons who admitted to an insincere dalliance with  Christianity  and
      who were prepared to sign a declaration that they were not  Christians
      would, ordinarily, may not be at risk.  No similar evidence  has  been
      put before us to suggest that a person who was  thought  insincere  in
      political views would not be  at  risk  for  that  person's  perceived
      views.

  52. The fundamental point is that the possibility of avoiding  persecution
      by renouncing the sincerity of the conversion was supported  by  clear
      evidence that such renunciations are sought by the authorities in  the
      case of Christians.  There is absolutely no basis  whatsoever  in  the
      evidence that I have seen for extending that to say  that  people  who
      might be at risk for other reasons would be given  an  opportunity  in
      renouncing their new positions.

  53. The appellant must prove his case to the lower "real risk" standard.

  54. Drawing these things together, I am satisfied that  the  appellant  is
      not a political activist in  any  strong  sense.   He  may  have  some
      sympathetic leaning towards the Kurdish cause because  he  is  Kurdish
      and some natural affinity can be expected and this is enhanced by  the
      rough treatment Kurdish people tend to experience at the hands of  the
      Iranian state.  He is not  a  man  who  has  a  profile  of  political
      activism and has done little to support the Kurdish cause  other  than
      attending some demonstrations where he has conducted himself in a  way
      that has made himself prominent.  It is impossible not to attribute  a
      degree of cynicism to those motives.  There is no reason to find  that
      he would have a desire to be any more active in Iran.

  55. However, this case is about perception.  I have reminded myself of the
      observations in HB (Kurds) Iran and the reference  to  "hair  trigger"
      and the risk of persecution following  low  level  activity.   I  also
      noted the evidence that lack of commitment is unlikely to impress  the
      Iranian authorities.

  56. I am satisfied the real point here is  whether  his  conduct  will  be
      noticed in the event of return, or, rather, if there is a real risk of
      it being noted in the event of his return.  There are  two  ways  this
      can happen.  One is if he was monitored and details picked up and  the
      other is if he felt obliged to say what he had done.  It is very  hard
      to have any clear evidence about what the  Iranian  authorities  might
      reasonably be expected to have picked up from their own monitoring  of
      demonstrations.  It would be  foolish  to  assume  that  they  do  not
      monitor.  Most of us carry around our  mobile  phones  with  perfectly
      good video recording equipment.  The idea that the Iranian authorities
      in the United Kingdom would not have some interest  in  demonstrations
      and those who attend is absurd and the possibility of  the  recordings
      being made is extremely real.  It is less clear how they could seek to
      identify anyone but the appellant was not a face  in  the  crowd.   He
      made sure he was doing things that would be noticed.  I  recognise  my
      evidential basis for  reaching  this  conclusion  is  thin  and  I  am
      speculating but I hope the speculation is informed by  what  is  known
      about the Iranian authorities and what seems inherently reasonable.  I
      am satisfied there is a real risk of his being identified  because  he
      made sure that he would  be  and  of  this  being  noted  in  case  he
      returned.  The second is that he would reveal what he had  done  under
      interrogation.  He will be interrogated in the event  of  return.   He
      does not have an up-to-date passport and is a Kurd.  I  cannot  assume
      he would not say what he had done.

  57. It follows therefore that I am satisfied that there is a real risk  of
      his being persecuted because he would  be  perceived  as  a  political
      activist.  It follows therefore that I allow this appeal.



Notice of Decision

  58. The appeal is allowed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 May 2021                    |



