


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/03405/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 23 January 2018                       |On : 25 January 2018           |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     KM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Shretha, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kutas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 12 December 1985.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rowlands dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  in  October  2009  and  was
      subsequently  granted  leave  as  a  Tier  4  dependant  partner.   An
      application made in February 2015 as a dependent  spouse  was  refused
      and a subsequent application for leave to remain on family and private
      life grounds was refused in November 2015 with an out of country right
      of appeal.  The  appellant  was  served  with  removal  papers  as  an
      overstayer on 16 September 2016 and on 29 September  2016  he  claimed
      asylum. His claim was refused on 29 March 2017 and he appealed against
      that decision.


   3. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he feared return to  Nepal
      due to his involvement  with  the  Nepali  Congress  Party  (NCP).  He
      claimed to have worked for the Nepali  Congress  Party  as  an  active
      member of the student union in Nepal, undertaking  activities  in  his
      college. He claimed to  have  been  attacked  and  threatened  by  the
      Maoists on various occasions as a result of his political activities.


   4. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted his inability
      to answer basic questions about the Nepali Congress Party and did  not
      accept that was an active member of the party.  The  respondent  found
      the appellant's account of the attacks on his home by  Maoists  to  be
      implausible and did not accept his claim. No weight was given  to  the
      documents produced by the appellant  in  support  of  his  claim.  The
      respondent considered that the appellant's delay  in  claiming  asylum
      undermined the credibility of his claim and did not accept that he had
      any genuine fear on return to Nepal. It  was  not  accepted  that  his
      removal to Nepal would breach his human rights.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rowlands on 4 May 2017 and was dismissed in a  decision
      promulgated on 9 June 2017.  At  the  appeal  hearing  an  adjournment
      request was made to allow the appellant's solicitors to obtain further
      information in response to the respondent's rejection of  his  account
      of being injured as a result of attacks and his membership of the NCP.
      The judge refused the request. The judge heard from the appellant.  He
      considered that the appellant had not been truthful about his level of
      involvement with the NCP and did not accept  that  he  was  an  active
      member or that he had been targeted by the Maoists. He considered  the
      documentary evidence, namely an NCP letter and a police report, to  be
      unreliable. The judge considered the delay  in,  and  timing  of,  the
      appellant's claim undermined his credibility and did not  accept  that
      he was assaulted and threatened as claimed. He considered that in  any
      event the appellant could relocate to another part of Nepal  and  join
      his wife and children who were living with his wife's parents and  had
      no problems. The judge considered further that there was a sufficiency
      of protection available to the appellant. The judge was not  satisfied
      that the appellant would be  at  any  risk  on  return  to  Nepal  and
      considered that his removal would  not  breach  his  human  rights  on
      Article 3 or 8 grounds.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal the judge's decision on  the
      grounds of procedural impropriety and unfairness, on  the  basis  that
      the judge had stated within the first few minutes of the hearing  that
      he found the appellant's claim implausible and that he  was  therefore
      prejudiced against the appellant from the  outset.  The  grounds  also
      asserted that the judge had erred by refusing to adjourn the appeal to
      enable the appellant to produce  documentary  evidence  and  that  the
      judge had misunderstood the evidence.


   7. Permission was granted in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  following
      grounds:


    "The judge on the face of it gave adequate evidence based  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant had failed to establish his evidence  was
    credible or that he was at risk from Maoists in Nepal.
    The grounds take issue with the refusal by  the  Immigration  Judge  to
    adjourn. The judge's reasoning relating to this at paragraph  3  cannot
    be argued to amount to unfairness. However the contention at  paragraph
    1(a) of the grounds that the  judge  indicated  at  the  start  of  the
    hearing the view that the appellant's  case  was  implausible  does  if
    accurate amount to arguable bias and error of law."

   8. At an error of law hearing on 25  August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Zucker adjourned the proceedings for the  appellant's  counsel  to  be
      given an opportunity to produce evidence of what was alleged  to  have
      been said by the judge at the hearing and for the judge to provide his
      comments. Mr Ahmed, counsel representing the  appellant  before  Judge
      Rowlands, provided a witness statement and Judge Rowlands provided his
      comments. A further hearing on 6 December 2017 was  adjourned,  as  Mr
      Ahmed appeared as the appellant's representative, which was agreed was
      not appropriate in the circumstances as he had since become a witness.
      In response to the Upper Tribunal's directions of 6 December 2017, the
      Home Office Presenting Officer who had represented the  respondent  at
      the hearing before the judge, Ms Houillet, produced her notes  of  the
      proceedings.

   9. The appeal then came before me. Both parties made  submissions  before
      me. Mr Shretha submitted that the proceedings  before  the  judge  had
      been unfair as he had formed a view before the hearing, he had stopped
      the appellant from giving evidence and had not given the appellant  an
      opportunity to express his case. The judge was  therefore  biased.  Mr
      Shretha relied on the case of Sivapatham (Appearance  of  Bias  :  Sri
      Lanka) [2017] UKUT  293  which  he  submitted  involved  very  similar
      circumstances. In response to my enquiry, Mr Shretha accepted that the
      appellant's solicitor's notes of the hearing had not been produced and
      that the appellant was relying on Mr Ahmed's statement. I  also  asked
      him to confirm that his submission was that  the  appellant  had  been
      stopped from giving his evidence and he replied that that was the case
      according to the instructions given to him by the appellant  prior  to
      this hearing. The appellant felt that he was unable to  give  evidence
      as he was upset because the judge had told  him  that  he  was  not  a
      credible witness.

  10. Mr Kutas, relying on  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 00418, submitted that the refusal  by  the  judge  of  the
      adjournment request was not unfair as there had been no prior  request
      for an adjournment and the appellant had known for some time that  the
      burden lay upon him to make out his case. In regard to the  allegation
      of bias he submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
      appellant's claim that he was prevented from giving evidence and  that
      had not been pleaded in the grounds. Mr Kutas relied on  the  case  of
      Sivapatham in submitting that the appellant had failed  to  show  that
      the proceedings were unfair. In response  Mr  Shretha  reiterated  his
      previous submission that there was unfairness in the  proceedings  and
      he submitted that that also arose from the judge's refusal to adjourn.


Consideration and findings

  11. Having carefully considered the submissions of both parties  it  seems
      to me that the grounds fail to establish that there were any errors of
      law in the judge's decision.

  12. With regard to the adjournment request, that  was  not  a  basis  upon
      which permission was granted, but in  any  event  the  judge  properly
      considered  the  request  and  provided  proper  reasons  at  [3]  for
      rejecting it. The appellant had had plenty of opportunity  to  produce
      all relevant evidence and there  was  no  unfairness  in  the  judge's
      decision to proceed with the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
      already available.


  13. As for the question of bias,  I  find  no  merit  in  that  ground  of
      challenge. It is of some concern that the allegation put to me  in  Mr
      Shretha's submissions was far more serious than that previously  made,
      asserting that the judge had actually  prevented  the  appellant  from
      giving evidence and putting his case forward. No  such  assertion  was
      made in the grounds and neither was it made in Mr  Ahmed's  statement.
      Furthermore it was not supported by a statement  from  the  appellant.
      There had been no previous suggestion that  the  judge  had  told  the
      appellant that he was not a credible witness or that he had  prevented
      the appellant from putting his case. It was  plain  from  the  judge's
      decision that the appellant had every opportunity to put his  case  at
      the hearing, through his own oral evidence and  submissions  from  his
      representative.  Such  an  allegation  was,  in  my  view,  completely
      unfounded  and  did  not  reflect  well  on  the  appellant   or   his
      representative before me.


  14. As for the allegation actually made in the grounds, namely that  prior
      to hearing any evidence the judge had  commented  that  he  found  the
      appellant's claim implausible, I set out Mr Ahmed's  comments  in  his
      statement and Judge Rowlands' comments, as follows.


  15. In his witness statement, Mr Ahmed stated:


      "1. I can confirm that I am a Barrister, who represented the Appellant
      at the hearing on 4 May 2017. The Appeal hearing was listed before  IJ
      Rowlands. I have provided  a  note  of  the  evidence  to  Instructing
      Solicitors.


      2. I can confirm that the learned Judge within minutes of the  hearing
      stated that  having  read  the  papers,  he  found  the  claim  to  be
      implausible. This was unfortunate, since the learned  Judge  heard  no
      submissions or evidence from the Appellant. The Appellant had not even
      been cross-examined. I was concerned  by  the  comments  made  it  was
      obvious, that the learned Judge had made up his  mind  to  refuse  the
      appeal."

  16. Judge Rowlands' commented as follows:


    " I can categorically assure the Upper Tribunal that I did not say that
    the Appellant's claim was implausible.

    I have sat as an Immigration Adjudicator/ Judge for seventeen years and
    would neither conclude that a claim was implausible let  alone  say  so
    without hearing the evidence first. As can be seen from my  decision  I
    considered the application for the adjournment and the reasons for it.

    In paragraph 31 of my decision I actually state that he 'may well  have
    been a member but not as significant as claimed'.  This  clearly  shows
    that I did not consider his claim to be implausible at all."


  17. Clearly there is a conflict in the recollection of the  judge  and  Mr
      Ahmed. It is relevant to note that Mr Ahmed's statement is dated  some
      four months after the hearing and has  not  been  accompanied  by  any
      contemporaneous notes of the hearing from the instructing  solicitors,
      despite the directions given by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  on  6
      December 2017. I note UTJ Rintoul's comment at that hearing, that  the
      passage of time between the hearing and the statement was a problem in
      the  absence  of  contemporaneous  notes  from  the  hearing,  and  he
      therefore made the directions stated. It is also the case  that  Judge
      Rowlands' comments were made after the same period of time, although I
      have seen his contemporaneous record of the proceedings which  I  note
      makes no reference to any comments on  plausibility.  I  note  further
      that the grounds of appeal, drafted shortly after the judge's decision
      was issued, are not specific about the judge's comments  in  terms  of
      timing and substance. There is, helpfully, a contemporaneous  note  of
      the hearing from the Presenting Officer, Ms Houillet. I  observe  that
      there is no reference in her detailed notes  to  any  comment  by  the
      judge at the outset of  the  hearing  in  regard  to  the  case  being
      implausible. Ms Houillet notes, however, that  after  the  adjournment
      request was made and refused, and after the  appellant  had  commenced
      his oral evidence, the judge  commented  that  he  found  it  hard  to
      believe that after 8 years the Maoists visited his father's house.

  18. Having considered Mr Ahmed's statement, the judge's  comments  and  Ms
      Houillet's notes, it seems to me that what happened was that the judge
      put to the appellant during his evidence that he found  an  aspect  of
      his claim implausible. I do not see any problem with that and consider
      that, if anything, it was beneficial to the appellant as  it  provided
      him with an indication of issues the judge  needed  to  be  addressed.
      Indeed that is precisely what the Court of Appeal observed in Singh  v
      SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 492, as quoted at [16] of Sivapatham.  A  similar
      observation is made in AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT  656,  also
      quoted at [16].


  19. However, even if it was the case  that  the  judge  indicated  at  the
      outset that he considered the appellant's case to be  implausible,  it
      seems to me that that in itself did  not  indicate  any  bias  on  the
      judge's part or amount to procedural impropriety  or  unfairness.  The
      Upper Tribunal,  in  Sivapatham,  considered  that:   "Provisional  or
      preliminary judicial views are permissible, provided that an open mind
      is  maintained."  and  found  at  [16]  that  "The  judicial  duty  of
      impartiality, one aspect whereof is the maintenance of an  open  mind,
      does not preclude the formation of  tentative,  provisional  views  in
      advance of adjudication."


  20. It is plain to me that  the  approach  taken  by  Judge  Rowlands  was
      entirely different to that taken by the judge in Sivapatham  and  that
      no comparison can reasonably be made between the two scenarios.  Judge
      Rowlands plainly kept an open mind. He heard from  the  appellant  and
      from the appellant's representative and made full and cogent  findings
      on the evidence. For the reasons fully and  properly  given  he  found
      aspects of the appellant's claim implausible and found the evidence to
      be unreliable and lacking in credibility. In any event, and aside from
      his adverse credibility and  plausibility  findings,  he  went  on  to
      consider the appellant's case in the alternative, taking the claim  at
      its highest and considering the background  country  information,  and
      provided cogent reasons for concluding that the appellant could safely
      and reasonably relocate to another part of Nepal and that there was  a
      sufficiency of protection available to him. Those were findings  which
      were properly open to him on the evidence.

  21. For all of these reasons I reject  the  allegation  made  against  the
      judge.  In  terms  of  the  principles  and  guidance  in   Alubankudi
      (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 I find no apparent or actual bias
      on the part of the judge.  The  appellant  had  every  opportunity  to
      present his case and to address the respondent's and judge's concerns.
      There was no procedural impropriety or unfairness. I find no errors of
      law in the judge's decision. I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  23 January
2018
