
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03015/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Newport                         |                                |
|On:              30 April 2018  |On :     4 May 2018             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     SA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr D Paxton, Counsel instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boyes in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who claims  to
    be a citizen of Iran, against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse asylum and issue removal directions.


 2. The application  under  appeal  was  refused  on  9  March  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Boyes on 9 June 2017 and was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie on 13 October 2017 in the following terms

       The learned First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  held  the  hearing  in  the
       absence of the Appellant. He made a finding that notice  of  hearing
       had been served upon the Appellant  at  the  given  address  of  the
       service.


       There is indeed a notice of hearing showing apparent service by post
       at an address given as that for the Appellant. There is no  service,
       however, upon any legal representatives, notwithstanding that at the
       time of the service of notice of hearing,  the  Appellant  did  have
       legal representation and this fact  must  have  been  known  to  the
       Tribunal, since these legal representatives had secured the transfer
       of the hearing from Glasgow  to  Newport.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge  was  apparently  unaware  of   the   involvement   of   these
       representatives, he stated that the  representatives  had  withdrawn
       from acting. This, however, is a misunderstanding of events.  It  is
       previous  representatives,  those  who  acted  before  the   present
       representatives, who had apparently withdrawn at  a  time  when  the
       hearing was scheduled to be in Glasgow.


       In the event, there  appears  to  be  arguable  risk  of  procedural
       unfairness in that the appeal was determined in the absence  of  the
       Appellant or his  representatives,  in  circumstances  when  it  was
       perceived that the Appellant had failed to engage with the Tribunal,
       notwithstanding the written request by new representatives that  the
       matter be transferred from Glasgow to be heard in Newport.


 3. By a rule 24 response dated 21 November 2017 the Respondent opposed the
    Appellant's  appeal  submitting  that  the   Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately. The Respondent  asserts  that  in  the  absence  of  any
    information from the Tribunal regarding an  adjournment  the  Appellant
    should  have  attended  the  hearing.  The   Appellant,   submits   the
    Respondent, did not have representation at the time of the  hearing  as
    the letter from Asylum Justice  only  outlines  that  they  would  have
    represented him if the proceedings were  transferred  to  Newport.  The
    Tribunal was entitled to proceed.




Background

 4. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Appellant  claims  to
    be a citizen of Iran born on [ ] 1993 and to have left Iran  travelling
    via Turkey and unknown countries to the United Kingdom where he arrived
    in July 2015 and claimed asylum shortly after  arrival.  The  Appellant
    claimed to fear persecution in Iran because of his involvement with the
    Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI).


 5. The Respondent conducted a screening interview with the Appellant on  5
    August 2015 and a substantive interview on 15 June 2016. Following this
    a language analysis took place on  1  September  2016.  The  Respondent
    refused the Appellant's claim on 14 March 2017 and in doing so did  not
    accept that the Appellant came from Iran asserting that he was in  fact
    a national of Iraq. It followed that the Respondent did not accept  any
    of the core facts of the Appellant's account.


 6. At the hearing on 9 June 2017 there was no appearance by the Appellant.
    The Judge noted that those he had instructed had come  off  the  record
    prior to the hearing and was satisfied that notification of the hearing
    was made to the Appellant's last known address.  In  the  circumstances
    the Judge decided that it was in the interests of justice to  hear  the
    appeal noting that the Appellant had not engaged with the  Tribunal  at
    all.


 7. The Judge dismissed the appeal finding, essentially in  agreement  with
    the Respondent's refusal letter, that the Appellant was not a  national
    of Iran and that his version of events happening in Iran was not true.




Submissions


 8. For the Appellant Mr Paxton submitted a skeleton argument and  referred
    to the grounds of appeal. In answer to my question he did not know  why
    the appeal had originally been listed in Glasgow and assumed that  this
    was an error on behalf of the Tribunal. Mr Mills agreed saying that the
    only address on the Home  Office  record  was  in  Swansea.  Mr  Paxton
    continued saying the test is one of fairness. If the Judge had seen and
    noted the letter from Asylum Justice dated 3 May 2017 alarm bells would
    have rung. From the decision of the First-tier Tribunal it is  apparent
    that the Judge was not aware of  the  letter.  If  he  had  been  aware
    enquiries would have been made. His decision  to  proceed  was  on  the
    basis of a misunderstanding of facts. The letter makes  it  clear  that
    Asylum Justice had been instructed and were prepared to  represent  him
    in his asylum appeal.


 9. For the Respondent Mr Mills referred to the rule 24 response.  He  said
    that notice of hearing was sent to the Appellant and the  onus  was  on
    him to contact the Tribunal and to appear on the specified date.  There
    is no lack of fairness. Mr Mills argued that  the  letter  from  Asylum
    Justice does not confirm that they will represent him, it  merely  says
    that they would be  prepared  to  represent  him  if  the  matter  were
    transferred to Newport and listed not to be heard before 2 June 2017 to
    give them time to prepare.


10. I said that the  appeal  would  be  allowed  and  reserved  my  written
    decision. It was clear that the Judge had failed  to  note  the  letter
    from Asylum Justice of 3 May 2017 and indeed that the Tribunal had  not
    responded to  that  letter.  It  appeared  that  the  matter  had  been
    adjourned from Glasgow to be heard in Newport on 9  June  2017  and  in
    those circumstances, in  accordance  with  their  letter,  that  Asylum
    Justice would have represented the Appellant. However, in  the  absence
    of response by the Tribunal to that letter Asylum Justice did not  know
    that the matter had been listed for hearing on 9  June  2017  so  could
    hardly be criticised for failing to attend.




Decision


11. The single issue in this appeal is whether it was  procedurally  unfair
    for the Judge to proceed with the hearing on 9 June 2017 in the absence
    of the Appellant and his representatives.


12. A perusal of the file is illuminating. This Appellant appears  to  have
    been living in South Wales  throughout  his  time  in  United  Kingdom.
    Certainly he was interviewed in Cardiff on 15 June 2016 and,  according
    to  Mr  Mills,  Home  Office  records  give  his  address  in   Swansea
    throughout. The Appellant was represented at asylum interview by a firm
    of solicitors based in Cardiff. However, the refusal letter, sent  from
    UKVI in Cardiff bears no address and does not appear to have been  sent
    directly to the Appellant. Instead it was sent to the Appellant's legal
    representatives in Cardiff with a covering letter from  UKVI  dated  15
    March 2017 asking them to serve it upon their client  at  the  earliest
    opportunity. Mr Mills suggested to me that  this  was  normal  practice
    where an Appellant is legally represented. If it is normal practice  it
    is not a practice that I have ever noted before. Perhaps the answer  is
    in the letter of 15 March 2017 which states:

         "we would also request that following your providing this  decision
         to your client that you inform the General  Practitioner  that  the
         decision has been served and request that  they  make  a  follow-up
         welfare call to your client to ensure they are offered any  support
         required."

    The letter reveals that self-harm issues had been reported to  UKVI  as
    long ago as August 2015. It  seems  clear  from  this  that  UKVI  were
    treating the Appellant as a vulnerable individual. Mr  Paxton  referred
    to the letter of 3 May 2017 being one that  should  have  caused  alarm
    bells to ring. It would perhaps have been appropriate for him to  refer
    to the letter 15 March 2017 in this light.


13. Following service upon them of the refusal notice the Appellant's legal
    representatives submitted the notice of appeal on his behalf confirming
    his address in Swansea and their address Cardiff. It is dated 24  March
    2017. By letter dated 31 March 2017 the Tribunal dispatched notice IA28
    to the Appellant in Swansea, his legal representatives Cardiff and  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer's  unit  in  Cardiff  giving  notice  of
    prehearing review on April 19, 2017 and final hearing on May  3,  2017.
    The prehearing review and final hearing were listed in Glasgow.  I  can
    see absolutely no reason why the Tribunal  would  have  listed  a  case
    where all parties, including a vulnerable Appellant, are based in South
    Wales at a hearing centre in Glasgow.


14. The prehearing review was conducted  in  Glasgow  by  Designated  Judge
    McDonald. The record notes that no reply notice had been  received  and
    standard directions should be  issued  along  with  a  standard  letter
    "English/Welsh agents not entitled to conduct in Scotland". A  standard
    letter dated 21 April 2017 was duly sent by the Tribunal in Glasgow  to
    the Cardiff solicitors. The effect of this  was  that  the  Appellant's
    legal representatives were barred  from  representing  him  before  the
    Tribunal two weeks before final hearing. It is perhaps  not  surprising
    that these legal representatives wrote to the Tribunal  in  Glasgow  by
    letter  dated  26  April  2017  stating  that  they  were   no   longer
    representing the Appellant.


15. On receipt of this letter on 27 April 2017 it appears that the Tribunal
    in Glasgow noted that there was a fundamental problem and  the  hearing
    of 3 May  2017  was  adjourned  at  the  Tribunal's  own  volition  and
    transferred to Newport noting that the representatives were  no  longer
    acting. It does not appear to have occurred to the  Tribunal  that  the
    reason the representatives were no longer acting may well have been the
    Tribunal told the representatives that they were not able to represent.
    In any event the hearing date of 3 May 2017 was adjourned and notice to
    this effect was sent to the Appellant from Glasgow on 28 May  2017  and
    on 2 May 2017 further  notice  was  sent  to  the  Appellant  from  the
    Tribunal in Newport giving a hearing date 9 June 2017.


16. The next event of note is the letter from Asylum Justice faxed  to  the
    Tribunal in Glasgow on 3 May 2017. It is unclear when this fax  reached
    the court file in Newport but if it has been filed chronologically then
    it did not arrive until after the hearing took place on 9 June 2017. It
    appears on the file after the notice of decision was dispatched  on  21
    June 2017.



17. It is clear from this letter that by 3 May 2017 Asylum Justice had been
    instructed by the Appellant and proposed to  represent  him.  All  they
    asked was that the case should not be listed  before  2  June  2017  to
    enable them to take full instructions.  There  is  no  indication  that
    there was any correspondence either from  Glasgow  or  Newport  to  let
    Asylum Justice know that their letter had been received  and  that  any
    action was being taken. There is certainly nothing to suggest to Asylum
    Justice that a hearing was taking place on  9  June  2017.  Although  a
    letter was dispatched to the Appellant on 2  May  2017  confirming  the
    hearing  date  it  is  in  my  judgement  quite   reasonable   for   an
    unrepresented Appellant who does not speak English  and  who  has  been
    defined as a  vulnerable  to  consider  that  the  new  representatives
    instructed by him were dealing with matters.


18. I have gone through matters in some detail above because it is only  by
    doing so that the overall unfairness of proceeding in  the  Appellant's
    absence can be shown. The Judge cannot be faulted for  not  noting  the
    letter from Asylum Justice because there appears to be every likelihood
    that the Tribunal administration failed to match  this  letter  to  the
    file until after the hearing on 9 June 2017. However as the above shows
    alarm bells should have been ringing well before then.


19. In my Judgement there has been procedural unfairness. The Appellant has
    not had the opportunity of being heard by the First-tier Tribunal.  His
    appeal is allowed, and this matter is remitted the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing de novo.




  Summary

20. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material procedural error of law. I allow the Appellant's appeal and as
    the procedural error prevented the Appellant from being  heard  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate that this matter is  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.




Signed:                                 Date: 1 May 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
