
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03939/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2017                         |On 28th June 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     na
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Gurung-Thapa  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 19th September 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Libyan citizen whose asylum and human  rights
    application was refused on 8th December 2015.

 3. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 23rd August  2016.   The  FtT  heard
    evidence from the Appellant and did not find her to  be  credible,  and
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon five grounds which are summarised below.

Ground 1

 5. The FtT failed to apply the correct standard of proof.  At paragraph 47
    the FtT made a finding that "it is more likely than not that it  was  a
    random attack by criminal elements in Libya".  The  FtT  erred  by  not
    applying  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  in  claims   for
    international protection.

Ground 2

 6. At paragraphs 45 and 46  the  FtT  gave  inadequate  reasoning  in  not
    finding the police report provided by the Appellant as being  reliable.
    At paragraph 47 the FtT gave inadequate reasons for not accepting  that
    the Appellant was specifically targeted by a terrorist group/militia.

Ground 3

 7. The FtT failed to adequately consider persecutory  the  risk  that  the
    Appellant would face on return to Libya as a failed asylum seeker.

Ground 4

 8.  The  FtT  failed  to  adequately  consider  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  and  in  particular  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    concluding that there would not be very significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Libya.

Ground 5

 9. The FtT erred in considering Article 8.  The FtT  materially  erred  at
    paragraph 53 by finding that Article 8 was not engaged.   At  paragraph
    60 the FtT found that the Appellant has  two  brothers  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and materially  erred  in  finding  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged, and  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  threshold  of
    engagement is not a high one.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused.  The Appellant renewed  the
    application direct to the Upper Tribunal, relying upon the five grounds
    summarised above, and adding that the FtT had erred at paragraph 43  in
    assessing plausibility, and had failed to take  into  account  guidance
    given in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

11. Permission to appeal was thereafter granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer in the following terms;

         1.   It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  has  applied  the
             wrong standard of proof at [43] and [47], despite the  correct
             self direction at [5].  The First-tier Tribunal  has  arguably
             erred in asking whether the converse to the  Appellant's  case
             is more likely  than  not  and  failing  to  ask  whether  the
             Appellant's claims are reasonably likely.

         2.   All grounds are arguable.

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary the Respondent pointed out that the FtT had  set  out
    the correct burden and standard of proof at paragraph 5, and had  given
    adequate reasons for finding the Appellant not to be credible.  It  was
    not accepted that the FtT had applied an incorrect standard of proof to
    the findings of fact made.

13.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtT  adequately  considered   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), and had not erred in considering Article 8 of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

14. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

15. Mr Sharif relied upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal, and the
    grant of permission.  I was asked to note that the FtT had referred  to
    a higher standard of proof at paragraphs 43 and 47.  Therefore findings
    that had been  made  by  the  FtT  were  not  sustainable,  because  an
    incorrect standard of proof had been applied.

16. Mr Mills relied upon the rule 24 response.  With reference to ground 3,
    Mr Mills pointed out that the  FtT  had  applied  the  correct  country
    guidance decision, that being AT Libya  CG.   A  new  country  guidance
    decision, FA Libya CG had been published on 20th  September  2016,  but
    the FtT decision had been promulgated on 19th September 2016.  The  FtT
    could not be blamed for following extant country guidance.  It was open
    to the Appellant to make a fresh application.  I was asked to  find  no
    material error of law and to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

17. Mr Sharif did not have further submissions to make in  response,  being
    content to rely on the grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted, and to indicate his disagreement with the submissions made  by
    Mr Mills.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I do not find that the FtT materially erred  in  law.   I  set  out  my
    reasons below, dealing with the Grounds of Appeal in the order in which
    they were made in the application for permission.

Ground 1

20. At paragraphs 43 and 47, the FtT uses  unfortunate  phraseology,  which
    has led to this challenge based upon the standard of proof.  However it
    is important to read the decision as a whole.

21. It is clear that the FtT set out the correct  burden  and  standard  of
    proof at paragraph 5.  That is common ground.  I am asked to find  that
    the FtT departed from that standard.  I do not  find  that  any  cogent
    reason has been given to persuade me that having set  out  the  correct
    standard of proof, the  FtT  went  on  to  apply  an  incorrect  higher
    standard.

22. The correct standard of proof is not only set out at paragraph  5,  but
    at paragraph 37, which is where the FtT begins to set out  reasons  for
    findings, there is reference to;

         "I have applied the burden and standard of proof to  which  I  have
         already referred."

23. The burden and standard previously referred  to,  is  contained  within
    paragraph 5.  At paragraph 54 the FtT records;

         "After consideration of all the evidence in the round I  find  that
         the Appellant has failed to demonstrate, even to the lower standard
         of proof, that she has a well-founded fear of persecution  for  any
         of the reasons recognised by the Refugee Convention."

24. At paragraph 43 the FtT makes a finding that "it is  more  likely  than
    not that the group would have searched for the husband at his  mother's
    home irrespective of the fact that they did not know he was  there  and
    the fact that she was an elderly lady."

25. At paragraph 47 the FtT finds "that it is more likely than not that  it
    was a random attack by criminal elements in Libya."

26. The above does not mean that the FtT concluded  or  believed  that  the
    Appellant had to prove her case on a higher standard than a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood.  Having carefully considered the  decision  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that the FtT  applied  the  correct  standard  of
    proof in assessing whether the Appellant  had  proved  her  case  to  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.

Ground 2

27. The Appellant complains of inadequacy of reasoning.  I  set  out  below
    the head note to Budhathoki (reasons for decision)  [2014]  UKUT  00341
    (IAC);

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

28. The Appellant refers in particular to paragraphs 45  and  46.   I  find
    that it is clear why the FtT did not accept the  Appellant's  claim  as
    credible.  The FtT correctly referred to  assessment  of  documents  by
    following the  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles.   One  must  also  read  the
    preceding paragraphs, and in particular paragraphs 41-44 in  which  the
    FtT sets out  reasons  for  not  accepting  the  Appellant's  claim  as
    credible.  Findings contained within those paragraphs were open to  the
    FtT to make on the evidence, and sustainable reasons given.

29. The Appellant also refers to paragraph 47, which must be read  together
    with paragraph 48 in which adequate reasons are given.  At paragraph 49
    the FtT was entitled to draw an adverse inference  from  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum.

Ground 3

30. I have checked, and the country guidance in force at the  date  of  the
    FtT hearing was AT Libya CG.  As correctly pointed out by Mr Mills,  FA
    Libya CG was not in fact published until 20th September 2016.  The  FtT
    was entitled to find that the Appellant did not fall  within  the  risk
    categories set out in AT Libya CG.

Ground 4

31. I find this ground to be a disagreement with the assessment made by the
    FtT in relation to paragraph 276ADE, but no error of law is  disclosed.
    The FtT found at paragraph 55 that there would be no  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration  in  Libya.   The  FtT  was
    entitled to note that the Appellant had only been in the UK since  27th
    July 2014.  She and her family are Libyan citizens.  The  FtT  did  not
    find them to be at risk.  It was also found that the Appellant had  not
    given a credible account.  The FtT  noted  at  paragraph  51  that  the
    Appellant  has  family  members  in  Tripoli,  and  that  one  of   the
    Appellant's brothers in the United Kingdom visited Tripoli in July 2016
    to see his sister and her family.  The FtT noted the  evidence  to  the
    effect that the Appellant's sister works in Tripoli as a pharmacist and
    her husband as a doctor.

Ground 5

32. With reference to Article 8, I find that at paragraph  53  the  FtT  is
    making a finding in relation to Articles 3 and 8 so far  as  a  medical
    claim is concerned.   The  FtT  considers  the  best  interest  of  the
    Appellant's five children at paragraphs 56-59.  It is  clear  that  the
    FtT regards consideration of the best interest of  the  children  as  a
    primary consideration, and the  conclusion  that  their  best  interest
    (taking particular account of their age) are in  remaining  with  their
    parents, is not  an  error  of  law.   The  FtT,  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's adult brothers in the United Kingdom,  notes  that  contact
    could be maintained either by visits or modern communication.  The  FtT
    correctly considers section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  In order for there to  be  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her adult brothers, the Appellant  would  need  to  prove
    that there exists something more than the  normal  emotional  ties.   I
    have not been directed to evidence that was before  the  FtT  to  prove
    that.  I find no error of law disclosed in this ground.

33. On a separate point, which was included in the renewed application  for
    permission to appeal, the Appellant complains about the FtT  conclusion
    at paragraph 43 in which the FtT finds "I do not find it plausible that
    the terrorist group/militia would not have searched for the Appellant's
    husband at his mother's house which was in the same area as  his  house
    if they were searching for him by December 2014."

34. I reiterate that the FtT decision must be read as  a  whole,  and  when
    that is done, it is apparent  that  the  FtT  has  not  made  incorrect
    plausibility findings.  The FtT has set out the  correct  standard  and
    burden of proof and applied it.  The FtT has looked at the evidence  in
    the round, made findings open to it  on  the  evidence,  and  supported
    those findings with adequate reasoning.

35. The Appellant disagrees with the FtT decision.  However the grounds and
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant, while supporting  a  clear
    disagreement with the FtT, do not disclose any material  error  of  law
    made by the FtT in this decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I renew the anonymity  order  pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify her or any member of her family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This  direction  is  made
because the Appellant has made a claim for international protection.




Signed                              Date 19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.




Signed                              Date 19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

