
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03026/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |




                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              EDITH IGHOMWONYI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Parker
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 11th July 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  10th  July  1994.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16th May 2014 and claimed asylum.  Her
    claim was refused on 10th October 2014 and the appellant appealed.  Her
    appeal was dismissed by Judge Holt.

 3. It is the appellant's case that she had a lesbian  relationship  there,
    with a woman called Sonia, and another  woman,  Stella,  threatened  to
    tell the government about that relationship.  In a brief  determination
    Judge Holt found that the appellant's fear of a return to  Nigeria  was
    not well-founded.  The judge said that, whether or  not  the  appellant
    was a lesbian, noting that the respondent did not really challenge  the
    point at the hearing,  she  has  three  children  and  it  would  be  a
    straightforward matter for her to deny that she was gay.   Furthermore,
    Stella would not put herself at risk by denouncing her.  She  dismissed
    the appeal.

 4. The appellant then made a second application for asylum,  submitting  a
    very large bundle of further evidence.

 5. Judge Parker noted that the there was no  concession  at  the  previous
    hearing in relation to the appellant's  sexuality.   He  placed  strong
    emphasis on the fact that, at the time  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Holt, the appellant was in a relationship with another  woman,  Dorcas,
    but she did not tell the judge about it.  The fact that  this  was  not
    mentioned at a previous hearing was a major factor counting against the
    genuineness of the relationship.

 6. With respect to the further evidence, he simply said:

         "I would agree with the respondent that the letters of  support  do
         add  very  little  to  evidence  without  them  intending  to  give
         evidence."

 7. The appellant, who was acting in person, sought  permission  to  appeal
    which was initially refused by Judge Baker on 15th August  2016.   Upon
    renewal it was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch.   Judge  Finch
    observed that there was a substantial amount of evidence  presented  at
    the hearing before Judge Parker. He was required to treat that evidence
    with anxious scrutiny, especially as some of it was from  professionals
    who on the face of it had no reason to  provide  the  Tribunal  with  a
    false account of events.  However. the evidence was  not  analysed  and
    assessed.

 8. On 15th September 2016 the respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing Mr Harrison accepted that the Immigration Judge had  not
    dealt with the appellant's bundle of evidence in an adequate manner.

10. The judge erred in law.  Judge Holt dismissed the first appeal  without
    actually making any findings as to whether the  appellant  was  gay  or
    not. Indeed at that stage the respondent did not appear to be disputing
    that she  was.  Moreover  there  was  a  further  clear  error  in  the
    determination in that Judge  Holt  made  no  findings  on  whether  the
    appellant would engage in gay relationships  in  Nigeria,  and  if  she
    would not, whether her reason for not doing so would be due to  a  fear
    of  persecution.   Be  that  as  it   may,   the   determination   went
    unchallenged.

11. By the time the case came before Judge Parker there was  a  very  large
    bundle of documents from a number of different  agencies  attesting  to
    the appellant's lesbian relationship.  It was clearly supportive of her
    case that she chooses to live an openly gay life in the UK  and  highly
    relevant to the outcome of her appeal.  He simply did not deal with it.



12.  The  judge  erred  in  failing  to  deal  with  relevant  matters  and
    accordingly his decision is set aside.

13. It was agreed that it would be possible to remake the decision without
    the need for a further adjournment.

The Oral evidence

14. I heard oral evidence from Edith Ighomwonyi.  She  explained  that  she
    had three children with a partner in Nigeria, two girls and a boy.   He
    was violent to her.  She fled from their  home,  taking  her  son,  and
    rented a room in another compound.  There she met a woman, Sonia,  with
    whom  she  became  romantically  involved.   However,  when   she   was
    threatened by Stella she went to Lagos, in October/November 2013  where
    she slept rough with  her  little  boy.   She  was  rescued  from  that
    situation by a man whom she described as a good Samaritan, a  catholic,
    who arranged for her to leave.

15. When she arrived in the UK she was housed in a Liverpool  and  began  a
    relationship with a woman called Dorcas. That relationship lasted until
    a couple of months ago when she  found  Dorcas  being  unfaithful  with
    another woman. She is not in a relationship at the moment  because  the
    trauma of the loss of Dorcas is still with her. She said that  she  was
    very sociable and attended a number of different organisations for  gay
    people.

16. Mr Harrison asked her about her family in Nigeria. She  said  that  her
    parents were dead and she was in contact with her brother, but  it  was
    impossible for her to tell him of her sexual orientation because it was
    taboo.

17. She feared being killed if she returned.  Her little girls  were  being
    looked after by her former partner's mother, who was extremely elderly.
     She had no direct contact with them but she heard, through her  former
    partner's cousin, that they were fine.  She became very distressed when
    talking about her children.

18. Sheila McCormick also gave evidence. She is a specialist health visitor
    who has had extensive contact with the appellant since her arrival   in
    Liverpool, although a little less so now than when she  first  arrived.
    She knew her former partner Dorcas and was  aware  that  the  appellant
    attended a number of LGBT groups in Liverpool. She said that the little
    boy had  progressed  well.   When  he  first  arrived  he  had  delayed
    communication skills but so far as she was aware he was now fine.   The
    appellant however was on anti-depressants and was receiving counselling
    from a number of different agencies.

The Documentary Evidence

19. The appellant has produced a number of different letters from a variety
    of different agencies.

20. Merseyside Refugee and Asylum Seekers Pre- and Postnatal Support  Group
    writes, in a letter dated 26th May 2016, that

         "Edith is in a lesbian relationship with  Dorcas  Kyola  Alas-Girma
         who is also a regular service user with our organisation.  We  have
         built a good rapport with Edith and her partner and we can  confirm
         that they are in a steady relationship.  I have also witnessed them
         cuddling and kissing on several occasions publicly. It  seems  that
         both are genuinely in love. We have given  Edith  and  her  partner
         Dorcas  moral,  emotional  and   social   support   without   being
         judgmental. Edith still has a long way to go  as  she  still  fears
         that if returned to Nigeria she will be  tortured,  persecuted  and
         even worse killed."

21. The Liverpool Asylum and Refugee LGBT Support  Network,  led  by  Sahir
    House and supported by Mersey Care Mental Health Heath  Trust  confirms
    that they first met the appellant at their launch event on  29th  March
    2016.  She attended with her partner Dorcas who  was  also  a  founding
    member of the organisation, Many Hands One Heart.  The authors,  a  PhD
    researcher at the University of Liverpool and an asylum support worker,
    confirm that they attend group- meetings and play an active part in the
    organisation.

22. The Armistead Centre Community Health Trust, a part  of  the  Liverpool
    Community Health Trust is a specialised service  for  LGBT  communities
    and has been in operation since  1997.   Joe  Lightwood  writes,  in  a
    letter dated 14 June 2016, that the appellant and her partner have been
    accessing the centre for approximately eighteen months.

23. A letter of 24 June 2015 from Asylum Link Merseyside  states  that  the
    appellant is a lesbian, and the project worker at the Armistead  Centre
    wrote on 13th August 2015 that the appellant attends  with  her  female
    partner.

24. Susan McCormick herself has written letters, one dated  15th  May  2016
    confirming that the appellant is in a lesbian relationship and that she
    has met her partner.

25. The appellant's GP confirmed that she is suffering from depression  and
    taking anti-depressant medication and receiving counselling  with  Talk
    Liverpool.  He said that  she  had  informed  him  that  she  was  very
    frightened of returning back to her home country of Nigeria because  of
    her sexuality (lesbian).

26. The City of Liverpool College, Counselling Heath and Wellbeing  Service
    reports that the appellant experiences

         "high levels of fear, worry, panic and anxiety in relation  to  the
         likelihood of persecution  in  her  home  country  because  of  her
         sexuality or as a LGBT person"

27. There is also a letter from the appellant's social worker dated 24 June
    2015 confirming that the appellant is in a steady relationship.

28. There are also a number of other letters from individuals attesting  to
    the relationship with Dorcas in the appellant's bundle.

Submissions

29. Mr Harrison noted that it was not accepted in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter that the appellant was gay, but he acknowledged the strength  of
    the evidence today which he did not  seek  to  undermine  in  any  way.
    Indeed, he observed that the appellant had  given  her  evidence  in  a
    controlled  manner,  recalling  events  which  were  clearly  extremely
    traumatic to her. He did not dispute the appellant's evidence that  she
    was living a gay lifestyle as her choice with other members of the LGBT
    community in Liverpool and he did not dispute that the reality for life
    as an openly gay woman in Nigeria would be extremely  difficult.   Even
    if the appellant herself was not prosecuted, he was  content  to  adopt
    the observation in the reasons for refusal  letter,  at  paragraph  28,
    which states: "The country information demonstrates that Nigeria  is  a
    dangerous place to be openly gay".

Findings and Conclusions

30. The decision of Judge Holt has not been overturned and is therefore the
    starting point for my consideration.  Although a flawed  determination,
    it was not appealed. The appellant was not well served by her  previous
    representatives.

31. Since it was promulgated,  the  appellant  has  produced  a  wealth  of
    documentary evidence, entirely unchallenged by  the  respondent  today,
    attesting to her sexuality. She also gave powerful oral evidence, again
    unchallenged, that, since the assault by her previous partner, she  has
    identified as being a lesbian. In fact when asked  directly,  she  said
    that she was not bisexual.

32. The appellant's case is that she was never asked her about her  present
    relationship at the hearing before Judge Holt, which is why she did not
    mention Dorcas, although in any event the relationship was in its early
    stages.

33. I accept her explanation. There the wealth of evidence  from  not  only
    the appellant's friends, but a large number of  professionals  who  all
    attest to the appellant's relationship with Dorcas.  The fact  that  it
    has now finished is not evidence that it did not exist.

34. I find that the appellant is a gay woman who has  had  a  relationships
    both in Nigeria and in the UK.   I  also  find  that  she  is  actively
    involved in a number of different  organisations,  in  particular  Many
    Hands One Heart, of which she was a founder member.

35. Mr Harrison did not see to argue that the appellant could  safely  live
    her life as she chooses to  live  it  now,  if  she  were  returned  to
    Nigeria.  HJ and HT v SSHD  UKSC  31  [2010]  rejected  the  so  called
    discretion test, and  held  that  it  was  no  answer  to  a  claim  to
    international protection to expect a person to act  discreetly  if  the
    reason for that discretion was a fear of persecution.

36. In this case the appellant has demonstrated that she wishes to live  an
    openly  gay  lifestyle  through  her  involvement  in   the   different
    organisations in Liverpool.  She would not be able to do so in  Nigeria
    because if she did, she would be at risk of persecution on  account  of
    her sexuality. Accordingly she is entitled to  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.



Decision

37. The original judge's decision is set aside. It is  remade  as  follows.
    The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 19 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
