

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/03451/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2017                       |    On 21 November 2017           |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    S B M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimons, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq whose protection  claim  was  refused
   by the Secretary of State on 23 November 2015 and his appeal against this
   decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 18 July 2016 on asylum, humanitarian protection and  human
   rights grounds. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  that
   decision was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge A Grubb in a decision  dated
   12 September 2016.

2. The Appellant relies on three grounds of appeal. Firstly,  it  is  argued
   that the First-tier Tribunal erred in assessing the question of Article 3
   ECHR and internal relocation without  reference  to  the  impact  of  the
   Appellant's lack  of  a  passport  and/or  laisser  passer  and/or  CSID;
   secondly it is argued that AA (Article 15 (c) [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  was
   wrongly decided and thirdly that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
   approach to internal relocation.


3. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb found that ground 3 was arguable and that  the
   finding about return to Baghdad was arguably flawed. The Judge was  wrong
   to exclude consideration of "job prospects and the risk of  falling  into
   destitution"  in  determining  whether  it  would  be   'unduly   harsh'.
   Permission was granted on ground 2 also because although  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was bound by AA, this was not the only arguable point raised and
   it was obviously considered to be an  arguable  point  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal.


4. At the hearing Ms Fitzsimons referred me to the authority of OM  (AA  (1)
   wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT and submitted that the  First-tier
   Tribunal had erred in law in respect of ground 2. Country guidance  stood
   until replaced or found to be wrong in law. Where a country guidance case
   was found to be legally flawed in its approach to the evidence it must be
   seen as never having been correct country guidance. In AA (Iraq)  v  SSHD
   [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of Appeal found that the Upper Tribunal had
   erred in law in its treatment of a CSID.  The  First-tier  Judge  applied
   flawed country guidance in respect of the  CSID  and  this  affected  the
   decision. With regard to the third ground, at paragraph 34 the First-tier
   Tribunal accepted that the Appellant was at risk in  his  home  area.  He
   should have examined all of the circumstances and  he  appeared  to  have
   stopped short and said he could not go beyond the general considerations.
   There was a material error in respect of  the  findings  in  relation  to
   Baghdad and he took the  same  approach  in  respect  of  the  IKR.   The
   Appellant did not have any connections to  find  employment  and  a  full
   enquiry should have been made.


5. Mr Diwnycz conceded that there was  an  error  of  law  for  the  reasons
   articulated by Ms Fitzsimons.


   Discussion


6. In AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of  Appeal  found  that
   the Upper Tribunal had erred in law in its treatment of a CSID. The Court
   held that it was not merely to be considered as a document which could be
   used to achieve entry to Iraq. Rather, it may be  an  essential  document
   for life in Iraq. It was  for  practical  purposes  necessary  for  those
   without private resources to access food and basic services. It was not a
   document that could be automatically acquired after return  to  Iraq.  In
   addition, it was feasible that an individual could acquire a passport  or
   a laissez-passer, without possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.


7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  himself  bound  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal's treatment of a CSID in AA and disregarded the Appellant's lack
   of documentation in assessing the risk to him.  Given that this has  been
   found by the Court of Appeal to be  a  legally  flawed  approach  to  the
   assessment of evidence, it follows that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
   law.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  further  erred   in   disregarding   the
   Appellant's job prospects and the risk of  falling  into  destitution  as
   these were matters that did not relate to  the  technical  obstacles  and
   therefore were required to be considered in an assessment of  whether  it
   would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to return to Baghdad.


8. In the light of the fact finding required, taking  account  of  Part  7.2
   (a) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of
   the First-tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal I remit the case  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray



