
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03776/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2020                           |On 16 January 2020            |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Islam, Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Row, promulgated on 25 June 2019, in which he
    allowed AA's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    a grant of asylum.


 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to AA as the Appellant and
    to the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting their positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. I make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds submit the judge has made irrational findings in
         respect of the evidence placed before him, in particular the
         absence of evidence of any forced recruitment by Hamas in Gaza, and
         the favourable credibility findings in the light of the documents
         lodged by the appellant in support of the appeal which appear to
         have no bearing on his actual claim and in the light of the finding
         of the judge that they had been produced to bolster the asylum
         claim.

         The grounds may be argued."

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives, following which I announced my decision that there was
    no material error of law.  I did not set the decision aside.


Error of law decision

 6. The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge made irrational findings
    in respect of the Appellant's credibility.  It was accepted by Mr.
    Howells that "irrational" is a very high threshold, and I find that the
    submission that his reasoning was irrational has not been made out.


 7. There are three issues listed in the grounds to support the
    Respondent's allegation that the Judge's findings were irrational.  The
    first is that the Judge reversed the burden of proof and relied on an
    inability of the Respondent to contradict the unsupported oral evidence
    of the Appellant.  This is with reference to [31] of the decision.
    This states:

         "Thus, whilst the appellant was not able to refer me to any
         incident of enforced recruitment of a student, the evidence of the
         respondent did not contradict this, and there was evidence that
         Hamas was involved in serious human rights abuses.  The appellant's
         account did not run counter to general information relevant to his
         case."

 8. It was accepted by Mr. Howells that the evidence referred to by the
    Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter which related to the West
    Bank was irrelevant.  The Judge considered this evidence at [28] and
    [29] and found that it was not relevant to the Appellant's case.  Mr.
    Howells accepted that the Judge was correct to give this evidence no
    weight.


 9. At [30] there is reference to the Judge inviting the Appellant's
    representative, Mr. Khan, to refer him to any evidence of Hamas
    forcibly recruiting adult students in Gaza.  The Judge states:

         "There was none.  However a US Department of State report dated 13
         March 2019 gave evidence of widespread human rights abuse by the
         Palestinian Authority and Hamas.  This included unlawful or
         arbitrary killings; systematic torture; arbitrary detention; the
         detention of political prisoners; interference with rights of
         assembly and freedom of association; restriction of movement;
         restriction on political participation; unlawful recruitment or use
         of child soldiers; use of force to obtain compulsory child labour."

10. I find that the Judge has not reversed the burden of proof.  He
    accepted that there was no evidence of Hamas forcibly recruiting adult
    students in Gaza.  In the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent
    had cited at length evidence relating to the West Bank.  It is not
    unreasonable of the Judge to point out at [31] that the evidence
    provided by the Respondent did not contradict the Appellant's position,
    especially as this evidence was relied on by the Respondent.  As was
    correctly found by the Judge, this evidence was not relevant to the
    Appellant's case.  The fact that the Appellant's representative was not
    able to provide evidence to support the recruitment of students in Gaza
    does not mean that the burden of proof had been reversed.  There is no
    indication that the Judge was expecting the Respondent to provide
    material to show that there was no recruitment in Gaza, rather he
    correctly pointed out that the Respondent's evidence did not contradict
    the Appellant's case.


11. Further, it is clear that the Judge has given weight to the evidence
    which was before him as shown at [31], where he refers to the USSD
    report provided by the Appellant.

12. In relation to [45], where the conclusion on the asylum claim is summed
    up, it was submitted that weight had been given to the Respondent's
    failure to provide the evidence referred to at [31], but there is no
    reference at [45] to any such lack of evidence.  The Judge states:

         "On the low standard of proof required I find that the appellant
         was under pressure to join Hamas, received threats from members of
         Hamas, and that if he returned to Palestine would be at risk of
         serious harm either by being forcibly recruited into a terrorist
         organisation or for refusing to join it.  He cannot reasonably
         safely relocate anywhere else in Gaza as Hamas is effectively the
         government there.  The Home Office guidance is that he cannot
         relocate to the West Bank.  The appellant therefore succeeds in his
         claim as a refugee."

13. I find that there is no error of law shown in [9(a)] of the grounds of
    appeal.


14. At [9(b)] the grounds submit that the Judge did not assess the
    Appellant's credibility in the round when considering the three witness
    summons.  At [43] the Judge states that he is giving little weight to
    the three summons produced by the Appellant.

         "I take into account all the above matters.  I take into account
         that the standard of proof in an asylum claim is a low one.  I put
         little weight upon the three summonses which the appellant has
         produced.  It has not been possible to authenticate them.  The
         circumstances in which they were produced would seem to indicate
         that they had been produced to bolster his asylum claim.  I take
         into account however that even if he did this it does not
         necessarily mean that his claim is untrue.  He may have produced
         the documents because he was frightened.  I put little weight upon
         the statement from the appellant's sister.  She did not attend to
         give evidence.  There was no proof of her identity.  It was not
         possible to cross-examine her."

15. The Judge considered the documents at [23] and [24].  At [25] he states
    "I will consider the documents in the light of the other evidence".
    This is the correct approach.  He then considers all of that other
    evidence from [26] to [42].  At [43] he comes to his conclusion "taking
    into account all the above matters".  This shows that he has adopted
    the correct approach to the evidence as stated at [43].


16. I find that the Judge was entitled to put little weight on the
    summonses, and was entitled to find that the fact that they were
    produced did not mean that the rest of the Appellant's claim was
    untrue.  He gave a reason why the Appellant may have done this.  He
    went through the objections of the Respondent as set out in the reasons
    for refusal letter from [26] onwards.  He took into account all of his
    findings when coming to the conclusion on the Appellant's claim from
    [43] to [45].  He applied the correct burden of proof having taken
    account of all of the evidence.  There is no error of law in his
    consideration of the summonses.

17. Mr. Howells accepted that the ground set out at [9(c)] was not the
    strongest point.  At [34] the Judge states:

         "It is said that the appellant described his friend's address as
         being between 20 and 30 km from where the appellant lived.  It is
         in fact 11 to 12 km.  Not everyone is accurate in assessing
         distances.  I do not find this to be an inconsistency."

18. It is clear that the Judge places no weight on this point and, while I
    find that it would have been better had the Judge acknowledged the
    inconsistency, and then stated that no weight was being given to it, I
    find that it is not a material error.  On the face of it, this is an
    inconsistency.  The Judge states that not everyone is accurate in
    assessing distances, indicating that he is attaching little weight to
    it.  Taken in the round with all of the other evidence, and taking into
    account the Respondent's acknowledgement that it was not a particularly
    strong point, I find that there is no material error of law at [34].


19. I have referred above to the fact that the Respondent had relied on
    wholly irrelevant evidence, as was accepted by Mr. Howells, in relation
    to the West Bank.  At [32] to [41] the Judge goes through all of the
    matters which the Respondent raised in the reasons for refusal letter.
    The Judge finds that these matters do not raise inconsistencies and
    gives reasons.  There was no challenge to these findings, except that
    at [34].  Further, some of the Respondent's objections, much like the
    reliance on the irrelevant evidence, were clearly wrong.  For example,
    the Appellant had stated that he could not leave Gaza until 2 July
    2018.  The Respondent alleged that external evidence indicated that the
    border was closed between 29 June and 2 July and therefore the
    Appellant could not have left on 2 July.  This is clearly illogical.
    The Judge further made the unchallenged finding at [42] that there were
    no matters which affected the Appellant's credibility under section 8.



20. I find that the Judge considered all of the aspects of the Appellant's
    claim.  He went through the Respondent's concerns.  He acknowledged
    that there was no documentary evidence to corroborate the Appellant's
    account but, as he showed at [26], he was aware that there was no
    obligation on the Appellant to provide any corroboration, given the low
    standard of proof applicable.

21. I find that the grounds of appeal are not made out.  The Judge properly
    considered all of the evidence before him.  He made findings which were
    open to him, and he gave reasons for those findings.  I find that the
    Respondent has not shown that these findings, and therefore the Judge's
    decision, is irrational.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making of
    a material error of law.  I do not set the decision aside.


23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 13 January 2020
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

