
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03440/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2020                         |On 13th January 2021          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON
                        DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MALIK


                                   Between

                                     MMM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Symes of Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harrild
& Dyer
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In UTJ Jackson's decision promulgated on 25 February 2020, an error  of
    law was found in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hanbury
    promulgated on 19  November  2019,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 1 April 2019 was  dismissed.   The  error  of  law  decisions  is
    annexed to this decision and sets out the  background  and  history  of
    this appeal, which will not be repeated herein save as is necessary.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside,  with  preserved
    findings that the Appellant's appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds is dismissed; such that the remaking of his appeal
    is only in relation to risk on return in his home area and if relevant,
    whether the Appellant would have  the  option  of  internal  relocation
    and/or a sufficiency of protection.  This decision has been reached  on
    those issues by both members of the panel.

 3. At the  end  of  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence,  Mr  Symes  made  an
    application  to  adjourn  the  hearing  part-heard  to  obtain  further
    evidence referred to in cross-examination  by  the  Appellant.   During
    questions from Mr Lindsey, the Appellant stated that a video showing  a
    news interview at a protest in the United Kingdom, referred to  in  his
    written statement, had been submitted to the Tribunal in support of his
    claim; but it had not.  On instructions, Mr Symes  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had sent the video to his solicitors, however they  say  that
    they had not received it and it had not therefore been submitted to the
    Respondent or the Tribunal.  Mr Symes assured us that the evidence  was
    available to the Appellant but  needed  translation,  although  he  was
    unable to confirm whether the evidence was a Facebook video (the  still
    screenshot of which was available in the documents relied upon  by  the
    Appellant) or the actual broadcast interview, or evidence of  any  such
    broadcast.  My Symes however  submitted  that  this  was  an  issue  of
    fairness which went to  the  heart  of  the  Appellant's  case  and  it
    appeared only to be a mixup, possibly Covid-19 related, that meant that
    the evidence had not been submitted.

 4. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Lindsey resisted the application on the
    basis that both the Appellant and his solicitors were well aware of the
    evidence, referred to in the most recent written  statement  and  there
    was no good reason why it had not been submitted.  In any event,  there
    was no sufficient reason to suppose that even if produced, the evidence
    would advance the Appellant's case in any material way.

 5. We refused the application for an adjournment  at  this  stage  of  the
    proceedings, in circumstances where there had been a  clear  breach  of
    directions for the Appellant to file and  serve  any  further  evidence
    upon which he wished to rely no later than 14 days before the  hearing;
    where the Appellant and his solicitors knew of the evidence as  it  was
    referred to in  the  latest  written  statement;  where  there  was  no
    reasonable excuse for the delay in submitting it; when the evidence was
    not in fact yet available or translated and  where  Counsel  could  not
    even specify precisely what the evidence was that the Appellant  wished
    to produce during any period of adjournment.  In  any  event,  a  still
    image of a video of an interview was available, which  could  be  taken
    into account alongside the Appellant's evidence  about  this.   In  the
    circumstances, it was not in the interests of justice to  both  parties
    to adjourn the hearing at this very late stage and  we  were  satisfied
    that it was not unfair to the Appellant to proceed with the hearing.

The appeal

Applicable law

 1. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 2. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 3. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

 4. The current country guidance in relation to Iraq is contained  in  SMO,
    KSP & IM (Article 15(c): identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT  400
    (IAC) which so far as relevant to the present appeal states:

     A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE  QUALIFICATION
        DIRECTIVE


     1. There continues to be an internal armed conflict in certain parts of
        Iraq, involving government forces, various militia and the  remnants
        of ISIL.  Following the military defeat of ISIL at the end  of  2017
        and the  resulting  reduction  in  levels  of  direct  and  indirect
        violence, however, the intensity of that conflict is not such  that,
        as a general matter, there are  substantial  grounds  for  believing
        that any civilian  returned  to  Iraq,  solely  on  account  of  his
        presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk   of   being   subjected   to
        indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within  the  scope
        of Article 15(c) QD.


     2. The only exception to the general conclusion above is in respect  of
        the small mountainous area north of Baiji in Salah al-Din, which  is
        marked on the map at Annex D.  ISIL continues to exercise  doctrinal
        control over that area and the risk of indiscriminate violence there
        is such as to engage Article 15(c) as a general matter.


     3. The situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the  governorates  of
        Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-Din)  is  complex,
        encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which  differ
        by region.  Whether the return of an  individual  to  such  an  area
        would be  contrary  to  Article  15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,
        "sliding scale"  assessment  to  which  the  following  matters  are
        relevant.


     4. Those with an actual or perceived association with ISIL  are  likely
        to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq.  In  those  areas  in  which
        ISIL retains an active presence, those who have a  current  personal
        association with  local  or  national  government  or  the  security
        apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.


     5.  The  impact  of  any  of  the  personal   characteristics   listed
        immediately below must be carefully assessed against the  situation
        in the area  to  which  return  is  contemplated,  with  particular
        reference to the extent of ongoing ISIL activity and the  behaviour
        of the security  actors  in  control  of  that  area.   Within  the
        framework of such an analysis, the other  personal  characteristics
        which are capable of being relevant, individually and cumulatively,
        to the sliding scale analysis required  by  Article  15(c)  are  as
        follows:


          . Opposition to or  criticism  of  the  GOI,  the  KRG  or  local
            security actors;


          . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious  group  which  is
            either in the minority in the area in question, or  not  in  de
            facto control of that area;


          . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores  and
            wealthy or Westernised individuals;


          . Humanitarian or medical staff and those associated with Western
            organisations or security forces;


          . Women and children without genuine family support; and


          . Individuals with disabilities.


     6. The living conditions in Iraq as a  whole,  including  the  Formerly
        Contested Areas, are unlikely to give rise to a breach of Article  3
        ECHR or  (therefore)  to  necessitate  subsidiary  protection  under
        Article 15(b) QD.  Where it is asserted that return to a  particular
        part of Iraq would give rise to such a breach, however, it is to  be
        recalled that the minimum level of severity  required  is  relative,
        according to the personal circumstances of the individual concerned.
         Any such circumstances require  individualised  assessment  in  the
        context of the conditions of the area in question.


    B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)


     7. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be
        to the IKR and all other  Iraqis  will  be  to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
        authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the  United  Kingdom
        to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or  expired
        Iraqi passport relating to P, or a Laissez Passer.


     8. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession
        of one of these documents.


     9. In the light of the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
        Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
        1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed  by
        reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  a
        current or expired Iraqi  passport  or  a  Laissez  passer,  if  the
        Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on  account
        of a lack of any of those documents.


    10. Where P is returned to Iraq on a Laissez Passer or expired passport,
        P will be at no risk of serious harm  at  the  point  of  return  by
        reason of not having a current passport.


    C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION


    11. The CSID is being replaced  with  a  new  biometric  Iraqi  National
        Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary  for
        an individual to have one of these two documents in  order  to  live
        and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or  conditions
        which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.   Many of the  checkpoints  in
        the country are manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by the
        GOI and are unlikely to permit an individual without a  CSID  or  an
        INID  to  pass.   A  valid  Iraqi  passport  is  not  recognised  as
        acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.


    12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a  CSID
        or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in any event,
        a recognised identity document.  There is insufficient  evidence  to
        show that returnees are issued  with  a  'certification  letter'  at
        Baghdad Airport,  or  to  show  that  any  such  document  would  be
        recognised internally as acceptable proof of identity.


    13. Notwithstanding the phased  transition  to  the  INID  within  Iraq,
        replacement  CSIDs   remain   available   through   Iraqi   Consular
        facilities.   Whether  an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a
        replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents available
        and, critically, the availability of the volume and  page  reference
        of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which system  continues  to
        underpin the Civil Status Identity process.  Given the importance of
        that  information,  most  Iraqi  citizens  will  recall   it.   That
        information may also be obtained from family members, although it is
        necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the father's  or
        the mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal.


    14. Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is expected  to
        attend their local CSA office  in  order  to  obtain  a  replacement
        document.  All CSA offices have now re-opened, although  the  extent
        to which records have been destroyed by the conflict  with  ISIL  is
        unclear, and is likely to vary significantly depending on the extent
        and intensity of the conflict in the area in question.


    15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely  to  be
        able to obtain a  replacement  document  there,  and  certainly  not
        within a reasonable time.   Neither  the  Central  Archive  nor  the
        assistance facilities for IDPs are likely  to  render  documentation
        assistance to an undocumented returnee.


    16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document  by  the
        use of a proxy, whether from the  UK  or  on  return  to  Iraq,  has
        reduced due to the introduction of the INID  system.   In  order  to
        obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA office  in
        person to enrol their biometrics, including  fingerprints  and  iris
        scans.  The CSA offices in which INID terminals have been  installed
        are unlikely - as a result of the phased  replacement  of  the  CSID
        system - to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or to a
        proxy.   The reducing number of CSA offices in which INID  terminals
        have not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to  individuals
        and their proxies upon production of the necessary information.


    E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17. There are regular direct flights from the UK to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
        Region and returns might be to Baghdad or to that region.  It is for
        the respondent to state whether she intends to  remove  to  Baghdad,
        Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.


    Kurds


    18. For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin  in  possession
        of a valid CSID or Iraqi National Identity Card (INID), the  journey
        from Baghdad to the IKR by land is affordable and practical and  can
        be made without a real risk  of  P  suffering  persecution,  serious
        harm, or Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties  on  the
        journey make relocation unduly harsh.


    19. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and  the  IKR
        without either a CSID, an INID or a valid passport.  If P has one of
        those documents, the journey from Baghdad to  the  IKR  by  land  is
        affordable and practical and can be made without a real  risk  of  P
        suffering persecution, serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment  nor
        would any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


    20. P will face considerable difficulty in making  the  journey  between
        Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or  an  INID.  There  are
        numerous checkpoints en route,  including  two  checkpoints  in  the
        immediate vicinity of the airport.  If P has neither a CSID  nor  an
        INID there is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint  until
        such time as the security personnel are able to verify P's identity.
         It is not reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and IKR
        by land absent the  ability  of  P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
        checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance of a  male  family
        member and production of P's identity  documents  but  may  also  be
        achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up  in  the  chain  of
        command.


    21. Once at the IKR border (land or air) P  would  normally  be  granted
        entry  to  the  territory.  Subject  to  security   screening,   and
        registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would be permitted to
        enter and reside in the IKR with no  further  legal  impediments  or
        requirements. There are no sponsorship  requirements  for  entry  or
        residence in any of the three IKR Governorates for Kurds.


    22. Whether P would be at particular risk of  ill-treatment  during  the
        security screening process must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
        Additional factors that may increase risk include: (i) coming from a
        family with a known association with ISIL, (ii) coming from an  area
        associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting  age.
        P is likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent  arrival  from
        the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of having arrived directly
        from ISIL territory.


    23. If P has family members living  in  the  IKR  cultural  norms  would
        require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances P would,
        in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as to lead
        a 'relatively normal life', which would not be unduly harsh.  It  is
        nevertheless important for decision-makers to determine  the  extent
        of any assistance likely to be provided by P's family on a  case  by
        case basis.


    24.  For  Kurds  without  the  assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
        accommodation options are limited:


        i) Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably likely that  P
           will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps  in  the
           IKR; these camps  are  already  extremely  overcrowded  and  are
           closed to newcomers. 64% of IDPs  are  accommodated  in  private
           settings with the vast majority living with family members;


       ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments  in  a  modern
           block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent at a cost of
           between $300 and $400 per month;


      iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living in an
           unfinished or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift  shelter,  tent,
           mosque, church or squatting in a government building.  It  would
           be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR  if  P  will
           live in a critical  housing  shelter  without  access  to  basic
           necessities such as food, clean water and clothing;


       iv)  In  considering  whether  P  would  be  able  to  access  basic
           necessities, account must be  taken  of  the  fact  that  failed
           asylum seekers are entitled to  apply  for  a  grant  under  the
           Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P  access  to  �1500.
           Consideration should also be  given  to  whether  P  can  obtain
           financial support from other sources such as (a) employment, (b)
           remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the  availability  of  ad
           hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


    25. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a case-by-
        case basis taking the following matters into account:


        i) Gender. Lone women are  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  secure
           legitimate employment;


       ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is 70%;


      iii) P cannot work without a CSID or INID;


       iv) Patronage and nepotism  continue  to  be  important  factors  in
           securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to  the
           region will have  a  significant  advantage  in  that  he  would
           ordinarily  be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to   make
           introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;


        v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are  at  the
           greatest disadvantage, with  the  decline  in  the  construction
           industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available;


       vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,  that
           may deter prospective employers.


Respondent's explanation for refusal

 6. In the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 28h of March 2019,
    the Respondent accepted that the Appellant was  an  Iraqi  national  of
    Kurdish ethnicity but it was not accepted that he would be at any  risk
    on return  to  Iraq.   The  Appellant  had  given  inconsistent  or  no
    information as to when he first started demonstrating in Iraq and  gave
    different explanations as to why he did.   The  Appellant  specifically
    stated in his screening interview that he  had  not  been  arrested  or
    detained in any other country, did not claim any periods  of  detention
    in his written statement; but claimed to have been detained for two  or
    three  days  in  2016  after  arrest  during  his  substantive   asylum
    interview.  The Appellant was considered to have been vague  about  his
    attendance of five days of  protests  in  Rania  and  Hajiawa  from  19
    December 2017 and it was only speculation that the Appellant's  picture
    had been taken during these  demonstrations.   It  was  not  considered
    credible that six months had passed after the demonstrations before the
    Appellant was sought by the authorities, during which time he  came  to
    no harm.  At its highest, the Appellant is someone who has little or no
    political profile in Iraq, who did not have any specific  role  in  the
    demonstrations, being one of  many  thousands  who  took  part  in  the
    protests in December 2017.  The Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was wanted by the authorities  for  protesting  and  as  such
    would not be at risk on return.

 7. The Appellant accepted in interview that he previously had a  CSID  and
    passport in Iraq, such that he was registered with the authorities  and
    there was no further evidence that he would not be able to access these
    obtain a new one, with information from his  parents  as  needed.   The
    Appellant is in contact with his parents.

 8. The Respondent rejected the  Appellant's  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights claims for essentially the  same  reasons  and  considered
    that he had not established any family life in the United Kingdom,  nor
    could he meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules for a grant of leave to remain on private life grounds and  there
    were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain
    on any other basis.

The Appellant's claim

 9. The Appellant is a single male from Suleymaniah  (specifically  Hajiawa
    Village, Ranio Town) in the IKR in Iraq; he is of Kurdish ethnicity and
    a Sunni Muslim.  He claims to have left Iraq on 1 August 2018, arriving
    in the United Kingdom on 22 August 2018 via Turkey and  claimed  asylum
    the same day.

10. The Appellant claims that he is at risk of  persecution  on  return  to
    Iraq because of his political profile; having  protested  against  both
    governments in Iraq whilst living there  and  in  the  United  Kingdom;
    attending demonstrations and posting on  Facebook  messages  which  are
    critical of the authorities.

11. In the skeleton argument, the issues of humanitarian protection due  to
    risk on return under Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  and
    whether removal would be an unlawful interference with the  Appellant's
    human rights were raised as  issues,  but  as  above,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on these grounds; the findings  on
    which were not challenged by either party and  were  preserved  by  the
    error of law decision.

The hearing and evidence

12. The Appellant's first written statement, signed and  dated  8  November
    2018, was  submitted  by  his  solicitors  (the  same  as  his  current
    representatives), together with  still  images  from  a  video  of  the
    Appellant attending a protest, a video of a protester being injured and
    a news report on a protest; on 18 December 2018.  A translation of  the
    news report refers to forces arresting protesters and activists with  a
    significant military presence and random shootings, wounding  at  least
    three people.  The video referred to is not before the Tribunal.

13. In the statement, the Appellant sets  out  his  family  background  and
    stated that everyone should have  freedom  of  speech  and  freedom  of
    expression.  He believed the Kurdish authorities  have  done  many  bad
    things, including a policy of not paying teacher  salaries  because  of
    which the Appellant missed two years of his education.  From  2014  the
    Appellant attended about 10 demonstrations in his home area,  to  speak
    out against corruption, abuse of human rights, and  cuts  to  salaries,
    the latter of which affected his father who lost his business as a self-
    employed man.

14. There was a large anti-corruption protest in Rania on 19 December  2017
    and in Hajiawa on 20 December 2017, continuing  to  22  December.   The
    Appellant, along with hundreds of other people, attended these protests
    and was vocal.  The protests  were  not  particularly  organised,  with
    people naturally taking to the streets.  The Appellant was not  wearing
    a mask and the authorities had people in the crowds  taking  photos  of
    protesters.  The Appellant did not know at the time that his photograph
    had been taken and only realised later that it must have been.

15. On 19 December 2017, one person was killed in the protests  and  others
    were wounded.  Between 20 and 22 December, the authorities were violent
    and three  people  were  injured,  including  two  of  the  Appellant's
    friends.  There is a video of the protest, which  shows  the  Appellant
    and people can be seen running after gunshots were fired.  It  is  said
    that there is a further video of one of the Appellant's injured friends
    but he is not visible in that and that video has not been submitted  to
    the Tribunal.

16. Following the protests, the Appellant went into  hiding  after  it  was
    realised that people who had  attended  were  being  arrested  and  the
    Appellant realised he may be  targeted.   There  was  a  TV  report  of
    activists being arrested.  The Appellant stayed  at  his  half-sister's
    house.  In January 2018, men from  the  PUK  attended  the  Appellant's
    family home to take the Appellant because he had disrespected  property
    and threatened to burn down the buildings, because  he  was  an  active
    demonstrator.  The Appellant was still  in  hiding  at  this  time  and
    remained there, not going out.

17. In July 2018, men from the PUK started to ask  friends  and  neighbours
    where the Appellant was, following which the Appellant decided to leave
    because he feared for his  life  in  Iraq.   He  thought  he  would  be
    arrested and in custody he would  be  tortured  or  even  killed.   The
    Appellant knew of many other  activists  who  had  been  kidnapped  and
    terrorised, including demonstrators  and  journalists.   The  Appellant
    left Iraq on 1 August 2018, with his uncle organising his travel.   The
    Appellant left his CSID card behind.

18. In the Appellant's written statement, signed and dated 29  April  2019,
    the Appellant responds to the Respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter
    and maintained his fear of persecution on return  to  Iraq  because  he
    took part  in  anti-government  demonstrations.   He  refers  to  being
    nervous in his interview not been able to remember  the  year  when  he
    started demonstrating, only his age and that he missed  school  because
    of reduced teachers' pay.  The  Appellant's  arrest  in  2016  was  not
    official or ordered by the judge and he was too frightened  to  mention
    this before his substantive interview, but at that point  he  was  told
    everything was confidential and would not be passed to the  authorities
    in Iraq.

19. The Appellant only escaped arrest in Iraq following the  December  2017
    protest because he was in hiding and he is still  of  interest  to  the
    authorities who were looking for him now.   The  media  do  not  always
    report people have been killed or arrested.   The  Appellant  has  also
    been posting anti-government material on his Facebook  account  and  is
    interested in taking part in demonstrations in the United Kingdom,  but
    none had been arranged by the date of this statement.

20. The Appellant's most recent written  statement,  signed  and  dated  11
    November 2020, provides an update on his  current  circumstances.   The
    Appellant has continued his political  activities,  protesting  against
    the general situation in Iraq and  Kurdistan  and  is  encouraging  the
    overthrowing of the political system.  He claims to be a  civil  rights
    activist not related to any particular party.  He refers to  corruption
    within the current governments in Iraq with a need for  change  in  the
    system.

21.  On  25  July  2020,  the  Appellant  posted  on  Facebook,  a  message
    criticising a high-ranking member of the PUK, Sheikh Jaffar;  following
    which he received a threatening message.  The  Appellant  thought  that
    his actions were endangering his family and he has cut off all  contact
    with them since July 2020.  He messaged his brother at the time telling
    him this.  There is evidence available of two threats, but others  were
    made and then deleted immediately by the senders.   The  Appellant  has
    also posted on Facebook evidence of protesters and activists  who  have
    been arrested in Iraq.

22. The Appellant has attended a few demonstrations in  London,  since  his
    last appeal hearing but has been unable to attend many due to Covid-19.
     The Appellant attended a demonstration on 11 August 2020 at  which  he
    was interviewed by a Kurdish  news  channel,  NRT,  a  video  which  is
    available (as above this was not submitted to  the  Respondent  or  the
    Tribunal and we refused the application for an adjournment made at  the
    end of the Appellant's evidence to adduce this).  Other  demonstrations
    were on 1 September 2020, in front of the Iraqi embassy  and  later  in
    front of Amnesty International and on 1 October 2020, in front  of  the
    Iraqi embassy.

23. The Appellant attended the hearing, confirmed his details, adopted  his
    three written statements and gave evidence through  a  Court  appointed
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter.  The Appellant  stated  that  he  has  been
    critical of both governments, the one in Erbil and the one  in  Baghdad
    as both are corrupt and in need of change.

24. The first video relied upon by the Appellant shows his participation in
    a demonstration in Iraq together with people from the same  town.   The
    Appellant can be seen on the video when the time is at 40 seconds.  The
    video was obtained from You Tube.

25. The  second  video  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  shows  him  at  a
    demonstration in front of the Kurdistan Regional Government  office  in
    London amongst the line of demonstrators.  The video was obtained  from
    Facebook and had been posted by the person giving  the  speech  in  the
    video.  The demonstration was to condemn the killing of Sardasht Osman,
    a journalist, by the Kurdish authorities, the PUK  and  the  KDP,  nine
    years ago.

26. In cross-examination,  the  Appellant  stated  that  he  first  started
    attending political demonstrations in 2014 when he was 15 or  16  years
    old.  When he was interviewed h couldn't remember the  exact  date  but
    said he was 15 or 16.

27. The Appellant was asked why he did  not  refer  to  his  detention  and
    mistreatment in 2016 in either his screening  interview  or  his  first
    written statement in support of his claim.  The Appellant  stated  that
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom initially, he was very scared and
    did not know if he should reveal everything or whether such information
    would get back to the authorities in his country.  Later on he was told
    that he could express anything that happened to him here without danger
    that he was now in a free country.  The  Appellant  confirmed  that  he
    prepared his first written statement with the assistance of solicitors,
    whom he has since  changed  and  he  cannot  remember  what  the  first
    solicitors advised him of to include in his written statement.  He knew
    more from his second solicitors and had not made any complaints against
    the first.

28. When he left Iraq, the Appellant had no access to Facebook and  it  was
    difficult to obtain internet  access  and  that  is  why  there  is  no
    evidence of any Facebook or other posts before he left Iraq.  The posts
    that the Appellant has made since  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    public and accessible by all  and  the  accounts  can  be  checked  for
    accuracy if needed.  The Appellant confirmed that he could  delete  his
    Facebook account if he wanted to, but he wanted to  continue  to  share
    his political views.

29. In relation to the first video relied upon, the Appellant  stated  that
    the video was dated and it is well known that there was a demonstration
    in that area on that date, showing that it was a protest.  You can hear
    shootings on the video and the person speaking on  it  says  that  they
    should stop the process until the shootings calmed  down,  after  which
    they can continue the demonstration.  The  Appellant  stated  that  the
    video is available on You Tube and can be  shared  from  there  and  on
    social media, but it is not possible to tell how many people have  seen
    it.

30. The Appellant was  reminded  of  his  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the first video was obtained from Facebook, not You  Tube
    which he confirmed was correct  but  it  is  also  from  YouTube.   The
    Appellant downloaded it through Facebook.  He stated that there was  no
    inconsistency in  his  evidence,  the  video  was  originally  seen  on
    Facebook and when you open it, it takes you to You Tube, but it can  be
    shared again through Facebook.  There was no evidence  of  the  URL  or
    source of the video available.

31. In relation to the second video relied upon,  the  Appellant  confirmed
    that one of the slogans was 'no to terrorism in Kurdistan' which it was
    suggested the KRG would not disagree with.  The Appellant  stated  that
    without doubt the authorities would disagree  as  the  protesters  were
    implying that it is the KRG itself involved in terrorism in  Kurdistan.
    The second video  has  been  shared  within  the  Appellant's  Facebook
    account.

32. The Appellant stated that he is a political person, he has a background
    of expressing his personal opinion which forced him to flee Iraq and he
    continues to be active in the United Kingdom without ever changing  his
    political beliefs.  His social media accounts prove how active  he  is.
    There is a lack of media coverage of demonstrators  who  get  arrested,
    kidnapped and killed.

33. The Appellant does not wish to contact his family in Iraq to assist him
    if he returns as this could put their lives in danger.

34. The panel asked the Appellant supplementary questions.  He stated  that
    hundreds of people attended  the  demonstrations  in  Iraq,  which  all
    happened in one place.

35. The Appellant made a Facebook post on 25 July 2020  regarding  a  high-
    ranking PUK person, Shaif  Jafar  with  information  about  corruption,
    harassment,  kidnapping,  illegal  businesses   and   smuggling.    The
    Appellant received two threats on the same day that if he ever returned
    to Iraq he would be killed and these included  threats  to  his  family
    unless he stopped making such posts.  There was no copy of the original
    post within the Facebook materials in the Appellant's bundle.

36. The Appellant did not know the person who made the  first  threat,  nor
    did he  know  anything  about  him.   There  had  only  been  a  single
    communication from him.  The Appellant however stated that  the  person
    was a member of either the PUK or KDP because of the  uniform  worn  in
    the person's profile picture, showing that he works with  the  counter-
    terrorism group which is under the control of these two parties.  These
    people and their affiliates are very experienced and would be  able  to
    find the Appellant in Iraq.

37. The Appellant did not know the second person who  made  a  threat,  nor
    anything about them but could also tell from the picture that they  are
    within the PUK.  The threats were both sent directly  through  Facebook
    messenger to the Appellant, the documents available in  the  bundle  do
    not show that these were sent to  the  Appellant,  but  one  shows  the
    message in response to a screenshot of the Appellant's post.

38. The Appellant last had contact with his family in July  2020  and  does
    not know of any threats that have been made to them in Iraq.

Closing submissions on behalf of the Respondent

39. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Lindsey  relied  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and submitted that the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  First, it was not credible  that  when  the  Appellant  first
    arrived and with the  assistance  of  solicitors,  he  would  not  have
    revealed all of the  details  of  his  claim,  including  a  period  of
    detention and it is notable that no complaint  has  been  made  against
    those solicitors who were acting for him at the  time.   Secondly,  the
    Appellant changed his evidence of where the first video relied upon had
    been obtained from, at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  he
    said it was obtained from Facebook and in his evidence before the Upper
    Tribunal he said it was obtained from You Tube and there is no evidence
    of it being published anywhere.  These were just two  examples  amongst
    many others which could be highlighted.

40. Overall, Mr Lindsey submitted that the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    consistent with his claim to be a  dedicated  political  activist.   At
    their highest the videos relied upon do not demonstrate any risk to him
    and there is no evidence at  all  that  they  have  been  broadcast  or
    shared.  It was submitted that the evidence from Facebook is of  little
    real weight, was not credible  and  lacked  supporting  evidence  which
    would reasonably  be  available  but  has  not  been  produced  by  the
    Appellant.  For example, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  at  least
    colour images of the computer screen shots and/or a statement of  truth
    from the solicitors  as  to  the  original  contract  original  content
    contained.  In any event, the Appellant has only a very low and limited
    approval doesn't establish a risk on return even if he  maintained  his
    Facebook account.

41. The background country evidence showed only isolated instances of  risk
    to members of the media and journalists or specific high-profile people
    within specific  activist  groups.   Taken  at  its  highest,  even  if
    credible, the Appellant would not be at risk on return.

42. The Respondent relies specifically  on  certain  evidence  recorded  in
    findings in the country guidance case of SMO, KSP & IM (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT; specifically the  evidence  of
    Dr Fatah in paragraphs 156 and 157, that a Kurdish person may face more
    questioning on return including about political affiliations, but there
    needs to be more than just Facebook postings to generate  this.   There
    is reference to politics having  opened  up  in  the  IKR  since  2009,
    extending beyond the two main parties and with more opposition  to  any
    human rights violations.  There is nothing within the country  guidance
    to establish that the Appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  in  the
    circumstances claimed, nor is there anything in  his  own  evidence  to
    support this.

43. In paragraph 248 of SMO, there is reference to opposition to  the  main
    political parties and the IKR, including protest involving thousands of
    people but no indication of a risk of  harm  to  any  number  of  those
    demonstrators.  Further in paragraph 299, a person may be  at  enhanced
    risk of harm by reason of political opposition and criticism, but there
    was no recent evidence of the same and the assessment of such risk  was
    beyond the scope of the  country  guidance.   There  were  only  a  few
    examples of harm from anti-government protests involving people with  a
    much more significant profile than this Appellant.

44. The Appellant is able to get in touch with his family for assistance on
    return and in obtaining a CSID as needed.  There has  been  no  adverse
    interest in his family and it was submitted that the Appellant had only
    cut ties with them to strengthen his claimed difficulties on return.

45. The Respondent does not expressly rely on internal relocation.

Closing submissions on behalf of the Appellant

46. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Symes relied on  his  skeleton  argument
    and submitted that the Appellant was a credible witness.   In  relation
    to the inconsistencies relied upon by the Respondent, it was  submitted
    that  these  need  to  be  looked  at  individually   many   were   not
    inconsistencies at all and in  any  event  they  didn't  undermine  the
    Appellant's credibility as a whole.  In relation to the Appellant's age
    when he  started  attending  political  demonstrations,  there  was  no
    inconsistency, he has stated throughout he was either 15  or  16.   The
    Appellant  has  made  a  consistent  claim  throughout,  his  screening
    interview cannot be considered as  a  comprehensive  and  at  the  time
    following arrival he was scared both are being  returned  to  Iraq  and
    also of being detained in the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  cannot
    remember the advice he was given by solicitors at that time,  which  in
    any event would be privileged and the fact that he has  not  complained
    about them but has changed his representatives, doesn't take the matter
    much further.  The other alleged inconsistencies have been explained by
    the Appellant in his latest written statement and do not undermine  his
    account.

47. The Appellant's Facebook evidence shows public posts, by  reference  to
    the global icon on each but the pages do not include how many times the
    material has been viewed.  The Appellant  offered  to  show  the  Upper
    Tribunal his Facebook account which suggest that the documents have not
    been fabricated and there is no suggestion that they are  not  genuine.
    The Appellant has made posts which are critical of the  governments  in
    Iraq and he is entitled to choose to keep this account and express  his
    views rather than deleting it to reduce the risk of persecution.

48. In relation to the video evidence, it is  accepted  that  there  is  no
    evidence of how widely this has been viewed and also that there  is  no
    evidence that they have  been  published  at  all,  but  there  was  no
    inconsistency in the Appellant's  account  of  where  the  videos  were
    available.  Whether the source is You Tube or You Tube accessed through
    Facebook is a case of splitting hairs rather than inconsistency.

49. The Appellant has provided details of two individuals, not  friends  of
    his on Facebook account who threatened him and it is  not  unreasonable
    as a result for the Appellant to think that people  would  be  able  to
    find him and his family, who are specifically referred to in the posts.
     One of the individuals is wearing a PUK uniform, the  insignia  behind
    him and his name (which includes PUK) establishes who  he  is  and  his
    affiliations, together with the threatening response  to  the  specific
    screenshot of the Appellant's post.  It is accepted that  there  is  no
    translation of the Appellant's  post,  but  that  is  not  material  as
    whatever it said, it elicited a threatening response.

50. The Appellant specifically relies  on  a  relatively  small  number  of
    specific extracts from the  larger  collection  of  background  country
    information submitted; first, the Gulf Centre for Human Rights  article
    'Iraq: and Iraqi Kurdistan:  Targeting  of  activists  and  journalists
    continues', dated 14 March  2019  which  reiterated  calls  to  respect
    public freedoms, including freedom of the press, freedom of  expression
    and freedom of peaceful assembly, in addition to protecting journalists
    and internet activists. Secondly, the USSD 2018 country report for Iraq
    dated 30 March 2019 which refers to extrajudicial killings and security
    forces  firing  on  and  beating   demonstrators   protesting   against
    unemployment and poor public services in Basrah Governate and  southern
    Iraq, with use of excessive and unnecessary lethal force in controlling
    protests  which  turned  violent  as  well  as  reports   of   enforced
    disappearances by or on behalf of government  forces  and  the  use  of
    forced confessions, together with credible reports of government forces
    abusing and torturing  individuals,  particularly  Sunni  Arabs  during
    arrest, pre-trial detention and after conviction; and arbitrary  arrest
    and detention of Sunni Arabs and IDPs.

51. There is no question of a sufficiency of protection for  the  Appellant
    as he fears the state authorities and the Respondent does not  rely  on
    any option of internal relocation.  Forced returns are to  Baghdad  but
    it is accepted that  voluntary  returns  can  be  to  other  locations.
    Assuming a return to Baghdad and an onward journey to  his  home  area,
    the Appellant would be returning without a CSID card and  even  if  his
    family could assist him (and he has no contact  with  them  because  he
    fears a risk to his family) they are not  in  even  from  Baghdad.   On
    arrival to the IKR without a CSID, the Appellant would not have a right
    to  work  and  would  face  very  difficult  circumstances  on  return.
    However, My Symes accepted that if the Appellant was  not  at  risk  on
    return to Iraq, there could be no risk  to  his  family  and  he  could
    therefore contact them for assistance and obtain a CSID; subject to the
    possibility of future political activism which may caution him  against
    family contact.

52. The Appellant specifically relies on the  likely  conditions  he  would
    face on return to the IKR even if not at risk, which to a great  extent
    overlaps  with  his  protection  claim  but  there  are  some   factual
    background issues which may still be relevant, including his  inability
    to find work given the high unemployment rate and lack of  sponsors  to
    assist him.

Findings and reasons

 5. We consider first the Appellant's claim to have been politically active
    in Iraq as the cause of him leaving that  country  and  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom before going on to consider  his  sur  place  activities
    here.

 6.  There  are  essentially  three  aspects  to  the  Appellant's  claimed
    activities  in  Iraq;  first  that   he   attended   approximately   10
    demonstrations between around 2014 and December 2017; secondly that  he
    was arrested, detained and beaten on at least one occasion in 2016; and
    thirdly, that as a result of attending the demonstrations  in  December
    2017, the authorities came looking for the Appellant.

 7. We do not  find  any  significant  or  material  inconsistency  in  the
    Appellant's account of when he first started  attending  demonstrations
    in Iraq, identifying consistently his rough age when he claims to  have
    started albeit not being able to consistently identity which year  that
    was.  Whilst we take into account the Appellant's relatively young  age
    at this time (14 or 15 years old),  there  is  a  significant  lack  of
    detail about these demonstrations.  The only information  given  is  an
    approximate number of demonstrations attended, with no  dates,  places,
    numbers of attendees, any incidents  or  difficulties  arising  at  the
    protests, no specific theme or  subject  matter  of  the  protests  and
    whether or not they were organised and if so  by  whom.   We  find  the
    Appellant's account to have been  involved  in  any  such  protests  or
    demonstrations to be so vague and lacking in detail that we are  unable
    to find that he participated as claimed.

 8. We do not find the Appellant's claim to have  been  arrested,  detained
    and beaten following a demonstration in Iraq  to  be  credible  either.
    Although we attach relatively little weight to lack of reference to any
    such event in the Appellant's screening interview (given it is  a  very
    brief initial set of questions asked at the outset of a claim),  it  is
    notable that the Appellant was expressly asked  if  he  had  ever  been
    detained to which he answered no.  More  significantly,  the  Appellant
    did not make any such claim of arrest, detention or being beaten in the
    written statement made  in  support  of  his  asylum  claim  which  was
    submitted prior to his substantive  asylum  interview.   The  Appellant
    claimed in evidence before us that although legally represented at that
    time, he was not aware of what should be included in the statement  and
    had since changed legal representatives, albeit no complaint  was  made
    against those representing him initially.

 9. We reject that claim entirely.  The Appellant is  represented  at  this
    hearing by the same legal representatives as those  who  submitted  his
    written statement in December 2018 and there is  therefore  nothing  to
    indicate any dissatisfaction with the service given  then  or  that  he
    would not have been advised to set  out  his  claim  in  full  in  that
    written statement.

10. In addition, the Appellant was asked at the  beginning  of  his  asylum
    interview if there was anything he would  like  to  add  or  amend  and
    other, minor corrections were made to his  written  statement  but  not
    relevant  to  the  claimed  detention.   It  was  only  later  in   the
    Appellant's asylum interview that he claimed for the  first  time  that
    the Appellant claimed that he had been arrested  one  year  before  the
    demonstrations in December 2017 during which his name had  been  taken,
    he was subject to intimidation, beating and given a warning.  He claims
    that he was detained for two or three days and there were no conditions
    attached to his release because it was not  an  official  arrest.   The
    Appellant has not expanded on the account of this claimed  incident  at
    all and no information is given as to whether there was any  follow  up
    to it (given the warning said to have been given) or why the  Appellant
    would need to be identified from the  later  demonstration  if  he  had
    already been encountered and identified in the past as a  protestor  or
    political activist.

11. We find that if  the  Appellant  had  been  arrested  (whether  or  not
    officially), beaten and detained previously in Iraq that he would  have
    mentioned this if not in his  screening  interview,  at  least  in  his
    written statement in December 2018 and that by the time of the  hearing
    before us, he would have given more details about this claim given  its
    potential significance as evidence  of  past  persecution.   For  these
    reasons, we do not find that  the  Appellant  was  arrested,  detained,
    intimidated, warned or beaten whilst in Iraq  in  connection  with  any
    demonstration or political activism or otherwise.

12. Finally, the  Appellant  claims  to  have  attended  demonstrations  in
    December 2017 in his home area, his involvement in which was the reason
    he left Iraq in the summer of  2018.   The  Appellant  claims  that  he
    participated in a series of demonstrations in two locations in his home
    area over a number of days  in  December  2017;  that  these  were  not
    organised demonstrations  and involved hundreds of people  all  in  the
    same place (in his asylum interview he gives numbers of 100s, 500,  600
    and 700 people).  The Appellant does not claim to have been involved in
    the organisation of the demonstrations  but  to  have  been  vocal  and
    active within them  and  assumes  that  his  photo  was  taken  by  the
    authorities during the demonstrations.

13. The Appellant's main evidence of this was the first video submitted  to
    the Tribunal which he says shows him  at  the  demonstration  and  that
    there was gunfire; together with background evidence of  demonstrations
    held at that time.  We do not find that the video provides any positive
    support at all for the Appellant's claim to have  been  involved  in  a
    demonstration on that day in Iraq.  The  video  itself  shows  a  small
    group of people standing to one side of a street with no obvious  signs
    of any protest.  There are no  signs  or  other  items  which  one  may
    associate with a demonstration and there is nothing like  the  hundreds
    of people that the Appellant claims were all demonstrating at the  same
    location together.  Although we accept that what appears to be  gunfire
    can be heard on the video, it is  impossible  to  tell  where  this  is
    coming from (or any other details like who was shooting or at whom) and
    the video does not, as the Appellant claim, show anyone  running  after
    the gunfire.

14. Although the Appellant states that what is being referred to audibly on
    the video is to a demonstration continuing after the gunfire  stops,  a
    translation of  the  video  does  not  support  this  either.   In  the
    transcript, three people are speaking about the sound of shootings from
    a roof and one being told to sit down and not get killed for trying  to
    take a picture.  There is not a  single  reference  to  demonstrations,
    pausing because of the gunfire, why the people were  there  or  of  any
    vocal protest at all.  The transcript supports what can be seen on  the
    video of a relatively small group of people having a conversation in  a
    street and nothing  more.   The  video  provides  no  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's claim to have attended a demonstration, let alone  to  have
    been  a  vocal  and  active  demonstrator.   Further,  the  Appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent as to where  this  video  had  been  obtained
    (whether You Tube or Facebook) and there was no evidence at all  of  it
    being publicly available,  for  example,  no  screenshot  of  it  being
    included in a post and no url.

15. The Appellant has also  referred  to  friends  being  injured  at  this
    protest and a video of this; but there was no such video before us  and
    no other evidence of any substance to  support  the  claim  of  friends
    being injured in the vicinity of the Appellant.

16. On the basis of the evidence before us, we do not  find,  even  to  the
    lower standard  of  proof  that  the  Appellant  was  involved  in  any
    demonstrations in December 2017 nor that  there  would  have  been  any
    reason why his picture may  have  been  taken  by  the  authorities  to
    identify and arrest him.  There is  no  express  reason  given  by  the
    Appellant as to why he personally may be targeted even if he did attend
    a demonstration beyond a news  report  that  some  activists  had  been
    arrested.

17. We also do not consider it plausible that following the  demonstrations
    in December 2017, even if the Appellant had  been  involved,  that  the
    authorities would come to his home in January 2018 and  then  only  ask
    around for him in his local area 5 months later in July 2018.  Even  if
    accepted,  this  does  not  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was  of  any
    significant interest and as above, it is entirely unexplained as to why
    the Appellant would need to  be  identified  given  his  claim  of  his
    details being taken when previously detained.   The  Appellant's  claim
    that he was not found because he was in hiding at  a  relative's  house
    for a period in excess of six months  is  also  inconsistent  with  his
    claim that following sur place activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  he
    would be found anywhere in Iraq by the PUK and/or  KDP  on  his  return
    now.

18. It is not necessary for an Appellant to corroborate his claim,  but  in
    this case, it would be reasonable to expect some  supporting  statement
    or evidence from his family members as to events in Iraq given that  he
    was in contact with them as recently as July 2020.   There  is  however
    nothing from his immediate family who the Appellant claims were visited
    by the PUK in January 2018, or from  friends  or  neighbours  who  were
    asked about him in July 2018, nor from any relatives in whose  property
    he claims to have been in hiding for a significant period; nor from his
    uncle who arranged  his  passage  from  Iraq  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further, there is nothing to  indicate  any  ongoing  interest  in  the
    Appellant since July 2018 at the latest  and  no  suggestion  that  the
    authorities have made any further visits to his  family  or  have  been
    continuing to look for him.

19. For these reasons we do not find that the  Appellant  was  a  political
    activist, nor had he been involved in any demonstrations  in  Iraq  nor
    was he of any interest to the authorities in  Iraq;  nor  that  any  of
    these were reasons for him to flee the country in August 2018.

20. We turn finally to the Appellant's claim of sur place activities in the
    United Kingdom, involving demonstrations and posts on Facebook which he
    says have resulted in direct threats to him.

21. We have been provided with some, but not  all  of  the  Facebook  posts
    which the Appellant states he has made expressing his  political  views
    and being critical of the governments in Iraq.  In the  earlier  period
    of November  and  December  2018  and  early  2019,  these  posts  were
    primarily sharing news reports and re-posting other comments, including
    news in particular about journalists.  Thereafter there is evidence  of
    posts on an irregular basis from October 2019, including photographs of
    demonstrations, some re-posts of news and  various  short  comments  on
    events in Iraq, protests and journalists.  We  accept  that  these  are
    public posts as shown by the globe icon on  the  screenshots  and  some
    show a number of likes and comments in response.

22. The Facebook posts include photographs of and references to  attendance
    at demonstrations and in addition a  second  video  of  a  protest  was
    submitted.  Again, as with the first video, there is no  evidence  that
    this is publicly available from a screenshot or url  and  we  have  not
    been provided with a translation as to what is being said; albeit  some
    parts of the  demonstration  are  self-evident  from  the  placards  in
    English against terrorism.

23. The Appellant has not claimed to be part of  any  particular  group  or
    association; nor to be an organiser of any protests  or  demonstrations
    in the United Kingdom, only to have attended a relatively small  number
    (although we appreciate that  Covid-19  has  restricted  this  sort  of
    activity significantly this year) without  undertaking  any  particular
    role.  The Appellant has not claimed that he has any received  threats,
    warnings or adverse interest as a result of this activity.

24. At its highest, we find this evidence to show that  the  Appellant  has
    made a limited number  of  fairly  short  comments  and  posts  on  his
    Facebook account, some of which are  more  expressly  critical  of  the
    government than others  and  attended  a  relatively  small  number  of
    demonstrators as a participant.  We however bear in  mind  the  finding
    above that the Appellant was not politically active  in  Iraq  and  his
    apparent interest after arrival in the United Kingdom  is  unexplained.
    We return below to whether this low level individual involvement  would
    place the Appellant at real risk of the authorities.

25. The final part of the sur place activities claimed is of  two  specific
    threats to the Appellant resulting from a post he made on 25 July 2020;
    albeit no copy  of  the  post  itself  nor  any  translation  has  been
    submitted (save for a  small  screenshot  as  part  of  another  post).
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant submitted that  it  did  not  matter
    that the details of the post were unknown because whatever it said,  it
    elicited a threatening response.  We do not  however  accept  that  the
    nature of the post is  irrelevant  particularly  when  considering  the
    context of what was said in response.

26. The first threat refers to the Appellant having criticised the PUK  and
    the author states "... I will end your criticism and your  respect  for
    KDP and Barzani ...", however the Appellant has never claimed to  be  a
    supporter of the KDP or Barzani (a former President of the IKR) but  to
    the contrary to be critical of both main parties and  both  governments
    in Iraq.

27. The second threat also appears to reference criticism of  the  PUK  and
    that the Appellant should "stop working for the  KDP"  but  again,  the
    Appellant has never claimed to support the KDP but to the  contrary  to
    be critical of it as well as the PUK.   In  addition,  the  Appellant's
    evidence is that he had never heard  of  the  author  of  this  message
    before (or after) but the message states "I warned you several times to
    stop posting on social media".

28. We do not find the translation of the threats to be consistent with the
    Appellant's claim or evidence about the post or  who  the  threats  are
    from.  Whilst there is a reference to the Appellant's home and brothers
    in Iraq, no family members are specifically  identified  and  there  is
    nothing to indicate any family members have been threatened  or  harmed
    following this and the Appellant has been in contact with at least  his
    brother after the threats were received.  There is also no evidence  of
    any further threats or contact at all since July up until the  date  of
    hearing.

29. The Appellant states that it is clear from the first message  that  the
    author is from the  counter-terrorism  group  within  the  PUK  or  KDP
    because of the uniform worn and that the person is under the control of
    both parties.  Again, that is inconsistent with the text of the  threat
    which is more consistent with  a  PUK  supporter  but  nothing  in  the
    message itself suggests any particular role or affiliation and there is
    no background country evidence to show identification from the uniform.
     Similarly the Appellant states that the second threat is from the  PUK
    from the picture, although  this  is  more  self-evident  in  the  name
    itself.  Again, there is no detail as to who this person is or  whether
    he holds any particular position, power or influence.

30. The Appellant asserts that these messages are both credible threats and
    that the authors would be able to locate him on  return  to  Iraq,  but
    there is little if anything to  support  this  assertion.   We  do  not
    accept that these are credible threats that place the Appellant at  any
    real risk of persecution on  return  to  Iraq;  in  particular  as  the
    authors are not identified beyond the name on  their  Facebook  account
    and without any indication that they would have the desire or means  to
    be able to locate the Appellant anywhere in Iraq and  more  importantly
    that they appear to both be on the premise  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    supporter of the PDK which is directly contrary  to  the  core  of  his
    claim

31. As  above,  we  have  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    politically active in Iraq and find at its highest, he has  irregularly
    protested and made  Facebook  posts  at  a  very  low  level,  with  no
    particular affiliation or group membership, no leadership or other role
    and we have not found the threats made to  be  credible  or  consistent
    with the Appellant's own claim.  We do not find that  at  its  highest,
    being a low level individual demonstrator/critic, places the  Appellant
    at any real risk on return to Iraq now and  there  is  nothing  in  the
    country guidance or background evidence to support  any  claimed  risk.
    The Appellant is not a journalist, he was not involved in any  protests
    in Iraq and as such there is nothing to suggest that he is or would  be
    of any adverse interest to the  authorities  on  return.   The  matters
    highlighted by Counsel  in  the  background  country  evidence  do  not
    directly apply to the findings we have made on  the  Appellant's  claim
    and it is doubtful that even if we accepted his account in its entirety
    the Appellant would in any event be at risk  on  return  in  accordance
    with the background evidence before us and the country guidance.

32. On the basis of these findings, the Appellant can return  to  his  home
    area in the IKR and there is  no  basis  for  him  not  re-establishing
    contact with his family who would, for the same reasons, not be exposed
    to any real risk of persecution arising from such contact  or  anything
    the Appellant  has  done.   Similarly,  there  is  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant would not be supported or assisted by his  family  on  return
    and the Appellant's evidence is that he had left his CSID card at  home
    and could get it with the assistance of his family.  We would add  that
    if no longer available or valid, there is no reason why the Appellant's
    family would be unable to assist  him  with  obtaining  a  replacement,
    particularly as returns can be to  the  IKR  directly  where  they  are
    based.

33. Counsel for the Appellant accepted that in the absence of a finding  of
    risk on return to his home area, the Appellant would be able to contact
    his family and obtain his own CSID (or a replacement) and therefore the
    remainder of his claim about conditions on return,  particularly  about
    access to employment and lack of support essentially fall away (subject
    to any future political activism, for which  we  find  no  basis).   In
    addition, as above, the findings of fact in  relation  to  humanitarian
    protection and human rights from the First-tier Tribunal are  preserved
    the appeal being dismissed on those grounds and therefore nothing  more
    arises as to conditions on return.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in UTJ Jackson's  error  of  law  decision  (annexed
below), the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
the making of a material error of law such that  it  was  necessary  to  set
aside  the  decision  on  asylum  grounds,  although  not  on   humanitarian
protection or human rights grounds on which there was no appeal against  the
dismissal of these aspects of the Appellant's claim and those parts  of  the
decision were preserved.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                               Date     3rd January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03440/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2020                         |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     MMM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Symes of Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harrild
& Dyer
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury promulgated on 19 November 2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 1 April 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  who  entered
    the United Kingdom on 22 August 2018 and claimed asylum  on  the  basis
    that he feared persecution on return because of his political  opinion,
    having protested against  the  authorities  and  undertaken  sur  place
    activity.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant had
    made a number of alternative claims, which lacked  detail,  were  vague
    and only relied on generic supporting documents  not  specific  to  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent did not  consider  that  the  Appellant  had
    claimed to have any significant or  particular  political  profile,  no
    specific role in demonstrations and it was not  accepted  that  he  was
    wanted by the authorities.  Overall there was no risk on return and  it
    was feasible to  return  the  Appellant  to  Iraq  given  that  he  had
    previously had a CSID card and an Iraqi passport and could obtain a new
    CSID with the assistance of his parents in Iraq with whom he was  still
    in contact.  The application was also refused  on  private  and  family
    life grounds and there were no exceptional circumstances for a grant of
    leave to remain.

 4. Judge Hanbury dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19
    November 2019, primarily on the grounds that the Appellant's claim  was
    generic in nature, inconsistent, in some respects implausible and  that
    in any event the Appellant had no particular political profile in  Iraq
    nor had he undertaken any significant sur place activities.  It was not
    accepted that the Appellant had been arrested and beaten  in  Iraq  and
    overall he would not be at risk on return.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on five grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made contradictory findings in  paragraphs  11  and
    45(v) of the decision as to the evidence contained on a DVD relied upon
    by the Appellant.  Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider all of the evidence available at the  hearing  and  relied  on
    inconsistencies which were either not  real  or  not  material  to  the
    claim.  Specifically, in paragraph 45(i) that the Appellant claimed  he
    was either 15 or 16 when he first attended demonstrations which was not
    an inconsistency; in paragraph 45(ii)  which  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's  explanation  for  not  mentioning  his  detention  in  his
    screening interview; and in paragraph 45(iv) which failed  to  consider
    the detailed evidence given in cross examination.   Thirdly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal reached illogical findings on the Appellant's CSID,
    reaching adverse credibility findings on the Appellant's claim to  have
    left this in Iraq despite the Appellant accepting that he could  obtain
    a new one on return and it bearing no material relevance to the core of
    the claim.  Fourthly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  no  power  to
    exclude or refuse  to  admit  Facebook  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant, in circumstances where  it  was  accepted  to  be  relevant.
    Finally, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing  to  make
    an anonymity direction in respect of the Appellant.

 6. At the outset of the hearing, on behalf of the  Respondent,  Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that although not all of the grounds of appeal were accepted,
    a number of material errors of law had been identified by the Appellant
    which were sufficient to require that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal be set aside and the appeal remade.   Specific  reference  was
    made to the inconsistency in the findings  between  paragraphs  11  and
    45(v) of the decision which was relevant to an essential  part  of  the
    Appellant's claim and property of evidence of it.  Mr Jarvis  confirmed
    that what was contained in paragraph 11 of the decision was description
    of the evidence rather than assertion submission by the parties and the
    contents of that paragraph were consistent with the note from the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

 7. In paragraph 11 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, in  the  section
    dealing with the hearing, the First-tier Tribunal stated  that  in  the
    first video gunshots were heard in the street and 'With some difficulty
    the appellant was seen second from  the  left  in  that  later  still'.
    However in paragraph 45(v), in the section dealing with  findings,  the
    Judge stated 'I did  not  consider  from  the  video  was  possible  to
    identify, either that it  was  definitely  the  defendant  present  or,
    perhaps more importantly, I did not hear gunshots on the  DVD.   I  was
    not  able  to  conclude  that  this  DVD  corroborated   his   account,
    therefore.'  These two paragraphs are mutually inconsistent  and  based
    on the factual description of the evidence in paragraph 11, it  was  an
    error for the First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 45(v), relied upon as an
    example of a  lack  of  detail  in  the  Appellant's  claim  and/or  an
    inconsistency, to reject the evidence in this way.  The Respondent  has
    very properly conceded that this is a material error in the decision on
    what is a core part of the Appellant's protection claim  which  infects
    the findings of fact and credibility assessment to such an extent  that
    for this reason alone the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be
    set aside.

 8. I also find a further error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's refusal
    to admit evidence relied upon by the Appellant available either the day
    before or on the day of the hearing.  It appears from the decision that
    a supplementary bundle was filed with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    cover of a letter dated 30 September 2019,  which  may  not  have  been
    received until 14 October 2019 and not served on  the  Respondent.   In
    paragraph 32  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refers  to
    additional Facebook activity having not  been  provided  in  accordance
    with  directions  and  that  this  additional  material  would  not  be
    considered even though it may be relevant (because  it  was  consistent
    with other posts in the public domain), it should not be admitted.  The
    further reasons for this are set out in paragraphs  36  to  38  of  the
    decision as follows:

         "36. Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 provides that  the
         FTT is to apply the overriding  objective  of  dealing  with  cases
         fairly and justly and avoiding  unnecessary  delay.   Dealing  with
         cases fairly and justly includes dealing with the  case  in  a  way
         which  is  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,   the
         complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs  on  the  resources
         the parties.  In considering these issues, the tribunal is not only
         to consider the interests of the parties before  it  but  also  the
         interest of other litigants whose appeals are "in the pipeline".


         37.  I considered that the additional Facebook posts had  not  been
         served on the respondent.  It would amount to a material  injustice
         to the respondent, who would have had  no  advance  notice  of  the
         application to adduce  this  evidence  or  the  substance  of  this
         additional material, to allow this evidence to be referred to.   It
         would inevitably result in adjournment of the appeal which would be
         highly undesirable given the oral  evidence  had  concluded.   This
         would be disproportionate.


         38.  In accordance with my case  management  powers,  therefore,  I
         decided to refuse reference to any post served with the appellant's
         solicitor's letter 30.9.19 because of lack of service and  lack  of
         opportunity  to  cross-examine  the  appellant  about  them.    The
         existing directions clearly foreshadowed the need to identify  this
         evidence, serve it properly on  the  respondent  and  be  ready  to
         proceed at the hearing of this agenda appeal on  16  October  2019.
         For these reasons I refused the application, making  clear  that  I
         did not consider the additional evidence would affect  the  outcome
         of the appeal."


 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision discloses another  inconsistency  on
    this issue, saying first that the material in the supplementary  bundle
    may be material as it supported and/or corroborated other evidence  and
    then stating in paragraph 38, prior to any decision being given on  the
    appeal, that it was made clear at the oral hearing that the  additional
    material would not affect the outcome of the appeal.  In any event, the
    First-tier Tribunal's consideration of whether to  admit  the  evidence
    focuses only on potential detriment to the Respondent but  without  any
    consideration of whether that could  be  mitigated  (i.e.  by  allowing
    further cross-examination on the day or further to an adjournment)  and
    without any overall balancing exercise as to  whether  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to admit  the  evidence.   The  mere  fact  of  an
    adjournment, even if highly undesirable as suggested by the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is not sufficient reason alone to refuse to consider evidence
    that was accepted as at least potentially relevant.  I find  a  further
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's approach to this evidence for
    these reasons, which led to the First-tier Tribunal failing to consider
    evidence before it which went to the core of the claim  and  assessment
    of risk on return.

10. In these circumstances, these errors of law are sufficient  to  require
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision on asylum  grounds  to  be  set
    aside and it is not necessary to make  any  detailed  findings  on  the
    second or fourth grounds of appeal; although there  is  some  merit  in
    those grounds as well.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's dismissal of the appeal on humanitarian protection or  human
    rights (Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights)  grounds
    and therefore the decision stands on those grounds.

11. The fifth and final ground of appeal is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in failing  to  make  an  anonymity  direction.   Although
    complaint may be made against the First-tier Tribunal about the refusal
    to do so, particularly as part of the reason was that  the  application
    for such a direction was made only during oral submissions; it  is  not
    an error of law to refuse to make an anonymity direction.  It forms  no
    part of the substantive decision on appeal and  is  not  in  itself  an
    appealable decision.  Further, as indicated to the  parties,  I  accept
    that this is an appropriate case for an anonymity direction and one was
    made at the outset of the oral hearing.

12. Having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statements  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal, the matter is retained in the Upper Tribunal to  remake
    the decision on appeal.  Although the First-tier Tribunal has failed to
    make adequate or detailed factual findings on  the  key  issue  in  the
    asylum claim, this is not a case where the effect of the error  of  law
    has been to deprive a party of a fair hearing and the nature and extent
    of fact finding is not so significant as to  require  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal having regard to the overriding objective  in  rule
    2.  In particular, it is noted that the Appellant accepts that  he  has
    had a CSID in the past and would be able to obtain a new one on  return
    to Iraq and the findings/decision to dismiss the appeal on humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds stands; such that  the  outstanding
    issues in the appeal are relatively narrow in relation to risk in  home
    area and potentially internal relocation.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
asylum grounds.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
appeal on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds is confirmed.

Directions

     i) The appeal to be re-listed before any Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
        on the first available date after 26th  March  2020,  with  a  time
        estimate of two hours.  The  Appellant  to  confirm  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal as soon as possible whether a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter
        is required.


    ii) Any further evidence the Appellant wishes to rely  upon  is  to  be
        filed and served  no  later  than  14  days  before  the  re-listed
        hearing.


   iii) The parties are at liberty to, but are  not  required  to,  file  a
        skeleton argument no later than seven  days  before  the  re-listed
        hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         24th February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

