
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03047/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by a remote hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 August 2021                         |On 17 September 2021             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BJM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge D. Kelly) (hereinafter  referred  to  as
    the "FtTJ") who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on the  23
    February 2021.


 2. Permission to appeal that decision was sought  and  on  14  April  2021
    permission was refused by FtTJ Froom. On renewal permission was granted
    by UTJ Allen who stated, "The respondent's grounds of appeal  make  out
    an arguable challenge to the judge's decision."

 3. The hearing took place on 13 August 2021, by means of  Microsoft  teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
     I was present at Bradford IAC  and  conducted  the  hearing  from  the
    tribunal centre. The advocates attended remotely via video. There  were
    no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing, and I am satisfied both advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

 4. Whilst the appellant in these proceedings is the  Secretary  of  State,
    for the sake of convenience I intend to refer to the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.



The background:

 5. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 2-15. The appellant is a national of
    Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  from  Makmkmoor  District,  Mosul.   On  19
    January 2016, ISIS surrounded the village and  force  its  inhabitants,
    including the appellant, his brother and his parents, to move to Mosul.
    Smoking cigarettes was forbidden  by  ISIS,  but  it  was  possible  to
    purchase them in secret from a shop located close to  the  house  where
    the appellant and his family were being forced to live. On  30  January
    2016 the appellant left the house to buy cigarettes. Whilst he was  out
    his mother rang to say that his brother and father been taken  away  by
    ISIS and that he should not return to the house but should remain where
    he was until her brother was able to collect him. He was taken back  to
    his house and later taken out of Iraq by an agent.

 6. The appellant was taken by the agent to Turkey, and he was  allowed  to
    have a very brief conversation with his uncle using the  agents  mobile
    phone. The appellant had not spoken to any member of his  family  since
    then. The appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  15th  February
    2016. He claimed asylum on the following day that claim was treated  as
    withdrawn on 13 January 2017 when he failed  to  maintain  contact  the
    Home Office. His current representatives made  a  further  claim  on  5
    December 2017 which was refused on 6 March 2020. On the advice  of  his
    legal representative he sent an email dated 20 April 2020 to the  Iraqi
    embassy in the UK seeking their assistance in obtaining  a  replacement
    CSID card and sent an email to  the  Red  Cross  dated  30  April  2020
    seeking their assistance in tracing his family  in  Iraq.  He  had  not
    received a reply to either email.

 7. In a decision letter dated 6 March  2020  the  respondent  refused  his
    claim. It was accepted  that  he  was  an  Iraqi  national  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, but his factual claim was refused. The  respondent  rejected
    the appellant's account of events in Iraq concerning Daesh  and  having
    to leave Iraq. It was further not accepted that he was not  in  contact
    with his family and  that  apart  from  his  "bare  assertion"  he  had
    provided no further evidence of  efforts  to  contact  his  family  (at
    paragraph 27]).

 8. The respondent gave consideration to SMO. Based on the CG decision  the
    respondent considered that the appellant's home area was in a  formerly
    contested  area   but   that   taking   into   account   his   personal
    characteristics there would not be an Article  15  (c  )  risk  to  the
    appellant on return  ( at paragraphs [33]-[36] of the decision letter).

 9. In light of  the  decision  in  SMO  the  respondent  stated  that  the
    appellant would be able to approach the appropriate agencies  and  have
    the assistance needed to have  the  documentation  renewed  by  embassy
    staff.

10. In the alternative the issue of internal  relocation  was  set  out  at
    paragraphs [50-59] and that noted that his fear was returning to  Mosul
    but that he had not expressed a fear of other regions in Iraq.

11. Thus it was considered if unable to return to his home  area  he  could
    relocate to the IKR. This was on the basis that he spoke Kurdish Sorani
    and had skills that  he  could  utilise  and  gain  lawful  employment.
    Furthermore to mitigate any hardship he would be eligible on return  to
    a voluntary payment if he decided to return to Iraq voluntarily. It was
    not unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to return to the IKR.

12. His claim was therefore refused.

13. The appeal came before the FtT on 11 February 2021.

Decision of the FtTJ:

14. The factual findings made by the FtTJ are set out  at  paragraphs  [24-
    30]. The judge considered the appellant's factual account in the  light
    of the background country  information  concerning  the  occupation  of
    Northern Iraq by Daesh forces between 2014 and 2017.  The  judge  found
    that there was "reliable external evidence" that towards the end of the
    period ISIS fighters were taking "tens of thousands" of people  hostage
    and herding them towards the city of Mosul for use as human shields  as
    the  battle  for  the  militants  group  last  major  Iraqi  stronghold
    intensified. Against that  background  the  judge  found  that  it  was
    plausible that the appellant would have left his possessions, including
    his CSID at home. The judge therefore  attached  "substantial  positive
    weight" to  the  supporting  external  evidence  when  undertaking  his
    assessment of the appellant's overall credibility.

15. The FtTJ also accepted his account that he was able to walk to the shop
    undetected and was absent from the house when Daesh  fighters  attended
    to abduct its male residents which included the appellant's brother and
    father. The judge also  found  that  it  was  plausible  and  "entirely
    understandable" that the appellant's mother would contact him  to  warn
    him not to return and arrange for her brother to assist him in  leaving
    Iraq (at [25]).

16. The judge did not attach adverse  weight  the  appellant's  failure  to
    contact the Red Cross or Iraqi embassy in London prior to the time when
    he was represented for the reasons that he set out at [27].  The  judge
    considered the appellant's claim that no one memorised the  information
    in  the  "family  book"  to  be  contrary  to  the  background  country
    information and that that undermined his overall credibility  and  also
    that he found it difficult to  understand  why  the  appellant's  uncle
    would have retained his mobile phone ( at [28]).

17. At [30] the FtTJ drew  together  his  conclusions  on  the  appellant's
    account and credibility and having done so concluded that "there is  at
    least a reasonable degree of likelihood that his account of the  events
    leading to his leaving Iraq and of his subsequent loss of contact  with
    his family is a truthful true one."

18. At [31 - 32] the FtTJ undertook the  risk  assessment  and  whilst  the
    judge gave reasons for finding that the appellant would not be at  risk
    in his home area under Article 15 (c ) of the  Qualification  Directive
    at [32], in the light of his factual findings and in the light  of  the
    respondents concession that if the appellant was  credible  that  there
    would be a real risk of the  appellant  finding  himself  destitute  on
    return to Iraq by reason of his inability  to  acquire  a  CSID  either
    advance within a reasonable time of his return to Iraq and therefore he
    would be eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection under  Article
    15 (b) of the Qualification Directive, the FtTJ allowed his appeal.

19. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by UTJ Allen on 18 May 2021.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

20. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions that the error of law issue could be  determined  without  a
    face-to-face hearing and the hearing was  to  be  listed  as  a  remote
    hearing.

21. Both parties indicated that  they  were  content  for  the  hearing  to
    proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing  to
    enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

22. Mr Diwnycz submitted that FtTJ Kelly did not make any reference to  the
    country guidance decision in SMO and others (article 15 (c  )  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (hereinafter referred to as "SMO")
    and therefore did not deal with the issue of  risk  on  return  or  the
    issue of redocumentation sufficiently.  He  submitted  that  there  was
    hardly a mention of SMO therefore the judge misdirected himself in law.

23. Mr Hussain on behalf of the appellant submitted that paragraph  31  was
    the starting point and that the risk relating to documentation was  set
    out clearly in SMO at paragraphs 347 and 378.

24. He submitted that whilst it may have been better for the FtTJ  to  have
    referred to the relevant paragraphs  of  SMO,  there  was  no  lack  of
    reasoning in his decision and in light of the  concession  set  out  at
    paragraph [31]. He submitted that paragraphs [30] and  [31]  when  read
    together provided a sufficient assessment.

25. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Decision on error of law:

26. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent confirmed that he did  not  seek
    to rely on the grounds for permission to appeal originally filed before
    the FtT and upon which permission  was  refused  but  relied  upon  the
    second grounds that were filed. The grounds referred to one  ground  of
    challenge which is referred to as ground 3 of the original grounds.

27. I will therefore consider that ground. It is submitted on behalf of the
    respondent that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  address  the  country  guidance
    decision of SMO and the feasibility of return. It is submitted that the
    decision is almost completely silent on  this  decision  and  that  any
    relevant findings  made  against  the  appellant  are  those  found  at
    paragraph [28] and are all made against the appellant.  It  is  further
    submitted that  the  sole  reason  for  allowing  the  appeal  was  the
    appellant's lack of ability to obtain documentation but  that  findings
    were required to be made in this respect. In this context  the  grounds
    cite  the  well-known  decision  of  Budhathoki  [2014]  and  that  the
    respondent is unable to understand why the appeal was allowed.

28. Having considered the decision of the FtTJ in the light of the grounds,
    I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not fall into error  in  the  way  the
    grounds assert.

29. The FtTJ set out his factual findings at [24 - 30] of his decision.  As
    to the appellant's account of events in Iraq, the FtTJ considered  that
    account against and in the light of the background evidence  concerning
    events at that  time.  At  [24]  the  FtTJ  stated  that  he  "attached
    substantial positive weight to the supporting external evidence" in the
    overall assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  account.  In
    the light of the evidence which demonstrated that Daesh were present in
    the village taking people hostage and  moving  them  towards  Mosul  as
    human shields, the FtTJ accepted the appellant's account of leaving his
    possessions, including his CSID, at home, to be plausible.

30. The FtTJ went on to give reasons as to why  he  found  the  appellant's
    account to be plausible at paragraphs [25 - 26] and expressly took into
    account the respondent's contrary submissions. The FtTJ therefore found
    that it was plausible that the appellant was absent from the house when
    Daesh attended to abduct the  male  residents  and  found  it  entirely
    plausible that the appellant's mother contacted him to warn him not  to
    return. Thus the judge accepted the appellant's account that his father
    and brother had been abducted by Daesh.

31. Whilst the grounds (paragraph 9 of the original  grounds)  assert  that
    the FtTJ failed to give adequate scrutiny to the  appellant's  account,
    this is a criticism without foundation. At [27] the FtTJ set out why he
    did not attach adverse weight to the appellant's failure to contact the
    Red Cross or the Iraqi embassy in London before he was represented.  It
    was open to the FtTJ to find on the evidence that it was not reasonable
    to  expect  the  appellant  to  have  been  aware  of  family  tracing/
    possibilities of redocumentation or even pursue  such  enquiries  in  a
    country where he was unfamiliar with the spoken language. The judge was
    entitled to accept the appellant's explanation in  his  evidence  which
    the judge had recorded at paragraph 7 of his decision.

32. At [28] the FtTJ set out the adverse credibility findings made. Firstly
    that the appellant's account that he had  not  memorised  the  relevant
    parts of the "family book" appeared to be contrary  to  the  background
    material referred  to  in  SMO  and  that  he  found  it  difficult  to
    understand why the appellant's uncle would  have  retained  his  mobile
    phone. I observe that since the  FtTJ's  decision,  that  part  of  SMO
    relating to the information known about the family book was  set  aside
    by the Court of Appeal and the Upper Tribunal is re-hearing that aspect
    amongst others. However at [30] the FtTJ made his  omnibus  conclusions
    as to the  overall  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account,  having
    balanced the positive findings made  against  those  negative  findings
    made at [28] to reach  his  overall  assessment.  The  FtTJ  stated  as
    follows:

         "30. Having considered the  various  aspects  of  the  evidence  in
         detail, I have  stood  back  and  considered  them  in  the  round,
         weighing  those  factors  that  help  both  for  and  against   the
         credibility of the appellant as a witness of truth. Having done so,
         I have concluded that there is at  least  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood that his account of the events leading  to  his  leaving
         Iraq and of his subsequent loss of contact with  his  family  is  a
         truthful true one."



33. Contrary to the grounds, the FtTJ undertook an analysis of the evidence
    before him and did so with the anxious scrutiny required.




34. The overarching findings made relevant to the risk on return were as
    follows; the appellant's home area was occupied by Daesh when he left
    Iraq; his brother and father were forcibly abducted by them; he did not
    know how to contact the Red Cross/or the Iraqi embassy prior to his
    representation and that the overall events leading to the appellant
    leaving Iraq were reasonably likely to have occurred and that the FtTJ
    accepted that he had given a truthful account that he had subsequently
    lost contact with his family.


35. The lack of contact had been set out in the appellant's witness
    statement at paragraph (22 - 25) where he set out that he had not had
    contact with his family members. The appellant had last been in contact
    with his mother when he left Iraq (see question 14AIR) and that he had
    last spoken to his uncle in Turkey which had been undertaken via his
    agent (Q 83 and Q 110). The key finding made by the FtTJ was at the
    appellant did not have his CSID and accepted his account has a truthful
    one that he had subsequently lost contact with his family. In the light
    of this and the other factual findings made, the FtTJ undertook the
    risk assessment at paragraphs [31- 32].


36. The grounds are entirely silent as to the position of the respondent at
    the hearing before the FtTJ. At [31] the FtTJ records the concession
    made by the presenting officer who "realistically accepted that if I
    found the appellant was credible, then (a) they would be a real risk of
    the appellant finding himself destitute on return to Iraq by reason of
    his inability to acquire a CSID (or its modern equivalent) either in
    advance or within a reasonable time of his return to Iraq, and (b) he
    would thus be eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection under
    Article 15 (b) of the Qualification Directive. I therefore brief return
    to consider the other basis of the appellant's claim for international
    protection."


37. Whilst I would accept that the risk assessment undertaken is in brief
    terms, that does not mean that the assessment of risk was in error or
    was contrary to the decision in SMO and the information set out in the
    June 2020 CPIN both of which were before the FtTJ.


38. In light of the concession made by the presenting officer that if the
    appellant's account was credible not only as to events in Iraq but that
    he was not in possession of a CSID and that he had lost contact with
    his family (as set out at [30])  that there was a real risk of the
    appellant find himself destitute on return by reason of his inability
    to acquire a CSID or INID either in advance or within a reasonable time
    of his return to Iraq, ( see paragraph [31]), it was not necessary for
    the FtTJ to set out any other reasoning in support of his conclusion
    that the appellant was eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection
    under Article 15 (b). His assessment and the respondent's stated
    concession was consistent with the decision in SMO.



39. At paragraph [317] of SMO it states as follows:


         "317.    The starting point  for  our  consideration  must  be  the
         respondent's repetition, at [150] of her  closing  submissions,  of
         her concession in previous cases that 'it remains the position that
         a person returning to Iraq without either family  connections  able
         to assist him, or the means to obtain a CSID, may  be  at  risk  of
         enduring conditions contrary to Article 3 ECHR'.  This  section  of
         our decision is therefore principally relevant to those who have or
         are able to obtain a CSID (or INID) within  a  reasonable  time  or
         have family  members  from  whom  they  can  secure  assistance  or
         support."


40. The grounds of permission make no reference to that paragraph. It is in
    the light of that paragraph that the FtTJ's  assessment  at  [31]  that
    the presenting officer accepted that if the FtTJ  found  the  appellant
    was credible, not only in respect of events in Iraq but that he did not
    have a CSID and that he was not in contact with his  family.  The  FtTJ
    plainly had this paragraph in mind, and this formed the  basis  of  his
    decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    (Article 15 (b)) which is consistent with the concession  made  by  the
    respondent.

41. The Judge did not allow the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds
    based on the infeasibility of return. As [9] of the SMO guidance makes
    clear, the feasibility of return is connected to lack  of  passport  or
    laissez passer. There is  no  dispute  that  the  possession  of  those
    documents has a bearing on the ability to obtain a CSID. However as the
    Tribunal in SMO also makes plain, the relevance of possession of a CSID
    has far wider implications in terms of ability to live day  to  day  in
    Iraq as the possession of such a document   enables  an  individual  to
    access services, to obtain support or employment and therefore to  find
    accommodation (see also [337] of SMO).

42. Dr. Fatah's evidence in SMO, records at (para 366): Dr  Fatah  did  not
    believe that a CSID could be obtained from abroad any  more,  since  it
    had been replaced by the INID.  At [968]-[980], however,  he  described
    how a CSID could have been obtained in the past from an  embassy.    At
    paragraph 2.6.16 of the June 2020 CPIN it was stated that "it is highly
    unlikely that an individual would be able to obtain  a  CSID  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy while in the UK. Instead a person would need to apply for
    a registration document (1957) and would then apply for  an  INID  upon
    return to their local CSA office in Iraq."

43. It was the respondent's evidence that the appellant would not  be  able
    to apply for or  obtain  a  CSID  in  the  UK.  The  alternative  route
    suggested in the CPIN is an application for a "1957 document" which  in
    turn  relied  upon  certain  documentation  being  provided  by  family
    members. However on the factual findings made by the FtTJ the appellant
    had lost contact with his family members and therefore  it  follows  he
    would not have access  to  that  documentation.  The  position  of  the
    respondent is that for this  appellant  the  only  destination  for  an
    enforced return would be to  Baghdad.  As  to  obtaining  a  CSID  from
    Baghdad, an individual returnee who is not from Baghdad, which  is  the
    position of this appellant, is not  likely  to  be  able  to  obtain  a
    replacement document or to do so in  a  reasonable  time.  The  central
    archive and  the  facilities  for  IDP's  are  not  likely  to  provide
    assistance for an undocumented returnee. The  appellant  would  not  be
    able to board a domestic flight beyond Baghdad or to  the  IKR  without
    either a CSID or INID or invalid passport.

44.  Given that the enforced route of return is to  Baghdad,  and  that  in
    light of the assessment he would not  be  able  to  leave  the  airport
    without such document, it follows that the appellant will be in Baghdad
    with no form of support and thus the risk of destitution applies.  This
    is the factual assessment made by the Secretary of State in the country
    guidance decisions when addressing Article 15 (b) and as recognised  in
    the concession made before FtTJ Kelly.

45. The conclusion of the  Judge  that  the  inability  to  obtain  a  CSID
    alongside  the lack of family support, (having lost  contact  with  his
    family members), that this was determinative  of  this  aspect  of  the
    appeal is one which was undoubtedly open  to  him  and  one  which  the
    presenting officer accepted at the hearing  as  set  out  at  paragraph
    [31].

46. Consequently, paragraph [31] of the FtTJ's decision and when read  with
    his factual findings on credibility and  the  concluding  paragraph  at
    [30], brief though it is, makes the  necessary  findings  in  order  to
    reach  the  conclusion  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on  the
    humanitarian protection ground, namely that the appellant will  not  be
    able to obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable  time  and  has  no  family
    members from whom he can otherwise secure assistance or support  as  he
    had lost contact with them.

47. The obligation on a tribunal judge is to  give  reasons  in  sufficient
    detail to show the principles upon which the tribunal has acted and the
    reasons that have led to the decision.   Appellate  courts  should  not
    rush to find a misdirection simply because they might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion on the facts or  express  themselves  differently,
    and in my judgement and  on  a  careful  reading,  the  FtTJ  did  give
    adequate reasons for his decision.

48. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that  the  decision  involved
    the making of an error on  a  point  of  law  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and the decision of the FtT shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
                                Date:     17/ 8/ 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
