
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03676/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 12, 2019                         |On February 19, 2019          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR H A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who arrived in the UK on  March
    7, 2016 and claimed asylum.  The  respondent  refused  his  application
    under paragraph 336 HC 395 on March 6, 2018.  The appellant lodged  his
    appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 on March 16, 2018 and his appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Ferguson  on  July  20,  2018  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on September 19, 2018 dismissed the appellant's  protection
    claim but  allowed  his  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  finding  the
    appellant had satisfied paragraph 276ADE(vi)  HC  395.  The  respondent
    appealed that decision on September 26, 2018 and permission  to  appeal
    was granted on October 10, 2018.

 2. On November 30, 2018 I heard submissions from both  representatives.  I
    concluded, after hearing submissions, that there had been an  error  in
    law. The Judge had allowed the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant
    satisfied paragraph 276ADE  HC  395  but  in  doing  so  there  was  no
    consideration in the Judge's decision on what treatment,  if  any,  was
    available for the appellant in Pakistan, and when  considering  whether
    there any "very  significant  obstacles"  this  is  a  fatal  flaw.  In
    deciding what obstacles were in Pakistan  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
    Judge to take that into account in addition to the matters which he had
    already considered.

 3. The Court of Appeal in Parveen and the SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  932  made
    clear that "very significant" obstacles connoted an "elevated threshold
    and the test would not be met by mere inconvenience or upheaval".

 4. I adjourned the remaking of the decision until today's date  to  enable
    further evidence to be submitted.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


 5. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 6. The respondent provided an  additional  bundle  of  documents  that  he
    sought to rely on which included the August 2018 CPIN report on medical
    and healthcare issues, mental health  NGOs  in  Pakistan,  articles  on
    mental health in Pakistan and case law.

 7. The appellant provided two additional bundles including two  statements
    dated November 26, 2018 and January 18, 2019, a statement from  Ms  MAK
    dated January 18, 2019, country expert report from Dr F  Wali,  updated
    psychiatric  report  from  Professor   Zeitlin,   letters   from   CPFT
    Psychological Wellbeing Service, letter of support  from  Ms  Stephanie
    Allen and objective evidence.

 8. I agreed that some evidence would be required from both  the  appellant
    and witness.




    EVIDENCE

 9. The appellant adopted his two statements and  gave  oral  evidence.  Mr
    Avery cross-examined the appellant who gave the following replies:

      a) He last had contact with his family a long time ago.  He  spoke  to
         his maternal uncle by phone. He was no longer in contact  with  him
         or any other family members because they have moved to Afghanistan,
         but he was unsure of the dates. His family had gone  there  because
         of problems with the  Taliban  where  they  lived.  They  came  and
         harassed them in his home and were asking about his whereabouts.

      b)  The  Judge  disbelieved  his  account  of  his  family  going   to
         Afghanistan so when asked why they would  have  to  flee  there  he
         stated the family had problems from both sides as no  one  accepted
         them.

      c) He agreed he had never been to hospital as a result of taking pills
         and that he was unaware what the pills were.

      d) He stated he had been to his local doctor, many times,  and  showed
         him the warts on the back of his neck. He currently was not on  any
         medication.

10. In re-examination, Mr Bradshaw asked him a series of questions  and  he
    responded as follows:

      a) The Taliban were active in his area before he left the country  and
         were controlling his area.

      b) He had also been to see the doctor when he was depressed,  and  the
         doctor told him he could do nothing about his depression  but  gave
         him details of a website which gave him advice.

      c) He tried to take pills on 2-3 occasions  but  had  been  unable  to
         swallow the pills properly and had vomited although on one occasion
         he swallowed one pill.

      d) He did not go to see the GP or  hospital  after  taking  the  pills
         because he did not feel like going. When pressed on  why  this  was
         the case, he stated he was just thinking about committing suicide.

11. Ms M A K adopted her statement, dated January 18, 2019, and  gave  oral
    evidence. She believed the pills were painkillers but admitted she  had
    not seen any packaging.

12. Mr Avery cross-examined her and she replied as follows:

      a) She saw the appellant had taken pills on  2-3  occasions  but  only
         found him on the floor on one occasion.

      b) She was worried about him because of what she had seen  albeit  she
         was uncertain what he had taken.

      c) She did not call for an ambulance as her first thought was  to  get
         him up and see he was okay. After making sure he was okay she could
         not say why she had not called an ambulance. She asked him to go to
         the doctor, but he was stubborn about it and would not go.

      d) When pushed why she did not make him seek  medical  assistance  she
         was unable to give a reason.

13. I asked her about her relationship with the appellant and she confirmed
    they began their relationship almost straight away but she continued to
    live at home and they are currently not engaged.

    SUBMISSIONS

14. Mr Avery  invited  the  Tribunal  to  find  the  appellant  had  either
    exaggerated his condition or was making it all up. The Judge had  found
    his core account lacked credibility and rejected his protection  claim.
    That finding was relevant when considering the medical evidence.

15. Mr Avery submitted the medical evidence was flawed and it was  unlikely
    the doctor had seen the Judge's decision. The Judge had considered  his
    accounts and at  paragraphs  27  and  28  he  identified  discrepancies
    between the accounts provided by the appellant to interviewer  and  the
    professor. The professor repeated  what  the  appellant  told  him  but
    failed to mention any of the Judge's findings in the decision and  this
    undermined the usefulness of the assessment provided.  The  professor's
    finding at paragraph 35 that the appellant  suffered  from  significant
    depression was equivocal and not a determinative finding.

16. His claim about attempting  suicide  must  be  looked  at  against  the
    background of other evidence. Ms M A K did not see  the  need  to  seek
    medical assistance even though she claimed he was in a bad way and  she
    was unaware of the tablets he had taken. Although he  claimed  to  have
    been to see his doctor, he had not been prescribed  any  medication  to
    treat. He submitted there was no serious mental health problem.

17. Country evidence in the CPIN report (see page 19)  confirms  there  are
    limited mental health facilities and NGOs in Pakistan.  The  "Expanding
    Mental Health in Pakistan" (page 49) confirms that families do  provide
    support for people with mental health problems.

18. With regard to his family fleeing to Afghanistan he submitted this  was
    an attempt by him to say he had no family. There was no reason why they
    could not have contacted him or why  they  would  flee  to  Afghanistan
    rather than a different area of Pakistan.

19. Turning to paragraph 111 of GS (India) and Ors c SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    40 he submitted that the absence or  inadequacy  of  medical  treatment
    carried limited weight in article 8  situations.  At  paragraph  37  of
    Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002  Part  5A-complling  test:  Mauritius)
    [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) the test on integration is set out.

20. Mr Avery concluded that his medical condition was not as bad as he made
    out and he would have some family support in Pakistan.

21. Mr Bradshaw adopted his skeleton argument and responded to  Mr  Avery's
    submissions. Whilst Professor Zeitlin does not refer to  the  decision,
    he did consider the possibility  of  the  appellant  manufacturing  his
    evidence. He relied on paragraphs 19-24 of his  skeleton  argument.  In
    paragraph 49 of the report the Professor noted that the truthfulness of
    the account  was  important  and  accepted  fabrication  could  not  be
    excluded but concluded that regardless he felt the diagnosis  stood  up
    to scrutiny.

22. Turning to his suicide attempt, Mr Bradshaw relied on his  account  and
    submitted that it was not an attempt to bolster his claim. Even  if  it
    was not a firm suicide attempt it was an act  of  self-harm.  Ms  MAK's
    evidence should be taken at face value and  provided  support  for  his
    claim.

23. Mr Bradshaw addressed the CPIN report and argued this report  supported
    what the country expert had said as it highlighted a distinct  lack  of
    facilities. The appellant would be unable to access medical  facilities
    where he lived because he lived  around  2-3  hours  from  the  nearest
    largest city. He submitted that the appellant would be unable to access
    the kind of treatment Professor  Zeitlin  says  he  needed.  To  access
    regular treatment, he would have to relocate and therefore even if  his
    family were still in his home area he would  be  living  alone,  if  he
    relocated to where the facilities were. The "Expanding Mental Health in
    Pakistan" report must be balanced against the evidence provided by  the
    appellant in his bundle.

24. With regard to his family, Mr Bradshaw explained that being a Pakistani
    Pashtun family marginalised his family and there was also the risk from
    the Taliban. The FTT Judge accepted the Taliban were active in his home
    area and there was a good reason why his family had relocated.

25. Mr Bradshaw submitted that GS was not relevant to significant obstacles
    test (paragraph 276ADE HC 395) albeit it was relevant  to  applications
    outside the Rules. This was an application that the appellant satisfied
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395. His skeleton argument, at paragraphs 8  and  9
    of his skeleton argument, address  what  "very  significant  obstacles"
    meant as expanded upon by the Court of Appeal in Parveen v SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 932. The court in Parveen altered what the Tribunal  had  said
    in Treebhawon. Paragraph 12 of the skeleton set  out  the  respondent's
    own guidance.

26. Mr Bradshaw invited the Tribunal to have regard to the expert  evidence
    of Dr Wali (in particular, paragraphs 72-74) and if he  was  struggling
    to access services here then how would he  cope  in  Pakistan.  Letters
    from the college confirm he is struggling. He asked that  the  Tribunal
    have regard to underlined sections of Section B  of  the  bundle  which
    confirmed the expert's view that stigma is a real problem.

27. There was a general threat from  the  Taliban  even  if  there  was  no
    specific threat. This was impacting on his mental health. He  submitted
    the appellant would be unable to build a normal  life  because  of  his
    mental health.

28. Alternatively, he invited consideration under article 8 ECHR and whilst
    a mental health claim cannot be the basis for an  article  8  claim  it
    would be a factor to take into  account.  He  has  a  girlfriend  which
    demonstrated an extension to his private life and  had  been  here  for
    almost three years.

    FINDINGS

29. I am invited by Mr Bradshaw to allow the appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds (article 8 ECHR) on  the  grounds  he  either  satisfied
    paragraph 276(1)(vi)ADE HC  395  or  on  the  standalone  private  life
    grounds set out above.

30. In assessing the appellant's appeal, I  have  had  regard  to  all  the
    evidence referred to above and I have  taken  into  account  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance No. 2 of  2010  in  view  of  the  mental  health
    concerns expressed in the report.

31. However, in assessing what may await the appellant in Pakistan  I  must
    refer to the unchallenged findings in the FTT Judge's  decision.  These
    are:

      a) The Judge rejected his claim that he had been taken by the  Taliban
         (once or twice) and his consequent claim that he escaped  was  also
         rejected.

      b) The Judge did not accept the Taliban had  been  back  to  his  home
         address.

      c) There was no background evidence to confirm that  the  young  child
         randomly recruited would retain the interest of the Taliban for the
         length of time claimed by the appellant.

      d) The appellant had fabricated his account to present a greater risk.

32. Professor Zeitlin has provided a report about  the  appellant's  mental
    health, dated April 29, 2018. In his original report he concluded  that
    the appellant did not  demonstrate  evidence  of  a  major  psychiatric
    disorder but noticeably lowered mood, sleep problems  and  weight  loss
    were consistent with recent  onset  of  mild  depressive  disorder.  He
    further concluded that it was possible that someone with  his  symptoms
    could come under the heading of PTSD but his  overall  condition  would
    fit more with Adjustment Disorder. He acknowledged that  the  appellant
    may  have  had  pre-existing  experiences  and  behaviours  that  would
    indicate vulnerability but went on to conclude that he was unlikely  to
    make any significant changes until he had a relatively  clear  security
    and safety. This latter finding was based on the fact  the  appellant's
    account was true and his  conclusions  in  this  report  must  be  read
    against the background of the Judge's decision to reject his protection
    claim and effectively to find that he had fabricated his claim.

33. I previously set aside the Judge's decision because this earlier report
    failed to  take  into  account  country  conditions  in  Pakistan.  The
    Professor has since provided an updated report dated January 20, 2019.

34. Mr Avery has criticised the report for failing to consider the  Judge's
    findings. This more recent report does not identify what documents were
    provided to the Professor and I was not provided  with  the  letter  of
    instruction. Mr Bradshaw did not state the Professor had been  provided
    with Judge's decision and I must therefore consider  this  report  with
    this qualification in mind.

35. The appellant's care worker, Stephanie Allen, reported to the Professor
    that since April 2018 the appellant's mental health had been  declining
    and that he had been referred to the  Cambridgeshire  and  Peterborough
    Foundation Trust for counselling. She described how the  appellant  was
    "overwhelmed" by what was going to happen and  although  meetings  have
    been arranged for him with NACRO he was not  attending  such  meetings.
    She referred to the fact he was self-harming but had seen  no  evidence
    personally of this. Ms Allen did not believe the appellant had  contact
    with his family and she believed they were in Afghanistan based on what
    she had been told by the appellant. She did not think he  had  had  any
    mental health assessment.

36. The appellant's claim is that he has attempted to take an  overdose  on
    three occasions and his girlfriend said that she found him on the floor
    on one such occasion but did not call the doctor or ambulance over this
    incident.

37. The Professor discussed general matters with the appellant. He noted he
    was no longer attending college because he did not sleep well  and  had
    negative thoughts in relation to self-harm. The tablets he  claimed  to
    have taken  had  been  bought  over-the-counter  without  prescription.
    Neither the appellant nor his girlfriend were  able  to  identify  what
    tablet he may have taken although the appellant stated he had  been  to
    counselling he had not discussed self-harm  with  them.  The  appellant
    confirmed was not taking  any  medication  although  he  suffered  from
    headaches.

38. At paragraph 23 of the report the Professor stated  that  his  opinions
    were dependent on the accuracy of the  information  available  and  the
    truthfulness of the statements made. This is important when considering
    possible problems that could face the appellant if he were returned  to
    Pakistan.

39. The Professor has prepared his report on the basis of what he  recorded
    in paragraph 25 of the report. He noted the  appellant  appeared  vague
    and frequently stated he could not remember things  and  the  Professor
    concluded  that  whilst  dementia  could  not  be  fully  excluded  his
    impression was that the appellant was not  able  to  make  use  of  his
    continuing normal level of cognitive function. His conclusion was  that
    the level of depression identified in the previous report had increased
    and he would now describe the appellant as having a moderate depressive
    disorder  whereas  previously  he  was  described  as  having  a   mild
    depressive disorder. He believed there was no major change with  regard
    to proposed treatment from that expressed in the original report. Based
    on the information available to him  he  concluded  that  a  return  to
    Pakistan was feasible if he had family and suitable  health  facilities
    available to address his ongoing condition.

40. I have considered the Professor's report, but  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's problems is prefaced by what he was told by the  appellant.
    As he stated in his reports if the information is  not  true  then  the
    opinions may well change.

41. There is no doubt the appellant presented as a person who does not want
    to return to Pakistan and has concerns if he were ordered to  go  back.
    It is not surprising that his mood  has  deteriorated  since  September
    2018 because:

      a) He would be aware the respondent was appealing the decision.

      b) He would also have been aware that his protection  claim  had  been
         rejected.

      c) Following the hearing in November 2018 he will be  aware  that  his
         right to remain in this country was under further scrutiny.

42. Bearing in mind his age and immaturity his reaction to  the  threat  of
    being returned is understandable.

43. Mr Bradshaw invited me to allow this appeal on the basis the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE HC 395 albeit under  the
    umbrella of article 8 ECHR.

44. In order to succeed on this basis the appellant must  demonstrate  that
    there would be "very significant obstacles" to his integration into the
    country to which he would have to go.

45. The starting point is that he has had his protection claim rejected and
    his claim that his family were no longer in Pakistan must be considered
    against this rejection of other core elements  in  his  claim.  At  the
    original First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Judge rejected his protection
    claim in its entirety.

46. Today's challenge does not seek to  go  behind  those  findings  and  I
    approach the appellant's private life claim under both the  Immigration
    Rules and article 8 ECHR on this basis.

47. I have taken into account the report  provided  by  Cambridgeshire  and
    Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust dated June 20, 2018.  I  assume  this
    report would have been available to the First-tier Tribunal due to  the
    date of the report.  Psychometric  tests  described  the  appellant  as
    suffering from moderate/severe depression and severe anxiety. There  is
    evidence of two appointments to commence Cognitive Behavioural  Therapy
    but it does not appear to be the case that the appellant took advantage
    of these.

48. I have considered two letters  from  Peterborough  City  Council  dated
    November 23, 2018 and January 21,  2019.  These  letters  indicate  the
    appellant has been struggling with mental health and had  been  to  his
    Doctor although other evidence suggests he has not been prescribed  any
    medication for his condition.

49. Whilst I accept the appellant be depressed  and/or  anxious  I  am  not
    persuaded that the appellant has a serious mental health condition.  He
    has not sought the advice of a doctor or specialist at  any  stage.  He
    stated in his oral evidence that he had not  been  to  see  his  doctor
    about these issues. He may have discussed his problems with his  social
    worker, the Professor and his girlfriend but these people are  not  the
    ones who would be able to help him.

50. There is no evidence of what medication he said he had been taking.  By
    his own admission he has  bought  medication  over-the-counter  from  a
    supermarket or chemist.  He  has  never  had  a  formal  mental  health
    assessment.

51. His girlfriend stated she found him on the floor but despite  this  she
    did not ring the emergency services nor ensure the  appellant  went  to
    see the doctor about it.

52. Although he  claimed  to  have  taken  a  tablets,  with  the  specific
    intention of self-harm, the appellant has sought no  help  or  reported
    such matters to doctor or the emergency services.

53. When comparing mental health or medical  facilities  in  Pakistan  with
    those in the United Kingdom it is important to remember that  they  are
    two different countries and the fact facilities in this country may  be
    better than those in Pakistan does not mean that he should  be  allowed
    to remain in this country.

54.  The  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Pakistan:  Medical   and
    healthcare issues dated  August  2018  contains  a  section  on  mental
    health. There are mental hospitals in Pakistan,  344  residential  care
    facilities and 654 psychiatric units in general hospitals. However, the
    report stresses more than 15 million people  in  Pakistan  suffer  from
    some form of mental illness and there are only five hospitals servicing
    a population 180 million people.

55. A recent article entitled "World Mental  Health  Day  today"  cited  Dr
    Mufti as saying that young people are vulnerable to mental illness  due
    to stress caused by the struggle for a better life. An article entitled
    "Expanding Mental Health in Pakistan", prepared by the  director  of  a
    psychiatric hospital in Karachi, described what treatment was available
    in the psychiatric hospital in  Karachi.  This  establishment  provided
    free psychiatric medicine to the poor. He described  that  there  is  a
    cultural aspect to  Pakistan  which  played  a  positive  role  in  the
    treatment and care of people with mental illness in that  people  still
    lived within the family environment and the Islamic belief instilled  a
    greater acceptance of mishaps tragedies.

56. Dr Wali provided a report on the availability of services  in  Pakistan
    dated January 21, 2019. He was asked to  consider  the  possibility  of
    accessing psychiatric/psychological care in Pakistan, what the  current
    situation in Pakistan was for people suffering with mental illness  and
    thirdly  could  the  appellant  safely  relocate  in  another  part  of
    Pakistan. His report mirrors the CPIN and identifies limited facilities
    especially in rural areas. At paragraph 28 of his report he  identifies
    there are an estimated 96,430 private health facilities in  what  is  a
    large unregulated part of Pakistani healthcare. Contrary  to  what  was
    recorded elsewhere he stated  there  was  a  stigmatisation  of  mental
    illness and negative cultural attitudes had hindered the development of
    mental  health  and  the  appellant  would  be  in  danger  of   social
    victimisation and possibly ostracised  from  the  community  and  taken
    forcibly to a religious healer to "remove  the  evil  spirit".  Without
    family support he would struggle to live in Pakistan or secure housing,
    employment, suitable health and mental care or education. He  would  be
    unable to afford private mental health care in Pakistan and he would be
    unable to survive on his own for financial reasons alone.

57. Dr Wali's report is prepared on the preface that he has no  support  in
    Pakistan. It is clear that this expert has not been made aware  of  the
    Judge's earlier decision. The report does not address the issue, in any
    substance, from the perspective that he does have family to whom he can
    turn to. Mr Bradshaw submitted that internal relocation  could  not  be
    possible because he would have to live alone but that submission  fails
    to address the fact he has support available to him who could  relocate
    with him, if necessary.

58. I have also considered material contained in  section  B  of  the  most
    recent appellant bundle.  Relevant  material  emphasises  the  lack  of
    psychiatrists outside of  urban  areas  and  re-emphasises  that  those
    battling mental health illness do feel the sense  of  shame,  dishonour
    and disgrace.

59. In his skeleton argument, Mr Bradshaw set out case law  in  respect  of
    "integration"  and  "very  significant  obstacles".  In  assessing  the
    latter, I have had regard to the guidance issued by the Court of Appeal
    in Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932.

60. The evidence provided by the  appellant's  representatives  has  to  be
    looked at against the earlier findings and the evidence that  has  been
    presented by the appellant and to a lesser extent his girlfriend.

61. I am prepared to accept  the  appellant  suffers  from  depression  and
    anxiety but these have not been serious enough  to  require  prescribed
    medication and there is no evidence of the appellant  engaging  in  any
    meaningful process with medical services. These concerns are reasonably
    likely to relate to the instability he currently  faces  and  the  fact
    that removal to Pakistan remains a realistic prospect for him.

62. I am satisfied, contrary to his claim, that he does have family to whom
    he can turn to. There is family support which the experts suggest would
    be necessary. He can turn to his family and I do not accept  his  claim
    they have fled Pakistan and gone to Afghanistan. Whilst the Taliban may
    have a presence in Pakistan, I am not satisfied they present any  issue
    to him either on a personal general basis.

63. I therefore find the appellant does not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

64. I have gone on to consider his appeal outside of the Immigration  Rules
    but as Mr Avery submitted, and Mr Bradshaw  accepted,  the  absence  of
    mental health facilities cannot form the  basis  of  his  private  life
    claim. He does have a girlfriend but they do  not  live  together.  The
    appellant has not been attending college.

65. I accept he can speak English but there are no other  positive  factors
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Removal,  based  on  the  findings
    above, would not lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences such that his
    removal would be disproportionate.


    Notice of Decision

66. There was an error of law in respect of article 8 ECHR. I  have  remade
    the decision and dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds.  In  all
    other respects the decision is upheld.


Signed                              Date     15/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     15/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
