
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03828/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 18, 2018                          |On January 22, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR S F M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Tuckers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq. He entered the  United  Kingdom  on
    November 29, 2015 claimed asylum the following day.

 3. The respondent refused his application on April 2, 2014 under paragraph
    336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on April 18, 2016 and  the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cooper (hereinafter called
    the Judge) on May 19, 2017. In a decision promulgated on June 13,  2017
    the Judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on June 27, 2017 arguing the Judge
    had erred. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Pedro on September 25, 2017. Grounds of appeal were
    renewed and on November 21, 2017 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the Judge may  have  erred  in
    her approach to internal relocation and sufficiency of protection.

 6. The respondent filed a Rule  24  response  in  which  she  opposed  the
    permission.

 7. The case came before  me  on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. Having heard submissions, I  reserved  my
    decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Daykin adopted her grounds of appeal and submitted the  Judge  erred
    in her approach to sufficiency of protection within the IKR. The  Judge
    had found the appellant's claim credible and in doing so  she  accepted
    that he had been attacked by an unknown terrorist group in Sulaymaniyah
    in 2011 and he had to flee the area. The Judge also accepted  that  the
    appellant, his parents and his mentally disabled brother were moved  by
    the Asayh to Mosul to a place  of  safety  paid  for  by  the  security
    forces. The appellant's sister, brother-in-law and  maternal  aunt  and
    uncle remained  in  Sulaymaniyah  and  were  never  approached  by  the
    authorities. The Judge accepted  the  appellant  found  work  in  Mosul
    working in the local PUK headquarters as a  chef  and  he  remained  in
    Mosul until Daesh entered Mosul in June 2014 at which time  it  was  no
    longer safe to remain there and he and his family fled and  went  to  a
    refugee camp in Turkey. The issue for the Judge was whether he could be
    safely returned to the IKR as the Judge accepted return to Baghdad  was
    not possible. Ms Daykin submitted that against the above  findings  the
    Judge erred in finding he could return either to a place where  he  had
    to flee from or to another part of the IKR.

 9. Ms  Pal  adopted  the  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  the  Judge's
    conclusion the appellant could safely return was a finding open to her.
    She had noted that since 2011 his sister and other family  members  had
    not been approached by anyone looking for him. This suggested he was no
    longer of interest to anyone either in Sulaymaniyah or elsewhere in the
    IKR.

10. In response Ms Daykin made the point that  the  appellant's  family  in
    Sulaymaniyah had never  experienced  any  problems  but  this  had  not
    prevented the Judge accepting the threats had been made. She pointed to
    the Judge's finding at paragraph 30(vi)  of  the  Judge's  decision  in
    which the Judge recorded the appellant had to leave the IKR because the
    security forces decided he would not be safe there.

11. Having heard the submissions I reserved my decision.




    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR IN LAW

12. The Judge found the appellant was a credible witness and stated at [49]
    of her decision-

         "I find that the appellant has demonstrated he  did  have  a  well-
         founded fear of reprisal from the terrorist group  and  that  as  a
         result his family were provided with protection from the  KRG  with
         armed security in Sulaymaniyah and their subsequent  relocation  to
         another city. I find the  evidence  demonstrates  the  Asaysh  were
         unable  to  provide  the  appellant  with  adequate  protection  in
         Sulaymaniyah in 2011. However,  the  move  to  Mosul  afforded  the
         family adequate protection as on the appellant's own account he and
         his family lived without difficulty in Mosul  until  Daesh  entered
         the city in June 2014."

13. At [50] the Judge reminded herself that  she  was  now  concerned  with
    whether the appellant's fear  was  now  well-founded  and  whether  the
    authorities would be able to provide sufficiency  of  protection.  From
    [51] onwards the Judge considered this issue.

14. The Judge concluded the appellant could return to the IKR because:

      a) The risk posed to the appellant in 2011 had been from unknown  non-
         state agents.

      b) Since fleeing Sulaymaniyah the  appellant's  remaining  family  had
         experienced no problems  whatsoever  with  this  unknown  terrorist
         group.

      c) There was no supporting evidence that the  appellant  would  be  at
         risk in another part of the IKR and the letter from  the  Brigadier
         General of the Asaysh made no mention of any ongoing threat or risk
         nor did it indicate the KRG (now IKR) would be  unable  to  provide
         protection.

      d) The terrorists did not find him in Mosul so  no  reason  to  assume
         they would find him in the IKR.

      e) The fact witness protection was provided in 2011 suggests there  is
         a willingness to provide protection even within Sulaymaniyah.

15. The issue in this appeal is simple namely were the Judge's  conclusions
    open to her or were they perverse or not sustainable in  light  of  the
    evidence and findings made.

16. The Judge clearly spent a considerable period of time  considering  the
    evidence in this appeal and in many respects,  she  accepted  what  the
    appellant claimed. When considering the risk in June 2017 the Judge had
    to decide (a) did the risk remain in the IKR be  that  Sulaymaniyah  or
    elsewhere and (b) was there sufficiency of protection.

17. The purpose of an appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not to reconsider the
    evidence that was presented but  to  consider  whether  the  Judge,  in
    reaching a conclusion, had made an error in law.

18. In R and Others  v  SSHD  (2005)  EWCA  Civ  982  Lord  Justice  Brooke
    summarised the points of law which would be encountered most frequently
    in practice as follows:

      i) making  perverse  or  irrational  findings  on  matters  that  were
         material to the outcome

     ii) failure to give reasons or any adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters

    iii) failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts  of  fact  or
         opinion on material matters

     iv) giving weight to immaterial matters

      v) making a material misdirection of law on any material matter

     vi) committing or permitting a procedural or other irregularity capable
         of making a material difference to the outcome or fairness  of  the
         proceedings

    vii) making a mistake as to a material fact which could  be  established
         by objective and uncontentious evidence when the  appellant  and/or
         his advisors  were  not  responsible  for  the  mistake  and  where
         unfairness resulted from the fact that a mistake was made.

19. I have to ask myself whether any of the findings made by the Judge fell
    into the above categories and it seems the only potential argument that
    Ms Daykin could put before me was contained in [18(i)].

20. Ms Daykin argued that the fact the family had not  been  contacted  was
    not relevant. The Judge felt it was a relevant fact  and  gave  reasons
    for reaching that conclusion and went further by stating that  if  this
    group was so powerful then why had no attempts been made to locate  him
    elsewhere. That conclusion was one the Judge was entitled to form.

21. The country  evidence,  referred  to  by  the  Judge,  identified  that
    protection is available and the fact the appellant previously  received
    such protection was evidence of  that  fact.  The  Judge  clearly  felt
    circumstances in 2011 were different to those  facing  her  today.  The
    appellant may feel he is unable to return to Sulaymaniyah, despite  the
    lack of activity against him, but the Judge  gave  reasons  why  return
    elsewhere within the IKR was possible.

22. The findings made by the Judge are  neither  perverse  nor  irrational.
    They were well  reasoned  and  in  those  circumstances,  it  would  be
    inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal  to  interfere  with  the  Judge's
    decision.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  Judge's
    decision.


Signed                              Date     January 18, 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable because the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed                              Date     January 18, 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

