
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03113/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   a a n m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Dylan Conrad
                    Kreolle Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Zambia  born  on  13  August  1962  who
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 30 January 2018 to refuse her Protection claim.  In  a
    decision promulgated on 30 August 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The appellant appeals
    with permission on the grounds that the Tribunal erred in:

      i) Ground 1 - not accepting the documents submitted by  the  appellant
         in support of her claim to be at risk of persecution for reason  of
         being a trafficked woman.

     ii) Ground 2 - not finding the appellant to be at real risk of  serious
         harm or that there would be a breach of the protected rights  under
         Articles 2, 3 or 8 on return to Zimbabwe.

Error of Law Discussion

 2. Expanding on the grounds Mr  Moriarty  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to make properly reasoned findings in relation to whether or not
    the appellant is a victim of trafficking and although the  reasons  for
    refusal referred to a National Referral  Mechanism  decision,  dated  6
    February 2017, concluding that  the  appellant  was  not  a  victim  of
    trafficking, there was  no  copy  of  that  decision  provided  by  the
    respondent or indeed  considered  by  the  Tribunal.   It  was  further
    submitted that it was  unclear  from  the  judge's  reasoning  why  the
    appellant's oral evidence was rejected.

 3. In addition, although the respondent's Rule 24 response relied  on  the
    Court of Appeal in MS (Pakistan)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  594  (in  summary,
    unless the  appellant  can  show  that  the  trafficking  decision  was
    irrational or  perverse  a  statutory  appeal  could  not  be  used  to
    indirectly challenge those findings) as I identified at the hearing the
    Upper Tribunal in ES (s.82 NIAA 2002 negative NRM) Albania [2018]  UKUT
    00335  confirmed  that  a  previous  decision  made  by  the  Competent
    Authority is not of primary relevance in the determination of an asylum
    appeal.  Mr Moriarty also relied on what  was  said  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MN [2018] EWHC 3268 including in relation to  the  importance
    of the lower  standard  of  proof  in  protection  claims  whereas  the
    competent authority is the balance  of  probabilities.   The  Court  of
    Appeal, at paragraph 60, did not accept that the court in MS (Pakistan)
    was intending to make a change to  the  function  of  the  Tribunal  in
    asylum/Article 3 cases, nor did MS (Pakistan) change  the  standard  of
    proof in those cases.

 4. The judge, at [29], noted the submissions that the appellant was not  a
    victim of trafficking as per the referral mechanism decision.   However
    the judge in his findings failed to give any specific consideration  to
    this issue  or  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  he  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to be trafficked; the judge appears therefore to have
    taken the decision of the competent authority at face value.

 5. In relation to ground 1 and the criticism of the judge's  treatment  of
    documents Mr Moriarty referred to the documents the appellant  provided
    in support of her claim that she was trafficked  and  specifically  the
    detailed document from Ashiana Sheffield (a trafficking project)  dated
    28 June 2016 which  purported  to  provide  additional  information  in
    relation to the appellant's claim to have  been  trafficked  which  the
    judge failed to appear to  fail  to  consider  and  did  not  give  any
    adequate reasons as to why it was rejected, if that was the case.

 6. In addition, at [44], the judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  oral  and
    written evidence but failed to give any reasons as to why this was  the
    case.  At  [48]  the  judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  against  the
    appellant for failing to provide any evidence from the woman in Ireland
    who had assisted her.  However, at [23] of the decision and reasons, it
    was recorded that the appellant stated that she had lost touch with the
    woman who helped in her Ireland and she did not  know  if  she  was  in
    Ireland or in Nigeria.  Again, it is unclear whether or not  the  judge
    rejected this explanation as it is not addressed.

 7. Although the judge, at [43], stated that the  appellant's  evidence  at
    interview was 'contradictory and  internally  inconsistent'  the  judge
    failed to provide any examples as to why this was the case.

 8. It was not argued that the  respondent  was  required  to  authenticate
    documents. However, although the  judge  had  directed  himself  as  to
    Tanveer Ahmed he failed to apply that holistic approach but instead had
    rejected the evidence because he felt that the documents did not  "look
    genuine to me" ([45]).  I agree with Mr  Moriarty  that  this  was  the
    wrong approach.

 9. In addition the judge, at  [47],  gave  little  weight  to  the  letter
    produced from the appellant's son as he had not attended  the  hearing,
    whereas it was not specifically in dispute that the appellant's son was
    resident in Zambia.

10. Mr Walker, for the respondent, conceded  that  there  was  considerable
    force in the appellant's arguments including specifically  the  failure
    to take into consideration the appellant's account of why she  did  not
    have any more information from the woman who assisted  her  in  Ireland
    and also in relation to what was said at [47] in relation to  the  non-
    attendance of her son.  Mr  Walker  noted  that  the  main  credibility
    finding  was  at  [42]  and  it  was  his  submission  that  this   was
    insufficient and amounted to a material error of law as the judge ought
    to have taken into account and considered, for  himself,  applying  the
    lower standard of proof, the appellant's claim to have been trafficked.
     Mr Walker submitted that the judge did not appear to have done so.  Mr
    Walker further submitted that  the  cumulative  errors,  including  the
    error in relation to the non-attendance of her son, given that  he  was
    in Zambia, and the error in relation to the appellant having  given  an
    explanation as to why there was  no  information  from  the  woman  who
    assisted her in Ireland, were sufficient  to  mean  that  the  decision
    could not stand.

11. I was grateful for the assistance of  both  representatives.   For  the
    reasons discussed, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    errors of law such that it falls to be set aside.  Given the nature and
    extent of the fact-finding required I remit the appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Taylor House to be considered de  novo,  other  than  by
    Judge Shore.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable.  No fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
