
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03733/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 August 2017                     |On 6 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    [A S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, [AS], was born on [ ] 1992 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 8 August 2013 to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following refusal of his claim for asylum and human rights claim.   The
    appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Robinson)  and  was
    dismissed by a decision promulgated on  6  June  2017.   The  appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keane on 3 July 2017.

 2. At the hearing at the Upper Tribunal sitting in Liverpool on 31  August
    2017, Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared
    for the respondent.  The appellant was not present at court nor was  he
    represented.  I am satisfied that a notice of the hearing was served on
    the appellant at his last known address in Liverpool  by  second  class
    post on 13 July 2017.  There is nothing on the court file  to  indicate
    that the  notice  of  hearing  failed  to  reach  the  appellant.   The
    appellant has provided no/no satisfactory reason for failing to attend.
     In the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing in the  absence  of
    the appellant.  Having reviewed the file carefully  and  having  regard
    for the matters detailed above, I consider that it is in the  interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing (see Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, paragraph 38).

 3. Granting permission, Judge Keane had found that there was no  merit  in
    the grounds as drafted by the appellant himself.  However, Judge  Keane
    noted that at [37],  Judge  Robinson  had  made  reference  to  earlier
    proceedings before a differently  constituted  Tribunal  involving  the
    same appellant.  In July 2015, the appellant  had  appealed  against  a
    refusal to grant him a residence card and had attended a  hearing  with
    his wife.  Judge Robinson noted that, "he was found to be an unreliable
    and untruthful witness of fact.  The Tribunal found that  his  marriage
    was a marriage  of  convenience.   Nevertheless,  the  appellant  still
    asserts that it was a genuine relationship".  Judge Keane found that it
    was arguable that Judge Robinson had relied upon an immaterial  matter.
    Judge Keane stated that it was "arguable that the judge in the  instant
    appeal should have confined his consideration to the evidence presented
    and it was arguably irrelevant that the appellant had not been believed
    at an earlier hearing".

 4. I have to say I do not agree with Judge Keane.  I find there is nothing
    inappropriate whatever regarding the reference made by  Judge  Robinson
    at [37] to the previous proceedings.  Indeed, Judge Robinson  is  doing
    no more than stating a fact; the appellant had been found by a previous
    Tribunal to be an unreliable and truthful witness  and  a  party  to  a
    marriage of convenience.  Within  the  instant  proceedings,  the  same
    appellant had asserted that the marriage previously found to be one  of
    convenience was genuine; the findings of fact of the previous  Tribunal
    which had considered the same matter of the appellant's  marriage  were
    manifestly relevant to Judge Robinson's deliberations.  Moreover, it is
    clear, even if Judge Robinson should not have considered those previous
    appeal, it played little, if any, role  in  his  determination  of  the
    appellant's credibility in the instant  proceedings.   At  [46],  Judge
    Robinson wrote:

         "In light  of  all  the  evidence  before  me,  in  particular  the
         inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  of  his  relationships
         with other men highlighted in  the  refusal  letter,  the  lack  of
         reliable evidence about his sexual orientation, the timing  of  his
         partner's decision to leave the UK and return to  Romania  and  the
         general lack of any coherent reason for not applying for asylum  at
         an earlier opportunity, I  conclude  that  the  appellant  has  not
         demonstrated that his account is reliable and can be  believed.   I
         find that his core story about his claimed sexual orientation,  the
         nature of the relationship with [CP], his relationship  with  other
         men in Pakistan and the UK, his claim to have  been  in  a  genuine
         relationship with a Romanian woman is unreliable.  I take the  view
         that he has fabricated an account  in  order  to  support  a  false
         asylum claim.  I do not accept that he has shown he has  a  genuine
         fear of persecution on the grounds that he is bisexual or gay."

 5. The judge was entitled to find that the appellant's claim to have  been
    in a genuine relationship with a Romanian woman was false  and  he  was
    entitled to  consider,  in  reaching  that  finding,  that  a  previous
    Tribunal had found the appellant to be an unreliable witness.   In  any
    event, it is clear from the first part of the paragraph  which  I  have
    just quoted above, that the reasons given by Judge Robinson for finding
    that the appellant was not credible, whilst numerous, are not primarily
    founded upon the  findings  of  the  previous  Tribunal.   The  judge's
    decision is legally sound and is supported by cogent and reasoning.  In
    the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 5 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
