
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03082/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 April 2017                          |  On 13 July 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                   mr S J
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, instructed by AH Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr S J against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge who in March 2016 heard  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal of his asylum claim.   The  judge  found  him  to  lack
    credibility, the basis of his claim being that he was at risk on return
    to Pakistan on account of his sexuality.  There are  three  grounds  of
    challenge to the judge's decision and I will take them in the order  in
    which Mr Kotas took them rather than the way in which  Mr  Dhanji  took
    them.

2.   The first point  is  the  point  concerning  claimed  contamination  of
    evidence.  This arises from what is said  by  the  judge  at  paragraph
    20(a).  Mr A, who is said  to  be  Mr  S  J's  partner,  was  asked  in
    examination-in-chief when his relationship with the appellant  started.
    He said it was in January 2011.  At this point Ms Martin the Presenting
    Officer said that she saw the appellant, who was sitting behind  Mr  A,
    say something.  "I asked the appellant to  explain  what  he  had  been
    doing.  He said he had been reciting his holy prayers.  I told  him  he
    must move to another area of the hearing room".  And  the  argument  in
    this regard is that the judge was wrong to attach any weight to that on
    the basis that it seems from the  witness  statement  of  Counsel,  who
    appeared below, that the judge said she had not seen anything and there
    was then a clear explanation for this.  I think in the end this is  not
    a matter of any particular materiality.  It  does  not  seem  that  the
    judge attached any particular significance  to  that.   I  accept  that
    cumulatively she came to adverse credibility findings and that may have
    played a part but she did not expressly attach any significance to  it.



3.   The second point is the matter dealt with at  paragraph  20(d)  of  the
    judge's decision.  Both Mr S J and Mr A had  been  found  by  the  Home
    Office to have obtained leave to remain by deception in relation to the
    use of an English language test  certificate.   The  judge  noted  that
    neither of them had appealed against the  respondent's  decision.   The
    appellant had sought to appeal in the United Kingdom but was  found  to
    have no in-country right of appeal.  She noted that  he  had  taken  no
    steps to appeal out of country.  Mr A had not appealed the decision, he
    had issued judicial review proceedings.  The basis of those proceedings
    had not been explained.  There was no evidence of any  judicial  review
    proceedings before the judge and she said there was no evidence to show
    that Mr A even obtained leave or the proceedings had progressed in  any
    way.  She sought  to  clarify  with  both  of  them  whether  they  had
    contacted ETS and said remarkably neither of them had taken  any  steps
    to do this and regarded the failure to appeal against the  respondent's
    decisions and/or pursue the  matter  with  ETS  directly  as  having  a
    significant bearing on the credibility.  So there  are  two  points  in
    this, the two reasons as to why she saw this impacting significantly on
    credibility.  And the point of course that  Mr  Dhanji  makes  is  that
    appealing out of country would have been completely impossible for Mr S
    J since it is risk on return that he  fears  and  therefore  no  remedy
    along those lines could possibly have been pursued and I think there is
    merit to that point.

4.   As regards not pursuing the matter with ETS directly  I  think  it  was
    said in the grounds or in a witness statement that pursuing the  matter
    with ETS was beside the point.  The decision was one of  the  Secretary
    of State.  I can see some point to the judge's reasoning there  in  the
    sense that it may be a matter that could go to  provide  some  evidence
    going contrary to the evidential burden  which  it  has  been  held  is
    narrowly discharged by the Secretary of State in ETS cases by means  of
    the usual witness statements of Mr Millington  and  Ms  Collings.   But
    attaching significant weight of one of those two factors to the failure
    to appeal the respondent's decision does seem to  me  to  be  a  matter
    where the judge erred in attaching weight to that where it  was  simply
    in practical, realistic terms, impossible for Mr S J to do that.

5.   The main point of concern I think is the question of  the  evidence  of
    the three witnesses which was not taken into consideration.  The  judge
    noted that evidence had been provided by Mr K, Mr U and Mr  R  and  yet
    referred  to  a  striking  absence  of  evidence  as  to  the   claimed
    relationship from friends, no evidence from a  single  person  who  was
    present at  the  civil  partnership  ceremony  or  celebration  and  no
    evidence from either the witnesses at the ceremony  although  there  is
    some evidence of the celebration  in  that  Mr  R  attended  the  party
    afterwards but he was not able to attend the ceremony itself.  But more
    particularly there is the content of the three witness statements.   Mr
    Kotas argued that they could not really take matters any further  since
    the judge was not satisfied that the attendance at meetings  of  Imaan,
    with which organisation I think Mr  K  and  Mr  U  are  concerned,  was
    anything more than an attempt to bolster the appellant's  claim  but  I
    think in a way that puts the cart before the horse.   The  judge  might
    have taken a different view of the evidence of attendance  of  meetings
    of Imaan if she had taken into account the evidence of Mr S J and Mr  U
    who provided both of them some detail about the way in which they first
    met the appellant and Mr A and some detail as to their  observation  of
    the relationship between them.  In my view that is the main matter that
    is a cause of concern in this case.  It seems to me that it  goes  very
    much to the heart of the credibility findings given  that  the  central
    issue, that of the appellant's sexuality, was disbelieved  and  yet  we
    have three witness statements which were not taken into  account  which
    could be said to bear materially on the claimed sexuality.

6.   So accordingly I find there are material errors of law in  the  judge's
    decision and therefore the decision is set aside and I think it is most
    appropriately to be  dealt  with  by  a  rehearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal since these matters are so central to the case.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 25 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

