
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03383/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 August 2019                   |On 23 October 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    A.A.
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Stedman ('the Judge'), issued on 20 May 2019 by which  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was refused.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal by way of a decision dated 20 June 2019.

 3. Consequent to the hearing Mr. Hawkin filed and served a 'Note'  seeking
    to clarify submissions presented. I have received no objection from Mr.
    Tarlow and therefore have considered the contents of the Note.

Anonymity

 4. The Judge made an anonymity order and neither representative before  me
    applied for it to be set aside. Therefore, unless the Upper Tribunal or
    a court directs otherwise no report of these proceedings or any  formal
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or close members of his family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I  re-
    affirm the direction so as to avoid  the  likelihood  of  serious  harm
    arising to the appellant from the  contents  of  his  protection  claim
    being made public.

Background

 5. The appellant is an Iranian national  who  was  born  in  1985  and  is
    presently aged 34. He asserts that  he  refused  to  complete  military
    service and when aged around 24 he was arrested by the authorities  for
    such failure and detained for some 15 or 16 days, during which time  he
    was tortured. He states that his father provided funds for his bail and
    he was released. He then  left  Iran  in  2009  and  travelled  to  the
    Netherlands where he claimed asylum.

 6. He details that he decided to return to  Iran  in  2010  and  travelled
    through Belgium, France, Italy, Greece and Turkey  in  order  to  reach
    Iran. He states that he did not  use  an  agent  and  simply  travelled
    across various borders by train. At Q45 of his interview  he  confirmed
    that he was not asked to produce  any  documents  on  his  journey.  He
    further details that having arrived in Rome, he  travelled  to  Italy's
    border with Greece so as to continue his journey [Q52].

 7. The appellant confirms that he experienced no  adverse  treatment  upon
    his return to Iran until  his  arrest  in  2015  for  evading  military
    service, at which point he was detained for 2 or  3  days.  His  father
    paid a bribe to secure his release and he left Iran with the assistance
    of an agent.

 8. He details that he arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in March
    2015 and claimed asylum on 7 April  2015.  He  was  interviewed  on  25
    February 2019. The respondent refused the application for international
    protection by way of a decision dated 22 March 2019.

 9. The appellant relies upon medical evidence as supporting his  claim  of
    possessing a well-founded fear of  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the
    Iranian authorities: a medico-legal  report  authored  by  Dr.  Phyllis
    Turvill MBBS, MRCS, DMJ (clinical),  on  behalf  of  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation, dated 21 November 2018.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

10. The hearing before the Judge took place at Hatton Cross on 8 May  2019.
    Upon  preliminary  consideration,  the  Judge  decided  to  treat   the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness within the terms of the  Presidential
    Guidance Note, No. 2 of 2010: 'Child, vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance'.

11. The Judge found various aspects of the appellant's  evidence  difficult
    to reconcile with a genuine claim to fear the  Iranian  authorities  on
    account of a failure to complete military service. A number of  adverse
    credibility findings were  made,  and  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant  did  not  possess  a  genuine  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Appeal

12. The appellant relies upon seven grounds of appeal dated  3  June  2019.
    When granting permission to appeal, JFtT Murray made observations as to
    what she identified to be the core grounds:

         'The grounds assert that the Judge erred in refusing to adjourn the
         appeal in view of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  a  pending
         complaint in relation to the conduct of his asylum interview and in
         view of the respondent's subsequent acceptance  that  the  decision
         should be withdrawn; made undue criticisms of the medical  evidence
         that he was not qualified to make; made errors in relation  to  the
         assessment of credibility as a  result  of  the  treatment  of  the
         medical  evidence;  failed  to  consider  the  background  evidence
         properly and  failed  to  make  a  clear  finding  on  whether  the
         appellant had completed his military service.

         It is arguable that although the Judge did not have the benefit  of
         the letter from the respondent  withdrawing  the  decision  in  the
         appeal prior to promulgation, that this and the  treatment  of  the
         medical  evidence  amounted  to  an  error  of  law  rendering  the
         credibility findings unsafe.'

Decision on Error of Law

13. Mr. Hawkin, the author of the appellant's grounds of appeal,  confirmed
    before me that he relied upon all  seven  grounds.  He  was  unable  to
    identify which ground or grounds he primarily relied  upon,  indicating
    that he would present them in the order as drafted.

Ground 1 - Failure to adjourn hearing

14. On the morning of the hearing before the Judge, the appellant sought an
    adjournment. The Judge records at [8] - ]9]:

         'Mr. Hawkin also referred me to a complaint raised by the appellant
         regarding the conduct of his asylum interview, which was said to be
         'unprofessional and insensitive' in the light  of  the  appellant's
         mental health.  While  the  letter  did  not  detail  any  specific
         allegations, plainly the appellant was unhappy  with  the  way  the
         interview was carried out. Mr. Hawkin submitted that I  might  need
         to adjourn the hearing to await a response from  the  Secretary  of
         State and, potentially, a reconsideration of the case by him.  But,
         of course, there was no telling when, or even if, a response  would
         ever be forthcoming, or indeed that it  would  alter  the  decision
         made in any way. Mr. Wain noted  that  this  matter  had  not  been
         raised at a recent case management review hearing.

         I did not adjourn the hearing. There was no risk that by proceeding
         the appellant would be deprived of a fair hearing. I would approach
         the interview with caution and be open to any specific matters  the
         appellant wished to raise in relation to  it.  No  separate  issues
         were raised at the hearing  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  answers
         recorded at either of the appellant's asylum interviews.'

15. The case management hearing referred to was a paper  hearing  conducted
    by JFtT Grant on 24 April 2019, two weeks before the oral hearing.  The
    appellant's solicitor, when completing a reply form to be considered at
    the case management hearing, confirmed at [3] that  no  more  time  was
    required for preparation, and at [4] that there were no new matters  to
    be raised. I observe that the complaint was made to the  respondent  by
    way of a letter dated 8 April 2019, some 15 days before the reply  form
    was completed. The Judge was therefore  reasonably  permitted  to  rely
    upon the position recently stated to the Tribunal  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors that the matter was ready to proceed. There was  no  mention
    by the solicitors of seeking to adjourn the oral hearing  so  that  the
    respondent's complaint process could be completed.

16. Mr. Hawkin contends that the Judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
    matters raised in the complaint. This argument is unsustainable  as  it
    is clear that the Judge had read the document and had expressly  stated
    that  he  would  approach  the  interview  with  caution  and,  indeed,
    indicated at the outset of the hearing that he would  be  open  to  any
    specific matters of concern the appellant was to raise in  relation  to
    the interview. I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  was  mindful  of  the
    overriding objective to deal with cases fairly and justly, as  required
    by rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, and lawfully considered  the  positions
    of both parties through the prism of fairness. He  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant could address issues of concern before him and there  was
    no  requirement  to  await  the  respondent's  consideration   of   his
    complaint. Ultimately, the consideration of  evidence  provided  at  an
    interview, and subsequent findings of fact, can be fairly and  lawfully
    considered by an expert Tribunal.

17. Mr. Hawkin further contends by way of his grounds of appeal, at [4]:

         'This is all the more relevant, because following the  hearing  the
         Secretary of State on 15 May 2019, i.e. prior to  the  promulgation
         of the Judge's decision, accepted that in  principle  his  decision
         dated 22 March 2019 should be withdrawn 'for  full  reconsideration
         in light of the information not considered.''

18. On the morning of the hearing before me Mr. Tarlow made enquiries as to
    this assertion. I was provided with  several  documents  which  confirm
    that Fadiga & Co wrote a letter to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross on 17 May 2019 detailing, inter alia:

         'We had previously made a complaint to the Secretary  of  State  in
         light of the fact that the evidence and further submissions had not
         been considered by the Secretary of State.

         In light of this Counsel representing the appellant  asked  for  an
         adjournment on the day of the hearing, however this was refused  by
         the Judge.

         We have since received correspondence from the Secretary  of  State
         confirming  that  as  the  previous  evidence  submitted  was   not
         considered, the decision dated 22 March 2019 will be withdrawn  and
         a new decision will  be  made  within  three  months  and  herewith
         enclose a copy of the correspondence for the Judge's information.'

19. The appellant's legal representatives therefore informed  the  Tribunal
    that  the  underlying  decision  had  been  withdrawn.  This   reflects
    correspondence between the respondent and  the  appellant's  solicitors
    prior to the drafting of the letter, in which I observe that by way  of
    an email from a senior caseworker dated 15 May 2019, sent at 12.11,  it
    is expressly confirmed that 'it IS the intention of the Home Office  to
    withdraw  the  decision  for  full  reconsideration  in  light  of  the
    information not considered. Are you happy to inform [the] Tribunal  ...
    and I will deal with the administration at our end. The intention is to
    ensure that a decision is completed and served within three months ...'

20. I was informed by Mr Tarlow that ultimately the decision letter  of  22
    March 2019 was not withdrawn because the caseworker had not been  aware
    that an appeal hearing had been conducted and a decision of a Judge was
    expected. The Judge cannot be criticised  as  erring  in  law  for  not
    taking into account a  document  received  before  he  promulgated  his
    decision where the contents of that letter are subsequently established
    to be incorrect.

Ground 2 - Undue criticism of medical evidence

21. Mr. Hawkin complains that at [39] - [50]  of  his  decision  the  Judge
    embarked on a lengthy  and  critical  consideration  of  Dr.  Turvill's
    medical report. It is said that the Judge was unduly  critical  of  the
    report that had been prepared under great pressure  by  a  hard-pressed
    charity. It was further asserted that the Judge  did  not  possess  the
    expertise to make such criticisms. My attention was particularly  drawn
    to [42] - [43] and [47] - [48] which follow consideration by the  Judge
    of Dr. Turvill's assessment of scarring upon the appellant's body,  his
    concern as to a failure to mention the age of such scarring and also  a
    simple repetition by Dr. Turvill of the appellant's statement  that  he
    was 'hit' in detention:

         '42.     In my judgment these  are  significant  omissions  in  the
             report and therefore the weight I can give to the  conclusions
             are far more limited. The appellant's record of S1, as gleaned
             from his GP notes, is that the scar  was  caused  by  a  knife
             injury. No mention of this  is  made  in  the  report  and  it
             damages the appellant's credibility in terms  of  providing  a
             consistent account. I  also  have  to  be  careful  in  giving
             appropriate weight to a report that fails to date or  seek  to
             date an injury and fails to offer  an  opinion  on  particular
             causation. It is wholly unclear therefore how the opinion that
             the  injury  to  the  appellant's  chest  at  S1  is   'highly
             consistent' with the appellant's attribution (to her) of being
             hit by 'sticks,  gun  butts  and  barrels.'  Indeed,  I  would
             venture to say that even to  the  untrained  mind,  and  on  a
             reading alone, the description of the  scar  'curved,  raised,
             white scar; (as  described  at  paragraph  40  above)  is  not
             compatible with being beaten with hard but blunt  instruments,
             but rather with a sharp object (such as a knife).

         43.      I also have concerns about the  psychological  examination
             in  which  Dr.  Turvill  concluded  that  the  appellant   was
             suffering from moderate to severe depression and severe  post-
             traumatic stress disorder, based on a CORE assessment. At  the
             same time Dr. Turvill opined that the appellant  was  fit  for
             interview or questioning in court. To my mind it is  difficult
             to reconcile with a diagnosis of severe post-traumatic  stress
             disorder,  at  least  without  some  explanation,  given  that
             exposure  to  cues  that  might  resemble  or  symbolise   the
             traumatic events may well cause psychological distress  in  an
             individual  with  severe  PTSD  and  potentially  disturb  any
             treatment program. Neither was there any application to  limit
             the scope of cross examination in line with the guidelines for
             vulnerable witnesses which I would have ordinarily expected to
             be the case with an individual with that diagnosis.'

         ...

         '47.     It appears that the appellant was offered counselling when
             he first explained his difficulties to his GP and  was  placed
             on antidepressants, but there can be no question however that,
             for the following three years, the dominant  problem  was  his
             headaches. I find  it  surprising  that,  notwithstanding  the
             history given to the GP and the lack of any consultations over
             this period regarding his mental health,  that  the  appellant
             had not been referred to a mental health team  or  indeed  for
             cognitive behaviour therapy  or  other  trauma-based  therapy.
             Indeed, the failure to refer him may itself be  viewed  either
             as  failure  to  follow  established  NICE  guidelines  or   a
             recognition of his GP that his mental  health  state  may  not
             have been a significant  as  it  is  now  being  suggested  or
             portrayed.

         48.      In terms of the conclusions of Dr.  Turvill's  the  report
             itself, and with the greatest respect  to  her  experience,  I
             make the following observations which cumulatively impact upon
             the weight I give to the report.

                . Firstly, the  NICE  guidelines  do  not  state  that  'all
                  doctors diagnose, if not treat PTSD'  (para.  101  of  her
                  report. In fact,  the  NICE  guidelines  states:  '...   a
                  primary  care  physician  with  appropriate  training  and
                  experience may be able to confirm the diagnosis.  However,
                  in most cases, referral to a mental health specialist with
                  expertise in managing post-traumatic  stress  disorder  is
                  required.'

                . Secondly, I see no explanation of how  Dr.  Turvill  finds
                  that the appellant meets the diagnosis criteria for ICD10.
                  The psychological examination is extremely brief  and  the
                  conclusions general and predicated solely on  the  results
                  of  the  CORE  assessment.  The   report   is   completely
                  inadequate in  explaining  how  the  appellant  meets  the
                  diagnostic criteria.

                . Thirdly, the report fails to make clear that  the  opinion
                  provided  is  from  a  general  practitioner  and  not   a
                  specialist.  Instead,  the   report   merely   appends   a
                  biography. A diagnosis of  PTSD  is  normally  made  by  a
                  clinical psychologist or a psychiatrist, which Dr. Turvill
                  is not, and this should be far more transparent throughout
                  the report.

                . A clear example of a  general  opinion  can  be  found  at
                  paragraph 114 of the report and demonstrates the danger of
                  a general opinion which is based on research and  studies,
                  and not a conclusion based on  a  clinical  assessment  of
                  this appellant. The statement made by Dr. Turvill at [114]
                  is  essentially  this:  those  with  PTSD  show  increased
                  suicidality; ergo, this appellant's risk of suicide  would
                  increase if returned. I place very little weight  on  this
                  opinion. It  is  a  general  opinion  which,  unless  read
                  carefully, gives  rise  to  a  picture  which,  not  being
                  clinically  justified  in  this  case,  may  well  not  be
                  accurate.

                . Fifthly, Dr. Turvill then suggests (as she  is  unable  to
                  make a referral herself) that the appellant's GP  consider
                  'referral for psychotherapy and any  other  help  such  as
                  English lessons,  exercise  etc.'  There  is  no  specific
                  request for cognitive behaviour  therapy  (CBT),  exposure
                  therapy (ET), or trauma-focused  psychological  treatment,
                  for example eye movements desensitisation and reprocessing
                  (EMDR) which ought to be routinely requested in such cases
                  and especially for those with severe PTSD.'

22. The general position is the remit of a medical  expert  is  limited  to
    making findings relating to an appellant's  physical  or  psychological
    condition and establishing whether it is consistent with the claimant's
    account of events.  It  is  for  a  judge  to  assess  the  appellant's
    credibility in the light of all  the  evidence  including  the  medical
    report: HH (Ethiopia) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] EWCA Civ 306;  [2007]  Imm.  A.R.  563.  Ultimately  whether  an
    appellant's account of the underlying events is or is not credible  and
    plausible is a question  of  legal  appraisal  and  a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal judge, not the expert doctors.

23. The fact that a medical expert is 'hard-pressed'  as  to  time,  or  is
    working through a reputable charity, does not lessen a judge's role  in
    assessing credibility.

24. It was not an error for  Dr.  Turvill  to  rely  upon  the  appellant's
    evidence and it is appropriate to observe  that  a  medical  report  is
    evidence that is independent  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  and  its
    independence is not lost even where a medical expert relies heavily  on
    an account given by an appellant. However, inappropriate or  uncritical
    reliance on such evidence alone may  reduce  the  weight  that  can  be
    attached to it.

25. It is appropriate to recall the observation of the Court of  Appeal  in
    SA (Somalia) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1302; [2007] Imm. A.R. 236 that one of the tasks a  medical  report
    is tendered to perform is 'to corroborate and/or  lend  weight  to  the
    account of the asylum seeker by a clear statement as to the consistency
    of old scars found with the history given.' When preparing a report,  a
    medical expert is required to bear in mind that when an advocate wishes
    to rely on their medical  report  to  support  the  credibility  of  an
    appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about  it
    affords support to what  the  appellant  has  said  and  which  is  not
    dependent on what the appellant  has  said  to  the  doctor:  HE  (DRC,
    credibility and  psychiatric  reports)  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    [2004] UKAIT 000321 and JL (Medical Reports: Credibility: China) [2013]
    UKUT 145 (IAC); [2013] Imm. A.R. 727.

26. In this matter, the Judge was entitled to undertake his  judicial  role
    and critically assess Dr. Turvill's evidence insofar as it was required
    for the purpose of his  credibility  assessment.  He  was  required  to
    consider that the appellant attributed to his GP that a scar was caused
    by a knife whilst in consultation with Dr. Turvill attributing  in  the
    same scar to being beaten by  an  instrument.  This  is  a  significant
    discrepancy, in circumstances where he makes no allegation of being cut
    by a knife to Dr. Turvill. I observe that Mr. Hawkin did  not  seek  to
    assert that the GP records were not contradictory  to  the  appellant's
    account presented to Dr. Turvill. On the  face  of  the  evidence,  Mr.
    Hawkin was correct not to do so. This is the  raised  white  scar  (S1)
    that is 9cm in length  and  0.5cm  at  its  widest,  that  Dr.  Turvill
    considers 'highly consistent' with the  appellant's  account  of  being
    beaten. Whilst she accepts that there may be other medically  plausible
    and possible causes, such as an accidental injury in a road accident or
    in a fight, she does not specifically address whether it was consistent
    or  highly  consistent  with  being  caused  by  a   knife.   In   such
    circumstances, when assessing the weight to be  given  to  the  medical
    report, the Judge gave cogent  and  careful  reasons  for  taking  into
    account an important material difference in accounts given to different
    medical practitioners: SS (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 155.

27. As  for  the  Judge's  consideration  of  Dr.  Turvill's  psychological
    examination, it is appropriate that at least some weight be given to  a
    GPs regular contact with persons  suffering  with  PTSD.  It  is  well-
    established that the evidence  of  an  expert  witness  is  not  to  be
    rejected lightly: Karanakaran  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR 271. However, it is appropriate that  a  judge
    consider whether a medical practitioner is an expert in  a  field  that
    will enable him or her to reach an informed conclusion on the  issue(s)
    arising in a particular appeal. A skilled witness must  demonstrate  to
    the court that he or she has relevant knowledge and experience to  give
    either factual evidence, which is not  based  exclusively  on  personal
    observation or  sensation,  or  opinion  evidence.  Where  the  skilled
    witness establishes such knowledge and experience, he or she  can  draw
    on the general body of knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  relevant
    expertise: Myers v. The Queen [2015] 3 WLR 1145.

28. I observe that Dr.  Turvill  relies  upon  some  80%  of  her  patients
    experiencing depression and having been on the Approved List of Medical
    Practitioners of  the  North  Thames  Health  Authority.  However,  she
    possesses  no  medical  qualification  in  psychology  and  details  no
    specific training in mental health assessment.  In  the  circumstances,
    the Judge was entitled to assess that Dr. Turvill was not a  specialist
    in this field and therefore could reasonably  subject  her  opinion  to
    close scrutiny to consider whether she was capable of  drawing  upon  a
    sufficient  general  body  of  knowledge  and  understanding,  and   in
    undertaking such  assessment  he  could  lawfully  expect  an  adequate
    explanation as to how the appellant met the  diagnostic  criteria.  Dr.
    Turvill's psychological assessment runs to six paragraphs of her report
    of which seven lines specifically relate to the appellant  at  [104]  -
    [106]:

         '104.    [Mr. A] suffers from anxiety, low mood  and  reduction  of
             energy. His concentration and libido are  reduced.  His  self-
             esteem is poor as is his sleep.

         105.     In my clinical opinion, [Mr. A] is suffering from Moderate-
             to-Severe Depression and this is corroborated by his  clinical
             score of 23 on the CORE2 assessment.

         106.     As he has also  recurrent  memories  of  his  problems  in
             flashbacks and nightmare, he is also suffering from  PTSD.  He
             scored 80 out of  a  possible  88  on  the  Impact  of  Events
             (revised) scale indicating severe PTSD.'

29.  The  Judge's  observation  that  'the  psychological  examination   is
    extremely brief and the conclusions general and  predicated  solely  on
    the results of the CORE assessment. The report is completely inadequate
    in explaining how the appellant meets the diagnostic  criteria'  cannot
    be criticised in the context of the report, where very limited relevant
    reasoning is provided.

30. The Judge was also reasonably entitled to take into account as part  of
    his assessment the fact that for  some  three  years,  the  appellant's
    primary contact with his GP  was  in  relation  to  headaches  and  not
    depression. This was a factor that could be lawfully relied upon in the
    credibility assessment and appropriate weight was given to it.

31. Further, the Judge has not strayed into asserting medical expertise  as
    contended by Mr. Hawkin. A judge sitting in  an  expert  Tribunal  that
    regularly considers medical reports concerned with PTSD is  capable  of
    identifying issues which he or  she  may  expect  to  be  addressed  or
    evidence that they may wish to consider. Having read the decision,  the
    Judge has not closed his  mind  to  issues.  Rather,  when  making  his
    assessment, and having  reasonable  concerns  as  to  elements  of  the
    appellant's evidence, he was entitled to draw upon his experience as to
    evidence that may have aided the appellant but was not present. In  all
    of the circumstances this ground must fail.

Ground 3 - Unlawful undermining of medical evidence

32. This ground is in essence the second limb of Ground 2, with Mr.  Hawkin
    asserting that in [44] - [47] the Judge held  unrealistic  expectations
    of what an NHS General Practitioner, as opposed to a  doctor  like  Dr.
    Turvill with experience of torture and trauma, could do for  an  asylum
    seeker, and to have wrongly used those preconceptions to undermine  and
    side-line the medical evidence.

33. The Judge observes at [44] that the appellant's medical history reveals
    very little  in  terms  of  his  mental  health  from  2015  until  his
    consultation with Dr. Turvill in 2018, with any stress he was suffering
    appearing to relate  to  his  migraines  'which  clearly  have  been  a
    significant, if not debilitating problem at times for him.'  The  Judge
    was reasonably entitled to place weight on the fact that the  appellant
    was willing to approach his GP for help and care on health  issues  and
    did not raise issues as to his mental health, and inappropriate  weight
    was not placed upon it in the assessment.

34. The Judge notes at [45] that the  appellant  was  referred  to  an  NHS
    mental health team in August 2018, following a letter from Dr.  Turvill
    to  the  appellant's  GP.  The  Judge  further  details  there  was  no
    discussion with the GP  as  to  anxiety  or  depression  prior  to  Dr.
    Turvill's letter. He also records in  this  paragraph  the  appellant's
    explanation to his doctor as to how he sustained a knife wound  on  his
    chest. The observations  made  by  the  Judge  are  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances.

35. At [46] the Judge notes a review of the appellant's medication  by  his
    GP in September 2015  and  the  prescription  of  a  moderate  dose  of
    Mirtazipine. The Judge reasons, 'I find the  paucity  of  any  evidence
    relating to a mental health problem (as distinct from stress caused  by
    his headaches) to be very telling in this  case,  particularly  as  the
    appellant was clearly fully engaged  with  his  GP  and  made  frequent
    visits over a period of  three  years'.  Such  reasons  are  lawful  in
    circumstances where the medical notes evidence regular contact  between
    the appellant and his  GP,  the  regular  receipt  of  medication,  and
    silence as to the mental health concerns  that  were  raised  with  Dr.
    Turvill some 3 years after the appellant first registered with his GP.

36. Whilst the observations at [47] are  general  in  nature  they  do  not
    undermine the previous findings as to the appellant's interaction  with
    his GP and his silence as to his mental health concerns. The Judge  was
    reasonably entitled to  rely  upon  such  silence  when  assessing  the
    medical  evidence  before  him.  He  was   not   holding   'unrealistic
    expectations of what an NHS General Practitioner could do for an asylum
    seeker.' Rather, the Judge lawfully and adversely noted that it was the
    appellant who was being silent on the issue in circumstances where  his
    GP had proved willing to help him on other  medical  issues,  including
    his recurrent headaches. In the circumstances, this ground must fail.

Ground 4 - Consequent to grounds 2 and 3, there was a  failure  to  lawfully
consider credibility

37. This ground is entirely rooted in the  appellant  being  successful  on
    grounds 2 and 3. He has not been successful as to  establishing  errors
    of law as to the Judge's approach to the medical evidence that impacted
    on the Judge's consideration of credibility and so this ground fails.

Ground 5 - Failure to assess credibility  in  light  of  country  background
material

38. Mr. Hawkin contends that in rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence  from
    [52] onwards of the decision, the Judge clearly failed to evaluate  the
    credibility of the appellant's account, and the risk to him,  in  light
    of the country background evidence. It is  stated  that  there  was  no
    proper consideration of the current situation in Iran, and specifically
    military service, at all. Reliance is placed upon the well-known  dicta
    of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Horvath v. Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [1999] INLR 7, at [21].

39. Tribunal decisions are not required to slavishly  follow  a  particular
    form.  Whilst  the  findings  were  made  in  the  absence  of  express
    consideration of objective country evidence, the Judge gave a number of
    sustainable reasons for finding that the account had not been proved to
    the requisite standard. In reaching  such  conclusions  the  Judge  was
    permitted to rely upon clear inconsistencies in the appellant's account
    and the limited detail provided on core issues.  There  is  no  express
    challenge to the appellant having been very vague  and  highly  evasive
    when asked about  his  brother,  [52];  his  inconsistency  as  to  the
    circumstances regarding what he did after receiving  a  letter  telling
    him to report for service, [53]; the appellant's inability  to  explain
    in light of his being so  fearful  of  the  authorities  the  steps  he
    undertook  to  change  his  daily  activities  so  as  to  evade  their
    attention, [53]; as to how he avoided arrest for 5 years when he worked
    in his father's shop, walked in the streets and frequented shops, [53];
    his  inability  to  provide  even  approximate  dates  for  his   first
    detention, [54]; and his failure to give a coherent answer  as  to  why
    having travelled to the Netherlands in fear of  his  life  and  claimed
    asylum, with a purported background of serious ill-treatment, he  would
    return to Iran after a few months, [55]. There is no express  challenge
    to the Judge's reasoning as to the latter issue, 'that fact  alone  and
    by itself, is completely at odds  with  the  behaviour  of  someone  in
    genuine fear of their life.' I further note that there  is  no  express
    challenge to the finding at [56] that cumulatively  the  appellant  was
    able to avoid the interests of the Iranian authorities  for  some  five
    years, whilst working in his father shop and later living for the  most
    part at the family home.

40. These are adverse findings of fact that are lawfully capable  of  being
    made in the absence of country objective material and it was reasonably
    open for the Judge  to  determine  that  they  fatally  undermined  the
    appellant's claim of possessing a well-founded fear of persecution.  As
    observed by the Judge at [58]:

         'While I accept that an individual may  take  certain  risks  which
         might potentially expose them to being captured by the  authorities
         in order that they might not entirely relinquish their  freedom,  I
         find it highly unlikely that if the appellant did not wish to  come
         to their attention (at least when he went back home in  2010)  that
         he would have returned to his home area, specifically to his family
         home and have gone to his father's shop  where  he  was  previously
         arrested. Those actions are a  far  cry  from  the  actions  of  an
         individual who is living in fear.'

41. In such circumstances, this ground fails.

Ground 6 - Failure to make a clear finding as to  whether  military  service
had been completed

42. It is appropriate to consider two paragraphs  of  the  decision  before
    embarking upon this ground:

         32.      Mr. Hawking ... posited that the respondent's decision had
             a fault line. It was never suggested that  the  appellant  had
             actually completed military service. The account  was  binary:
             the appellant has either done military service or not.  If  he
             had not, then as a matter of background evidence he had evaded
             the authorities and  his  claim  might  succeed.  The  written
             evidence was consistent from the outset. This  was  evidenced,
             as an example at 2.2 of  the  screening  interview  where  the
             applicant stated that he did not have a  passport  because  he
             had not served in the army. His somewhat 'less  than  informed
             answers' underlined the fact that he  had  not  done  military
             service and strengthened his case.'

         ...

         62.      Finally, I should address a point made by Mr. Hawkin  when
             he invited me to embark on a chain of  reasoning  which  would
             lead inexorably to the conclusion that, looking at the way the
             respondent put the case, or has failed to put  the  case,  the
             appellant had simply not undertaken military service - a claim
             that he submitted was consistent. I do not agree that  I  need
             to undertake that analysis. As I am  unable  to  rely  on  the
             appellant's evidence for the main  reasons  I  have  given,  I
             cannot say  whether  this  appellant  has  completed  military
             service or not. Even applying the lower standard, there is  no
             truthful matter on which I can pin any such conclusion.  I  do
             not believe that the appellant has been arrested and  detained
             and tortured by the authorities in Iran. What I do know and  I
             am able to conclude, is that he left  Iran  on  at  least  one
             occasion, and quite possibly two occasions,  with  a  view  to
             seeking to remain in another country, and  does  not  wish  to
             return to Iran.'

43. Mr. Hawkin relies upon [27] - [28] of the respondent's decision  letter
    of  March  2019  as  evidencing  the  respondent's  position  that  the
    appellant had never undertaken military service:

         '26.     You claim that you were sent a letter informing  you  that
             it was time for you to be drafted into the army when you  were
             aged 18 or 19 (AIR 46-47). You were asked  if  the  government
             makes any public announcements when it is time for  the  draft
             to occur (AIR 45). You state 'no, it's not like  that  because
             it may be time for  me  to  serve  or  not  others.'  External
             country information sourced in Country Policy and  Information
             Note: Military Service version 1.0 October 2016 (4.5.1)  notes
             that:

                  Call-up procedures

                  ACCORD's COI July 2015 compilation  on  Iran,  citing  the
                  Netherlands Ministry of Foreign  Affairs  (Ministerie  van
                  Buitenlandse Zaken,  BZ)  December  2013  'General  Office
                  Report on Iran' reported that:

                      '... all men, upon reaching the age of 18, are called
                      up as part of their  military  service  duties.  They
                      must report to the military  authorities  within  one
                      month after the start of the Iranian calendar year in
                      which they turn 18. Announcements are  made  via  the
                      media (including newspapers,  radio  and  television)
                      calling upon men born in a given year  to  report  to
                      the local conscription bureau.'

         27.      It  is  considered  that,  given  this,  your  account  is
             externally inconsistent. You are asked in (AIR 145) to explain
             why you were not aware of this, you responded 'even I  knew  I
             didn't want to go I didn't want to go and serve in the  army.'
             It is considered that you have failed to explain why you  were
             evidently not aware of this, given the reasonable  expectation
             for you to be aware being an Iranian  national.  This  damages
             your credibility as an applicant.

44. Mr. Hawkin contends that the Judge was required to make a clear finding
    as to whether the appellant had completed his military service, because
    the refusal to carry out military service was the central issue in  the
    appeal. At the hearing before me he sought to rely upon [26]  and  [27]
    of the decision letter as evidencing  the  respondent's  position  that
    actually the appellant had not undertaken military service  because  he
    lacked sufficient knowledge about the system.

45. The appellant's evidence before the Tribunal as to the core  issues  of
    his claim was entirely rejected. It is not  the  role  of  a  judge  to
    speculate  as  to  the  possible  history  of  the  applicant  in  such
    circumstances.  A  Judge  is  required  to  consider   the   individual
    circumstances of the claim advanced and consider whether a well-founded
    fear of persecution has been established: GM, YT and  MY  (Eritrea)  v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA  Civ  833.  The
    fact that the appellant advanced an  unmeritorious  application  before
    the respondent, and in doing so gave inadequate answers as to  military
    conscription, does not by itself establish that he has  not  undertaken
    military service. His claim was advanced on a specific basis, which has
    been  found  to  be  incredible.  His  evidence  as  presented  to  the
    respondent in interview  has  been  found  to  be  incredible.  He  has
    presented no evidence acceptable to the Judge that could establish  his
    own personal history of having avoided military conscription  for  some
    12 years before  his  arrival  in  this  country.  The  fact  that  the
    respondent  criticises  the  evidence  presented  is  not   by   itself
    sufficient to establish such evidence as being acceptable for  judicial
    consideration. In essence, Mr. Hawkin required the Judge to  engage  in
    speculation and for lawful reasons  he  refused  to  so  proceed.  This
    ground has no merits and must fail.

Ground 7 - Failure to lawfully consider the article 8 claim

46. Mr. Hawkin concisely asserts that the Judge's  conclusions  at  [68]  -
    [69],  regarding   paragraph   276ADE(1)(bi)   and   article   8,   are
    fundamentally flawed.

         '68.     The appellant did not argue article 8 at  the  hearing  or
             any additional arguments on the grounds  of  his  private  and
             family life in the UK.  I  find  that  the  reasoning  in  the
             refusal letter at paragraphs 76 to  90  is  comprehensive  and
             sets out  the  reasons  why  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules or otherwise argue  that
             there are exceptional or very compelling circumstances.

         69.      Mr. Hawkin said that 276ADE(1)(vi) might apply, but  I  do
             not see how, in view of my finding on  the  protection  claim,
             that  the  appellant  can  show  that  there  would  be   very
             significant obstacles to his reintegration. I  find  that  the
             appellant could return to Iran, to his home area  and  to  any
             family as may remain there, and continue with his life in much
             the same way as he did up to 2015 when he left for the  second
             time. He is young and in relatively good physical  and  mental
             health and would be returning to his own country where he  had
             lived and worked for the majority of his life and where he  is
             familiar with the language and culture. I can see no  distinct
             area, nor was any advanced by his advocate, as would impact on
             his ability to integrate. There is no risk of a breach of  his
             private life rights.'

47. It is somewhat unusual for a ground of complaint to be  based  upon  an
    argument that was not advanced with great vigour at the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  at  the  hearing  before  me  Mr.  Hawkin
    accepted that this ground hinged upon my assessment as to  the  medical
    consideration. I  have  found  no  error  of  law  as  to  the  Judge's
    consideration of the  medical  evidence  before  him,  nor  as  to  his
    rejection of the appellant's claim. Consequently, there is no  material
    error of law in the Judge's consideration of  the  appellant  and  very
    significant obstacles under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Notice of decision

48. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

49. The anonymity direction is confirmed.

50. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 21 October 2019





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD


No fee was paid and so no award is payable.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 21 October 2019



