
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03671/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 January 2018                       |On 21 February 2018                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    [m i]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bahja of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1987.  He arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in  2005  and  was
    subsequently granted further periods of leave to remain as  a  student.
    On 7 August 2013 an application for leave to remain  was  made  outside
    the Immigration Rules which was refused on 31 August 2013 with no right
    of appeal.  On 29 July 2015 the appellant claimed asylum on  the  basis
    that  he  is  an  atheist  who  fears  the   government   and   Islamic
    fundamentalists as well as his own family who have disowned him.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's  asylum  claim  on  27  November
    2015.  The respondent accepted that the appellant  is  an  atheist  and
    that he had demonstrated a genuine subjective fear  of  persecution  on
    return to Bangladesh.   However,  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant's fear is not objectively well-founded  because  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection provided by the authorities in Bangladesh and
    he would be able to relocate within his country  of  nationality.   The
    respondent considered that the appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules with  regard  to  family  life  as  there  was
    insufficient evidence of the claimed relationship and  the  couple  had
    not been living together for 2 years.  The appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances requiring consideration outside the Immigration Rules.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 31 August 2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kimnell dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The  Tribunal
    found  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the basis of his activity as an atheist blogger and that
    there is no state persecution of atheists in Bangladesh.   With  regard
    to Article 8 the judge found that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show  that  appendix  FM  requirements  were  met.    The   appellant's
    representative at the hearing did  not  press  that  point  but  raised
    paragraph  276ADE(6).  The  judge  found  that  there  were   no   very
    significant obstacles  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant
    integrating into Bangladesh.   The  judge  considered  that  there  was
    compelling reason to examine Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules as
    there is nothing of note in the appellant's case that  is  not  catered
    for within the Rules themselves.

 5. The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  the   Upper
    Tribunal.  On 3 October 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  refused
    the  appellant  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed   his
    application to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  16  November  2017  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. There are two principal grounds of appeal.  It is  submitted  that  the
    judge's assessment  of  credibility  was  based  on  his  disregard  of
    material facts and  evidence  and  on  an  unreasonable  and  erroneous
    conclusion on material submissions.  The judge failed to have regard to
    RT Zimbabwe and Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] 1 AC 152 [2012] UKSC 38 where the Supreme Court held that  where
    a person  was  obliged  to  conceal  his  beliefs  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution that would amount to persecution and entitle a claimant  to
    recognition of refugee status.  Although not  set  out  in  grounds  of
    appeal, in the appellant's skeleton argument submitted on  the  day  of
    the hearing before me it  is asserted  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the state does not persecute atheists.   The  grounds  of
    appeal also set out that the  judge  had  failed  to  place  sufficient
    weight on the  witness  evidence  of  Karen  Beer  the  mother  of  the
    appellant's girlfriend.   It  was  submitted  that  there  are  genuine
    difficulties for the appellant to return to Bangladesh to make a  fresh
    application or for the British national partner to move  to  Bangladesh
    to continue family life with the appellant.

 7. At the hearing before me the grounds of appeal with regard to Article 8
    were not pursued  by  the  appellant.   Mr  Bahja  indicated  that  the
    appellant accepted that permission to appeal had not  been  granted  on
    that ground of appeal.  The central issue in  this  case  therefore  is
    whether the judge erred in the approach and conclusions on  the  asylum
    claim.  Mr Bahja submitted that at paragraph 27 and 28  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision the judge has not considered appropriately the
    appellant's  evidence.   In  the  appellant's  witness   statement   he
    indicated that the reason that he had undertaken some blogging  in  his
    pseudonym or  in  a  different  name  was  because  he  was  afraid  of
    extremists and the government.  Reliance was placed on the case  of  RT
    Zimbabwe and it is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
    by holding that given the appellant had not used his own name  in  some
    of the items submitted for publication the contribution that  he  makes
    as a blogger is negligible.  The judge accepted, at paragraph 27,  that
    the appellant had expressed his atheist and  anti-fascist  view  albeit
    not in his own name.  In his witness  statement  of  24  May  2016  the
    appellant set out his views about the need for international protection
    stating that he became a member of many pages and groups and  commented
    on many issues surrounding Islam.  The judge erred by failing  to  take
    into account the fact that the appellant cannot be expected to hide his
    view about atheism in order to be safe in Bangladesh and to assess  the
    risk on return on  that  basis.   The  judge  only  took  into  account
    evidence which was recorded in the appellant's own name and  failed  to
    consider why the appellant hid his name in some  of  the  publications.
    The appellant is an activist belonging to a group with  4,000  members,
    he writes blogs and encourages people  to  renounce  their  faith.   At
    paragraph 10 the judge recorded  the  appellant's  evidence  indicating
    that the appellant will continue to express his  view  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh.

 8. In the skeleton argument and at the hearing Mr Bahja submitted that the
    judge erred by concluding that the country material does not  establish
    that there is state persecution of atheists.  It is submitted that  the
    judge failed to consider the objective evidence regarding Bangladesh in
    a proper context.  Reference is made  to  evidence  contained  at  page
    AB/115 of the appellant's bundle with regard to a  statement  from  the
    Council of Ex-Muslims dated 3 May 2016 in which  the  author  describes
    the views of the Prime Minister.  If the Prime Minister or Minister  of
    Interior makes statements  that  bloggers  should  not  hurt  religious
    feeling otherwise the government  will  not  take  responsibility  this
    makes the state complicit in attacks  upon  atheist  bloggers.   It  is
    submitted that many bloggers who  have  been  killed  did  not  have  a
    prominent  profile  examples  are  given  of  Nazimuddin  Samad,   Asif
    Mohiuddin and Sunnyur Rahman.  It is the  content  of  writing  that  a
    blogger a target of extremists or the government not their  prominence.



 9. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 reply.  The findings at paragraph 27 to
    30 are ones that were entirely open to the judge to make.  He submitted
    the grounds are really a disagreement with the finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  He referred to paragraph 30 where the judge  recognises
    that a prominent blogger would be at risk but says that  the  appellant
    does not fit this profile.  Mr Tarlow referred to pages 67 to 72 of the
    appellant's bundle which set out the on line posts  by  the  appellant.
    Looking at the index of the bundle these are only blogs which amount to
    ten  items.   Based  on  that  evidence  the  judge's   conclusion   is
    sustainable notwithstanding the reference to considering  the  evidence
    in the appellant's own name.   The  evidence  amounts  to  very  little
    whether in the appellant's name or in a false name.  With regard to the
    state protection issue he relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

10. Mr Bahja in reply referred to paragraph 67 of the bundle and  made  the
    point that  the  appellant  joined  as  an  atheist  prior  to  leaving
    Bangladesh.  He submitted that the blogs and the posts by the appellant
    amounted to very strong views that the appellant  was  against  fascism
    and inferred from that that he was against Islam.   He  submitted  that
    the statement from the Prime Minister was a clear  indication  that  he
    supports Islamists actions against bloggers.

Discussion

11. The judge set out the  background  to  the  case  and  the  appellant's
    evidence.  At paragraphs 10 to 12 the judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    oral evidence given at the hearing.  At paragraph 16 the judge set out:

         16.  As regards the asylum appeal  the  facts  are  not  really  in
             dispute because the respondent has accepted that the appellant
             is an atheist.  The asylum appeal turns on whether or not  the
             appellant's subjective fear is  objectively  well-founded  and
             whether there is a sufficiency of protection for  an  internal
             relocation option available.


12. From paragraph 18 onwards the judge considered the background evidence.
     At paragraph 18 the judge found:

         18.  The appellant stated at interview that he is fearful not  only
             of Islamic extremists in Bangladesh but also the government of
             Bangladesh, however the country  materials  submitted  do  not
             establish that there is state persecution of atheists.


13. From paragraph 19 to  26  the  judge  considered  in  some  detail  the
    evidence contained in the appellant's bundle regarding  the  background
    material that demonstrates that non-state actors seek to kill and  harm
    atheists.   From  paragraph  27  the  judge  analyses,   against   that
    background evidence, the appellant's own evidence.  At paragraph 27 the
    judge set out:

         27.  As to the appellant's own activity, he stated clearly in  oral
             evidence that he is not an  accomplished  writer  but  he  has
             submitted some items submitted in  the  name  of  Md  Mazharul
             Tarek, one of which refers to joining atheists  in  Bangladesh
             in October 2009.   He  posted  comments  that  he  is  against
             fascism.


         28.  On the basis of the evidence  in  the  appellant's  name,  the
             contribution he makes as a blogger is negligible.


         29.  The Council of Ex-Muslims in Britain have  written  (page  73)
             supporting  the  appellant's  case.   They  believe  that  the
             appellant has good reason to fear persecution but  the  letter
             is no more than a generalisation which  adds  nothing  to  the
             specific cases already referred to.


         30.  The  country  evidence  shows  that  a  prominent  blogger  or
             activist may be at some risk but the appellant  does  not  fit
             that profile.  On the basis of his activity there is  no  real
             risk of harm.  His parents have merely disowned him  there  is
             no evidence that they represent any harm to him.  There is  no
             state persecution of atheists, and  the  risk  from  non-state
             actors, which I acknowledge it does exist, is not  a  real  or
             significant risk to the appellant on the facts  of  his  case.
             He has no well-founded fear of persecution.

14. The judge decided this case on the basis that the  appellant  does  not
    have a well-founded fear of persecution from non-state  actors  because
    he does not fit  the  profile  of  a  prominent  blogger  or  activist.
    However, the analysis and conclusions reached  as  to  the  appellant's
    profile appears to have been based solely on the evidence that  was  in
    the appellant's own name ignoring the evidence  that  was  in  a  false
    name. There is specific rejection of that evidence.  Rather  the  judge
    appears to have accepted that the evidence submitted was written by the
    appellant under a pseudonym. Given the need to consider  asylum  claims
    with anxious scrutiny, and although the evidence provided regarding the
    blogs under a pseudonym is not compelling, I cannot be  sure  that  the
    judge would have arrived at the same conclusion had that evidence  been
    taken into consideration. Alternatively, the judge could  have  made  a
    specific finding rejecting that evidence but there is  nothing  in  the
    determination that suggests this  is  the  reason  the  judge  did  not
    consider it. This is a material error of law.


15. With regard to the grounds that the judge erred by failing to take into
    account the fact that the appellant cannot be expected to hide his view
    about atheism in order to be safe in Bangladesh and to assess the  risk
    on return on that basis this ground  is  misconceived.  The  judge  was
    fully aware that the appellant would continue  to  express  his  views,
    hence the consideration of what his profile  would  be.  There  was  no
    suggestion that the judge considered he would not be at risk if he kept
    his views hidden. On the basis of the low profile the  judge  correctly
    considered the risk on return on that basis.
16. The appeal on Article 8,  either  within  or  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, was not pursued at the hearing before me. The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that  there  are  no  reasons  to  examine
    Article 8 outside the rules therefore stands.


17. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').


18. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.


19. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the asylum appeal to be
    heard at the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  before  any  judge
    other than Judge Kimnell  pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a)  of
    the TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  for  the
asylum appeal to be re-heard  before any judge  other  than  Judge  Kimnell.
The First-tier Tribunal decision on the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8
stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 13 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw













