
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03553/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12th December 2017                 |On 22nd January 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                           MR KHALID QADIR MINAAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Gita Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie
Jackson &     Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  1st  September  1997.   He
    entered the United Kingdom illegally and sought to claim asylum on  the
    basis that he and others were  engaged  in  the  process  of  smuggling
    alcohol and that his identity in that enterprise was now known and that
    he would suffer death from violence or imprisonment were he to  return.
    That claim was considered by the Secretary of State and in  a  decision
    dated 26th November 2015 the claim for protection was refused.

2.   The appellant exercised his  right  to  appeal  against  that  decision
    which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Somal  on  17th  February
    2017.  In a determination dated  27th  February  2017  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

3.   A challenge has been made to the decision  and  leave  was  granted  to
    argue the matter before the Upper Tribunal on the basis essentially  of
    burden and standard of proof or upon any other grounds.

4.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.

5.   It is a detailed determination.  The only evidence in  support  of  the
    claim is that of the appellant himself.   In  those  circumstances  the
    Judge looked closely at the accounts as given.   In  the  determination
    the Judge paid regard to the screening interview and noted  that  there
    were discrepancies between that and the asylum  interview  itself.   It
    was noted that there were discrepancies between  the  asylum  interview
    and further statements made by or on behalf of the appellant.

6.   The grounds  of  appeal  essentially  contended  that  the  Judge  gave
    excessive weight to the screening interview and failed  to  acknowledge
    that it  was  only  a  preliminary  fact  finding  interview  and  that
    therefore detail was not necessarily to be expected.  Reliance had been
    placed particularly upon JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450.

7.   The grounds contended that the  Judge  employed  an  unreasonably  high
    standard of proof to the matter and that  the  discrepancies  were  not
    such as to detract from the overall cogency of the account.

8.   It cannot be said that the Judge was  unaware  of  the  detail  of  the
    account as that was set out in some detail in the determination.

9.   In particular the appellant contended  that  on  2nd  August  2015  his
    group was ambushed by the authorities.  He managed to escape but others
    were caught and arrested.  With  the  assistance  of  his  brother  and
    maternal uncle he managed to leave Iran and eventually arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The penalty for smuggling  alcohol  was  imprisonment.
    At the screening interview the appellant contended that that  was  what
    he was doing with others but in his interview he  added  an  additional
    element to his claim, namely that, unbeknown to  him,  the  group  with
    whom he was involved was also carrying drugs.   That  carried  a  death
    penalty and it was his contention that those who had been  arrested  of
    his group had been executed.  Initially he said that  his  brother  had
    contacted him to give him this information but later he  said  that  he
    had in fact contacted his brother.

10.  In the screening interview the appellant did not  know  the  date  when
    the authorities found the alcohol but in the asylum  interview  several
    months later he was very specific about the date.  He was asked why  he
    had not mentioned the date earlier and he said that he had  been  tired
    at the screening interview.

11.  It  was  the  view  of  the  Judge  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact
    embellished his account after  the  screening  interview  to  introduce
    drugs because the penalty was far more  severe  at  the  hands  of  the
    authority to do that.  The Judge could not rule out  that  the  account
    had been well rehearsed and researched.  Such did not impose any higher
    nor standard of proof, rather is a conclusion which  was  open  to  the
    Judge to make having regard to the evidence before her.

12.  It was clear that the Judge, although paying significant regard to  the
    screening interview, also had regard to the asylum interview itself and
    to the submissions dated 23rd November  2015  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

13.  The Judge found that  the  account  of  the  appellant  was  internally
    inconsistent and had developed over time.

14.  It seems to me that the Judge was perfectly entitled to come  to  those
    conclusions and that there was no imbalance in  consideration  nor  any
    undue or unfair  weight  attached  to  one  part  of  the  evidence  in
    particular to the detriment of another.

15.  It is to be noted that the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  very
    soon after the events which he seeks to describe.  It is reasonable  to
    expect that details would be clear in the memory  and  recollection  of
    the appellant.

16.  The screening interview was conducted on 25th August 2015.  It was  his
    position then that he feared the authorities because they had found his
    alcohol and his brother had told him that the authorities were  looking
    for him.  At the date of the screening interview he indicated  that  he
    had left Iran about fifteen to twenty days beforehand.

17.  The interview itself was conducted on 16th November 2015 at which  time
    the appellant was contending that he now found  out  from  his  brother
    about the drugs.  It was claimed that his other colleagues had  already
    been executed.  The drugs had been found.

18.  No details were given as to when such drugs were found  but  that  fact
    came from the brother, the same brother seemingly who, at the  time  of
    the screening interview, had merely indicated  to  the  appellant  that
    alcohol had been found and no mention had been made at  that  stage  of
    drugs.   It was claimed that the authorities had arrested the group  in
    August and if there had been drugs it would no doubt had  been  a  fact
    known to the brother at the earlier stage of conversation.

19.  I find that the Judge was entitled to find the appellant's  account  to
    lack credibility both as to his participation in alcohol smuggling  and
    particularly so in drugs.

20.  In  those  circumstances  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  upheld,  namely
    that the appeal stands dismissed on  asylum  grounds,  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and on the grounds of human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            [pic]                      Date 19 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
