
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03942/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 18 February 2019           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Xiao [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Xiao [D], is a male citizen of  China.   By  a  decision
    promulgated 16 August 2018, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.   My  reasons
    for reaching that decision were as follows:

         1.   I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Xiao [D], was born on  18
         November 1976 and is a male  citizen  of  China.   He  entered  the
         United Kingdom clandestinely  in  1998.   He  was  convicted  on  8
         February 2008 of being involved in the cultivation/manufacture of a
         controlled drug (cannabis) and sentenced to two  years  and  eleven
         months' imprisonment.  The  appellant's  sentence  was  reduced  on
         appeal. He was served with a liability  to  deportation  notice  in
         January 2009.  He appealed against the decision to deport  him  but
         his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 11 May 2010.
          Further representations were made on the appellant's behalf but he
         subsequently absconded.  He was encountered on 13 March 2013 during
         an immigration operation and was then arrested and detained.  On 30
         April 2014, the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
         on the basis that he had established a family and private  life  in
         the United Kingdom.  The appellant was granted bail and his  appeal
         subsequent to a further refusal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  was
         dismissed by Judge Batiste but he was appeal rights exhausted by 25
         June 2015.  The appellant was detained again in July 2015 at  which
         time he made further submissions on the basis that he had converted
         to Christianity and had been living as a  Jehovah's  Witness  since
         January  2015.   In  the  meantime,  the  appellant's  partner  and
         children have been granted indefinite leave to remain on 31 January
         2016.  The decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  revoke
         the deportation order dated  6  April  2017  was  appealed  by  the
         appellant to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge G R J Robson) which, in
         a decision promulgated on 24 November 2017, allowed the  appeal  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The  appellant's  asylum  appeal  (on  the
         basis that he is a Jehovah's Witness) was dismissed.  The Secretary
         of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         There was no cross appeal in respect of the asylum decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal which the Upper Tribunal will not revisit.

         2.   I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should  be
         set aside.  The primary challenge to the decision by the  Secretary
         of State concerns a failure of the judge to make any finding as  to
         whether the removal of the  appellant  to  China  would  be  unduly
         harsh.  I note that the appellant's two sons  (HTD  and  HWD)  were
         registered as British citizens in 2016.   The  appellant's  partner
         (the mother of HTD and HWD) applied for naturalisation as a citizen
         in February 2017.

         3.   As the appellant was convicted of an offence of less than four
         years, Section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) applies:

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         4.   It was necessary for Judge Robson to analyse all the  relevant
         evidence and to  determine  whether  or  not  the  removal  of  the
         appellant from the family unit  would  be  unduly  harsh.   He  has
         failed to do this.  In his decision at [118-122] the judge  records
         that the appellant has a "strong relationship" with  his  children.
         The appellant looks after the children whilst the wife is at  work.
         The judge noted the evidence of an independent social worker  which
         indicated that "both boys felt very sad about the thought of  their
         father being deported".  The judge noted that  both  children  were
         "clearly very attached to their father and cannot contemplate being
         separated from [him]".  The judge concluded by  finding  that  "the
         separation of the father  from  the  children  would  have  a  very
         considerable negative impact on the children" [my  emphasis].   The
         judge concluded that the "public interest  is  outwayed  (sic)  and
         that in the light of the above circumstances  are  acceptable".   I
         have no idea what the second part of that last sentence is intended
         to mean but what is clear  is  that  the  judge  has  not  made  an
         unequivocal finding as to whether removal would have  unduly  harsh
         consequences.  It is not enough for  the  judge  to  say  that  the
         separation of the children from  the  father  would  have  a  "very
         considerable negative impact on the children"; the  same  could  be
         said in the vast majority of cases where a parent is separated from
         his/her children.  The failure of the judge to make an  unequivocal
         finding in respect of the relevant test has rendered his  reasoning
         unclear and his decision unsafe.  The  decision  will  need  to  be
         remade on Article 8 grounds in the Upper Tribunal.

         Notice of Decision

         5.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promogulated  24
         November 2017 is set aside.  The findings and decision  as  regards
         asylum/Article 3 ECHR are  preserved.   There  will  be  a  resumed
         hearing in the Upper Tribunal (before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at
         Bradford on a date to be fixed (two hours) at  or  following  which
         the Tribunal will remake the decision on the appeal  on  Article  8
         ECHR grounds.  Both parties may adduce fresh evidence prior to  the
         resumed hearing provided they send copies of any  written  evidence
         to the other party and to the Tribunal no later than 10 clear  days
         before the date fixed for the resumed hearing.

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 20  November  2018,  Mr  Bradshaw
    appeared  for  the  appellant.   Mr  Diwnycz,  a  Senior  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.

 3. The appellant gave evidence in  Mandarin  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.  He adopted his written  statements  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief.  The appellant's appeal on asylum grounds was dismissed  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, a decision which I  have  preserved.   The  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal proceeded on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  only.
    The standard of proof in  the  Article  8  appeal  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

 4. In his most recent witness statement,  the  appellant  states  that  he
    continues to live with his wife and two children.  The eldest child  is
    13 years old and is in year 8 of  secondary  school.   The  appellant's
    younger son was born in 2007 and is 11 years old.  The eldest child  is
    about to begin work on GCSE's.  Both children are doing well in school.
     The appellant denies that he absconded (see paragraph 1 of my error of
    law decision).

 5. I also heard evidence from Ruo Bin He, the appellant's wife.  She  also
    adopted her written statements as her evidence-in-chief.   Neither  the
    appellant nor his wife were cross-examined.

 6. The Secretary of State accepts that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his children.  As both parties agree, this
    is a case which will be determined by reference to the test  of  "undue
    hardship".  Section 117C5 of the 2002 Act provides:

         Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

 7. Save for  sub-paragraph  117B(6),  Section  117B  is  also  of  general
    application:

         The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
    interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         .....

 8. Paragraph 399(a) of HC 395 (as amended) provides:

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

 9. "Undue harsh" test has been recently examined by the Supreme  Court  in
    KO (CNL insert reference).  In particular at [23] and [32]:

         23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal  in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be
             equated with a requirement to show "very compelling  reasons".
             That would be in  effect  to  replicate  the  additional  test
             applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences  of  four
             years or more.

         ...

         32. Laws LJ's approach has the advantage of giving full weight  to
             the emphasis  on  relative  seriousness  in  section  117C(2).
             However, on closer examination of  the  language  of  the  two
             exceptions, and  of  the  relationship  of  the  section  with
             section 117B,  as  discussed  above,  I  respectfully  take  a
             different view . Once one accepts, as the  Department  did  at
             that  stage  (rightly  in  my  view),  that   the   issue   of
             "reasonableness" under section  117B(6)  is  focussed  on  the
             position of the child, it would be odd  to  find  a  different
             approach in section 117C(5) at least without  a  much  clearer
             indication of what is  intended  than  one  finds  in  section
             117C(2). It is also difficult to  reconcile  the  approach  of
             Judge Southern or Laws LJ with the  purpose  of  reducing  the
             scope  for  judicial  evaluation  (see  para  15  above).  The
             examples given by Judge Southern illustrate the point. On  his
             view, the tribunal is asked  to  decide  whether  consequences
             which are deemed unduly harsh for  the  son  of  an  insurance
             fraudster may be acceptably harsh  for  the  son  of  a  drug-
             dealer. Quite apart from the difficulty of reaching a rational
             judicial conclusion on such a question,  it  seems  to  me  in
             direct conflict with the  Zoumbas  principle  that  the  child
             should not be held responsible for the conduct of the parent.




10. The appellant relies upon a report by Rukhsana Farooqi, an  independent
    social worker.  Ms  Farooqi  considered  that  the  separation  of  the
    children from their father would cause an emotional response similar to
    bereavement [46] - [48].  She noted that "both boys felt very sad about
    the thought of their father being deported."  She found that there  was
    "a great deal of  emotional  warmth  between  the  children  and  their
    parents" and that it was "a very close cohesive and warm family with  a
    close relationship.  I found that the boys could not "contemplate being
    separated from their father.""

11. Both children are British citizens as is  their  mother.   Mr  Bradshaw
    submitted that the education of the children  would  be  very  severely
    disrupted if they accompanied the appellant  to  China.   The  children
    would be also deprived of exercising their rights as a British citizens
    if they were to leave the country permanently.

12. I am mindful of the education of these children, the eldest  child,  in
    particular, is reaching his GCSEs. On the  evidence,  I  find  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to accompany their  father  and,
    presumably, their mother to China.   The  remaining  question  in  this
    appeal is whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to  be
    deported whilst the children and their  mother  remain  living  in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. I am mindful of  the  recent  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC 53.  The assessment of 'undue  harshness'  must  be
    made irrespective of the fact that the appellant has committed  serious
    criminal offences involving drugs.  As regards the allegation that  the
    appellant  absconded,  I  accept  Mr  Bradshaw's  submission  that  the
    Secretary of State has  not  provided  any  evidence  to  support  that
    allegation.  On the standard of proof of the balance of  probabilities,
    I find that the appellant did not abscond as  alleged.   However,  that
    finding is of little  relevance  to  the  issue  in  this  appeal.   Mr
    Bradshaw submitted that the eldest child's approach to  the  taking  of
    his crucial GCSEs was an important a factor in the  appeal.   I  accept
    that being  separated  from  his  father  with  whom  he  has  a  close
    relationship at a time when, for the first time in his life, the  child
    is required to submit  to  serious  study  in  preparation  for  public
    examinations  may  prove  very  difficult.    However,   unduly   harsh
    consequences have to be more severe than circumstances which may  occur
    in any case  of  separation.   The  children's  possible  reactions  to
    deportation which are described in Ms Farooqi's  report  together  with
    the likely difficulties that the elder child will suffer coming  up  to
    his GCSEs do not, in my opinion, enter the  area  of  undue  harshness.
    Distress similar to bereavement, emotional turbulence and a struggle to
    achieve academically against a background  of  such  emotions  are  the
    likely consequences  for  any  children  separated  from  a  parent  by
    deportation. These are consequences which may be described as harsh  or
    even 'duly' harsh (in the sense that they are likely to  occur  in  any
    family) but they cannot, in my view, be described as unduly harsh.   In
    reaching that conclusion, I have been careful to base  my  analysis  on
    the evidence and to avoid speculation.

14. I have had regard to those parts of Section 117B which  apply  in  this
    instance.  I have considered also the effect of  deportation  upon  the
    appellant's partner.  Whilst I recognise that she would suffer distress
    by reason of the appellant's deportation, I do not find,  by  reference
    to [13] above, that the effect of that deportation upon would be unduly
    harsh. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

