
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03300/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2019                         |On 10 September 2019              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                Mr M A F A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz, Solicitor, A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Kuwait born on 1 July 1982.  He arrived in
the United Kingdom on 2 January 2019, claiming asylum the following day on
the basis that he is an undocumented Bidoon who had attended demonstrations
in Kuwait following which he had been arrested and detained and
subsequently fled from Kuwait, fearing he would be arrested and killed if
he returned.  This application was refused by the Secretary of State, in a
decision dated 21 March 2019.

The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lloyd-Smith for hearing in Manchester on
14 May 2019.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 20 May 2019, the
judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds, finding that the Appellant had
not established that he is an undocumented Bidoon and that he would not be
at risk of persecution or treatment in breach of his human rights if he
were to be returned.

Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis of the following
grounds:

there was procedural unfairness in that the judge appears to have made an
after the event observation that the Appellant's claim to have attended a
demonstration on 18 February 2014 was the same day but there was a
difference of three years to the date his witness is said to have attended
a demonstration in his appeal, the witness having attended on 18 February
2011; that it was clear that this was not put to the Appellant or his
witness to allow them the opportunity to respond and that the background
evidence shows that there were protests by Kuwaiti Bidoons in both February
2011 and February 2014.

the judge made irrational findings, in particular in relation to the
Appellant's attendance at demonstrations;

the judge failed to have regard to material evidence when assessing the
credibility of the Appellant's arrest, in particular the Home Office CPIN,
which provides at [5.5.3] evidence in relation to the protests in 2014, and
fourthly,

that the judge failed to give sufficient reasons for her findings.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray in a
decision dated 20 June 2019 on the basis that:

"It is arguable that the adverse finding at 14(b) of the decision is flawed
in relation to the February demonstrations as this was a matter in respect
of which the Appellant was not on notice and one which could be countered
by objective evidence.  Whilst the other grounds are less arguable I do not
refuse permission in light of Safi and Others (permission to appeal
decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC)."

     Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates expressly accepted in
relation to the first ground, i.e. procedural fairness and the manner in
which the judge had dealt with the issue of the dates of the
demonstrations, that this had not been raised by the Presenting Officer as
a matter for cross-examination and that he accepted he was in difficulties
defending the judge's decision in this respect.

Mr Bates also expressly accepted that he was in some difficulties in
relation to ground 2 and the assertion that there were irrational findings,
one of those being the judge's reliance on the fact that the Appellant was
illiterate, which he found was inconsistent with the fact that he was also
made to sign an undertaking.  Mr Bates accepted that the judge had not gone
far enough in terms of providing reasons as to why this did not mean that
the Appellant could not have had the statement read to him or explained.

Ms Naz sought also to rely on her challenge to the judge's finding at
[17](b). This was in relation to the finding concerning the Appellant's
accommodation in the UK and his relatives.  However, in light of Mr Bates'
express acceptance that there were errors in the judge's decision and that
those errors were material to a proper assessment of the Appellant's
credibility, it was agreed that the decision be set aside in its entirety
and listed for a de novo hearing before a different Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal.

     Decision

I find and agree with the express concession by Mr Bates for the Respondent
that there are material errors in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Lloyd-Smith.  I set that decision aside and remit the appeal for a hearing
de novo before the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Manchester.  I make the
following directions:

(i)  The appeal should be listed for two hours;

(ii)     An Arabic (Gulf) interpreter should be booked for the hearing;

(iii)     Any further documentation upon which the parties wish to rely
should be served on    the First tier Tribunal and the other party five
working days before the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
