
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03010/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   | |
|Centre                                  |                                 | |
|On: 23rd November 2018                  |On: 12th February 2019           | |
|                                        |                                 | |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Atuegbe, Solicitor, R&A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal  who  seeks  protection  in  the
       United Kingdom. In its determination dated the 25th January 2018  the
       First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Knowles)  dismissed  his  appeal.  Judge
       Knowles rejected the Appellant's claim to be (alternatively) at  risk
       from Maoists and the government. The fact that the  Appellant's  home
       might have been destroyed in the  earthquake  was  not  a  sufficient
       basis to grant leave. The Tribunal further rejected  the  Appellant's
       claim to have converted from Buddhism to Christianity.

    2. The Appellant appealed to this Tribunal. On the 12th January 2018 the
       matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell. Judge Birrell
       upheld the First-tier Tribunal decision in all respects but  one:  in
       finding that the Appellant had  not  converted  to  Christianity  the
       Tribunal had erred in going behind a concession of fact made  by  the
       Respondent, and in so doing had failed to conduct a  risk  assessment
       of the possible dangers the Appellant  faced  as  a  convert.   Judge
       Birrell set the findings on Christianity aside and ordered  that  the
       matter remain in the Upper Tribunal, so that further submissions  and
       findings could  be  made  on  any  possible  risk  arising  from  the
       Appellant's conversion.

    3. Unfortunately it has not been possible to have  the  matter  relisted
       before Judge Birrell, and this has  resulted  in  some  delay.  Upper
       Tribunal Judge O'Connor signed a Transfer Order on  the  30th  August
       2018 and the matter was  then  relisted  before  me.   At  the  short
       hearing on the 23rd November 2018 it was agreed between  the  parties
       that the Respondent's concession  as  to  the  Appellant's  Christian
       faith stood; it was further agreed  that  I  could  conduct  my  risk
       assessment on the  basis  of  the  country  background  material  and
       submissions made by the parties in writing. I would not need to  hear
       further evidence from the Appellant. I am very grateful  to  both  Mr
       Atuegbe and  Mr  McVeety  for  their  helpful  and  succinct  written
       submissions.

    4. The agreed facts personal to the Appellant are that he has  was  born
       and raised a Buddhist but in 2015, in the United Kingdom, he  started
       attending church. He was baptised on Easter Sunday, in 2016. He is  a
       regular member of the Anglican congregation at  St  Pauls  Church  in
       Withington, South Manchester;

       The Appellant's Case

    5. The Appellant's bundle contains several articles by 'Open Doors USA',
       an American organisation which describes  itself  as  providing  "the
       world's largest outreach to persecuted Christians in the  most  high-
       risk places". In February 2018 'Open Doors' placed Nepal as number 25
       on its 'watch list' list of countries where Christians face the  most
       persecution for their faith.   The  articles  contain  references  to
       Christians facing criminal sanction for  promoting  their  faith.  In
       June 2016 seven people were arrested for handing out  bibles,  and  a
       woman who was 'looking after poor children' was sent  to  prison  for
       three months after being convicted of attempting to evangelise.   Her
       sentence has  subsequently  been  increased  to  three  years.    The
       background to these arrests is the  October  2017  amendment  to  the
       criminal code, in which religious conversion was  outlawed.   Similar
       incidents are reported by 'christianitytoday.com', a  Christian  news
       website.   In another incident in April 2017 arsonists  set  fire  to
       the Catholic Cathedral in Kathmandu.   The articles report that  many
       of the most recent converts  to  Christianity  are  Hindus  from  the
       'Dalit' underclass, and that many of those objecting to the spread of
       Christianity are extremist Hindu nationalists who seek  closer  union
       with India.

    6. Mr Atuegbe's written submissions make reference to those  aspects  of
       Nepalese law which, he says, place converts such as the Appellant  at
       risk.  Although I have not been given a direct translation of the law
       in question it is summarised in the US State Department International
       Religious Freedom Report for 2017:

           'The constitution stipulates every person has the right to
           profess, practice, and protect his or her religion. While
           exercising this right, the constitution bans individuals from
           engaging in any acts "contrary to public health, decency, and
           morality" or which "disturb the public law and order situation."
           It also prohibits persons from converting other persons from one
           religion to another or disturbing the religion of others, and
           states violations are punishable by law.

           On August 8, the parliament passed a new criminal code, signed
           into law by the president on October 16, which reduces the
           punishment for converting - or encouraging the conversion of -
           another person or for engaging in any act, including the
           propagating of religion, that undermines the religion, faith, or
           belief of any caste, ethnic group, or community, from six years
           to five years' imprisonment. The law is scheduled to take effect
           in August 2018. It also stipulates a fine of up to Nepali Rupees
           (NPR) 50,000 ($490) and subjects foreign nationals convicted of
           these crimes to deportation. The new criminal code also imposes
           punishments of up to two years' imprisonment and a fine of up to
           NPR 20,000 ($200) for harming the religious sentiment of any
           caste, ethnic community, or class, either in speech or writing.'

       The Respondent's Case

    7. The Respondent accepts that the  Appellant  is  Christian,  and  that
       Christians are a minority in Nepal, constituting at best  7%  of  the
       population, but for the reasons set out in his  refusal  letter  does
       not accept that he would face a real risk  of  harm.  The  Respondent
       acknowledges the evidence provided by the US State Department to  the
       effect that Christian organisations and institutions such as  schools
       can face difficulty in registering and operating, but notes:

           'The government has not enforced the ban on converting others,
           according to Christian groups and legal experts. Christian
           groups have interpreted this ban as including a ban on
           proselytizing. Human rights lawyers and leaders of religious
           minorities expressed concern that the constitution's ban on
           conversion could make religious minorities vulnerable to
           persecution for preaching or public displays of faith.

           Media reports stated some Christian social welfare organizations
           engaged in proselytizing while distributing relief supplies to
           communities affected by the April 25 earthquake. According to
           Christian groups, foreign missionaries did not declare to the
           government any intent to proselytize publicly. The government
           reportedly did not expel any foreign workers for proselytizing.
           There were no arrests for violating the anti-conversion law,
           according to the Office of the Attorney General, but Catholic
           and Protestant leaders said foreign and local missionaries
           attempted to keep their activities discreet to avoid this
           possibility.

           Christian groups reported encountering difficulties in
           registering as NGOs or nonprofits. A human rights lawyer stated
           the government had initially rejected the application of his
           client, a Christian organization, for registration as a
           nonprofit on the grounds the organization preached Christianity.
           When the lawyer submitted a revised application, the government
           approved it, but did not approve some of the "objectives" of the
           organization indicated in the application, including preaching,
           establishing churches, and helping the poor.

           Christian leaders and human rights lawyers said a constitutional
           provision establishing the government's authority to "make law
           to operate and protect a religious place or religious trust and
           to manage trust property and regulate land management" could
           allow the government to formulate legislation for the
           registration of Christian churches, and possibly of other
           organizations of religious minorities, as religious
           institutions.

           Christian missionary hospitals, welfare organizations, and
           schools continued to operate without government interference,
           according to Christian leaders. Many foreign Christian
           organizations had direct ties to local churches and sponsored
           clergy for religious training abroad.

           Leaders of religious minorities stated most converts to other
           religions, including Hindus who converted to Christianity, were
           willing and able to state publicly their new religious
           affiliation without fear of retribution. Christian leaders
           stated a small, decreasing number of converts to Christianity
           tried to conceal their faith from their families and local
           communities, mainly in rural areas.

           Christian leaders stated Hindu nationalist politicians, as part
           of the movement to declared Nepal a Hindu state during the
           constitution drafting process, made speeches threatening to
           "drive out" Christians if they did not convert to Hinduism.
           According to the Christian leaders reporting these incidents,
           the politicians were not prominent, and there were no reports of
           attempted forced conversions to Hinduism. Some media outlets
           reported that Christian groups engaged in "forced" conversion
           through promises of material gain or trickery.'

    8. The Respondent submits that it is  open  to  the  Appellant  and  his
       family to return to Nepal and continue to  practice  as  a  Christian
       along with the estimated 1.5 million other Christians in the country.
       Whilst the articles produced by the Appellant are  alarmist  in  tone
       they are not objective sources.




       Discussion and Findings

    9. The country background material suggests that Christians in  Nepal  -
       in particular those who have converted to Christianity from  Hinduism
       - have on occasion been targeted by Hindu  nationalists  who  believe
       that Nepal should be an officially Hindu state. Two features of these
       cases stand out.   The first is that many such converts were formerly
       Dalits, a fact which would appear to  have  increased  the  animosity
       shown towards them by Hindu extremists.  The second is  that  in  the
       vast majority of the incidents cited in the Appellant's bundle, those
       targeted have been engaged in proselytising, or  behaviour  perceived
       as such. It is that kind of activity with which the law cited by  the
       Appellant is concerned with.

   10. The Respondent points out that the Appellant is not,  and  has  never
       been, a Hindu. He was raised a Buddhist. I  have  not  been  able  to
       identify, in  the  material  before  me,  any  examples  of  Buddhist
       converts to Christianity being targeted in any way.

   11. Nor is there any evidence before  me  that  the  Appellant  considers
       evangelism to be an important element - or indeed any  element  -  of
       his  faith.  Letters  from  the  church  warden,   members   of   the
       congregation and the  church  council  secretary  all  speak  to  his
       personal devotion and attendance at  church,  but  none  mention  any
       evangelical role. The Appellant has been involved  in  raising  money
       for charity, and volunteers at a  community  kitchen,  but  there  is
       nothing to suggest that he is active in 'spreading the word'.

   12. With those two factors in mind, I am unable, even applying the  lower
       standard of proof, to find that the Appellant faces a  real  risk  of
       persecution in Nepal for reasons of his religious belief.

   13. The law which prohibits "disturbing the faith of others"  appears  to
       be exclusively directed at those who are  actively  proselytising.  I
       could find no evidence to  suggest  that  it  has  been  directed  at
       Christians engaged  in  private  worship,  an  activity  specifically
       protected by the constitution.    The  articles  in  the  Appellant's
       bundle  express  concern  that  such  a  law  could  be  used  in   a
       discriminatory  manner  to  target  members   of   minority   faiths.
       Comparison is drawn with the blasphemy laws  in  Pakistan.  I  accept
       that for organisations  engaged  with  the  defence  of  Christianity
       worldwide that it is a legitimate  concern:  such  groups  have  good
       reason to campaign against such legislation.  It is not  however,  on
       the evidence before me, a concern which is yet borne out by  reality.
       Nor is there any reason  to  believe  that  the  Appellant  would  be
       targeted by a malicious allegation because of his faith.  In addition
       the attacks and prosecutions that have taken place have been very few
       in number.    Even if the population size of Nepalese  Christians  is
       as small as 350,000 (other estimates are as high as 1.7 million)  the
       percentage of Christians  experiencing  difficulty  is  tiny.  Again,
       there is no reason to believe that the Appellant would be  vulnerable
       to attack or arrest.

       Anonymity

   14. Having regard to the fact that  this  is  a  protection  claim  I  am
       prepared to make the following direction for anonymity,  pursuant  to
       Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the
       Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the
           Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
           contempt of court proceedings".

       Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  and
       the decision has been set aside.

   16. I remake the decision  in  the  appeal  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
       dismissed on protection grounds.

   17. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          20th December 2018
