
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03052/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th February 2018                 |On 10th April 2018                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR. S A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Ms A Harvey, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. Although it is the Secretary of State who  is  appealing  in  these
         proceedings, for convenience, I  will  continue  to  refer  to  the
         parties hereinafter as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant claimed he was an uneducated  Iraqi  Kurd.  He  lived
         with his family in a village in the Independent Kurdish Region. His
         elder brother by almost a year had been  in  a  relationship  which
         included sexual intercourse  with  a  local  girl;  S.  Her  family
         discovered the relationship and in  2013  threatened  to  kill  his
         brother.  In  October  2014  their  village  was  destroyed  in   a
         bombardment and all his family killed except for  his  brother  who
         was out working in  the  fields.  They  lived  with  friends  until
         January 2015 when they went to live in the city of  Soran.  In  May
         his brother discovered that S's family had been trying to find him.
         They decided to leave immediately and with the  help  of  an  agent
         crossed into Turkey. In December  2015  they  split  up,  with  the
         appellant arriving in Paris some six months later.  From  there  he
         went to Calais and then on  to  the  United  Kingdom,  arriving  in
         September 2016.

      3. His claim is that he would be  at  risk  in  Iraq  because  of  his
         association with his brother. The Refugee Convention was engaged on
         the basis this made him part of a particular social group.

    The refusal

      4. His claim was refused  by  the  respondent  with  his  account  not
         considered credible. It was accepted he was an Iraqi Kurd. Although
         he claimed to have been born in 2000 an age assessment put  him  at
         being at least one and a half years older, albeit still a minor.

      5. The account of his brother being a  relationship  with  S  was  not
         believed, with inconsistencies noted. The respondent also  did  not
         accept his village had been destroyed in 2014 and  located  country
         information that there had been an attack but in 2016. His claim of
         being suspected of being a member of the PKK  was  rejected,  based
         upon his general credibility.

      6. Even if the claim were true there was sufficiency of protection  or
         alternatively, the option of relocation with the IKR. Regarding  AA
         (article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 his village is in  Erbil,
         a none contested area. It was felt he could return there or  go  to
         another area in the IKR.

    The First tier Tribunal

      7. His appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas  at
         Birmingham on 22 September 2017. In a decision  promulgated  on  31
         October  2017  it  was   allowed.   At   the   appeal   stage   his
         representatives had obtained a psychiatric report  which  diagnosed
         him as having depression and post-traumatic stress. It  was  argued
         on his behalf that this should be taken into  account,  along  with
         his age, when assessing the credibility of the claim as well as the
         reasonableness of relocation. A report had also been obtained  from
         Dr George, a country expert.

      8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas found that the appellant lived  in
         a  small  village  of  several  houses  and  that  S  lived  in   a
         neighbouring town. The judge referred to  the  country  information
         and a report from Dr George to the effect that both Turkey and Iran
         had shelled Kurdish villagers and accepted, given the appellant was
         from a small village, an attack on it would not be documented.

      9.  In the appellant's oral evidence he said that  afterwards  he  and
         his brother went to live in the town were S  was  from.  The  judge
         accepted as credible they would take the risk of going there out of
         necessity.

     10. The appellant had also said he and his brother had not been allowed
         out because of fear of S's family. However, his  account  had  been
         they were away attending farmlands when their home  was  bombarded.
         The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that the  farmland  was
         nearby.

     11. The judge also accepted their account that they could  not  produce
         documentation because of the bombing of their home  and  that  they
         were initially suspected of being in the PKK.

     12. The judge then referred to honour based killings being  traditional
         in Iraq and that the local authorities avoid involvement. The judge
         concluded that there would not be sufficiency  of  protection  from
         S's family and that relocation was not viable given the appellant's
         age; the lack of reception facilities and the absence of family  or
         other  support  bearing  in  mind  his  mental  health.  The  judge
         concluded there was a real risk he would fall into destitution.

    The Upper Tribunal

     13. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis  the  judge
         materially erred in law in finding the appellant would be  at  risk
         from S's family. He and his brother had been able to  live  in  the
         same town as she was from and there was no evidence to  suggest  he
         would be of any interest to her family. It was also argued that the
         evidence did not justify a finding that he could not relocate.  The
         medical evidence produced had stated that was  treatment  available
         and his mental state would not necessarily deteriorate  if  it  was
         absent. It was pointed out he had been able to support himself  and
         travel across Europe. Permission was granted on the ground sought.

     14. At the outset  of  the  hearing  both  representatives  agreed  the
         question of relocation was confined to the IKR. The  appellant  had
         initially indicated that he and S were from the same village but in
         oral evidence said he was from a village and she was from  a  town.
         Mr Melvin made the point that on his account he and his brother had
         been able to live for two months in the same town where S's  family
         where after their home had been damaged without coming to harm.  He
         could give no  explanation  as  to  what  had  happened  to  S.  At
         paragraph 30 of the decision the judge found that after the bombing
         the appellant had been hiding in the town where S's family were for
         two months. However, at paragraph 20 of his statement he said  that
         he and his brother stayed with a family  friend  in  the  town  and
         during that time they helped farm their land and did not  refer  to
         being in hiding.

     15. He submitted the judge had not considered if the girl's family  had
         any influence outside their local area. A considerable time  passed
         before the appellant left the country and the fact they came to  no
         harm is not reflected in the judge's conclusions.

     16.  The presenting officer submitted that the  appellant  had  changed
         his account at hearing.  The  diagnosis  of  post-traumatic  stress
         disorder was queried in relation to  the  existence  of  any  index
         incident. In any event, there would be treatment available for  the
         appellant in his home country.

     17. In response, Ms Harvey referred me to the  rule  24  response.  She
         submitted that the challenge was no more than a disagreement by the
         respondent with the  judge's  findings.  She  referred  me  to  the
         country expert report and the complicated nature of feuds in  Iraq.
         Regarding internal relocation, she submitted  the  judge  had  made
         sustainable findings that the appellant could well  end  up  as  an
         internally displaced person and  would  face  undue  hardship.  She
         referred to the humanitarian situation in the country.

    Consideration

     18. The respondent had not accepted the underlying claim was  true  and
         questioned the appellant's  credibility.  The  appellant  had  said
         after the girl's family approached his he and his brother  did  not
         go out yet they were out alone when  their  home  was  bombed.  His
         explanation is that they were within eyesight, farming land.  There
         was then the issue of them going to live in the same town as a girl
         was living with her family. Originally, it  was  recorded  she  was
         from the same village. Again, although he said they did not go  out
         his evidence was not consistent.

     19. The grounds are premised on the claim made being accepted and argue
         there was no evidence to show the girl's family were interested  in
         him. It was pointed out that he and his brother lived in  the  same
         town as her family after their own home was bombed and did not come
         to harm. Thereafter, they lived in a city for almost  half  a  year
         without difficulty.

     20. The First-tier Judge at paragraph 33 found the appellant  would  be
         at risk of an  honour-based  killing  and  in  his  home  area  the
         authorities would not offer  him  protection.  Dr  George,  in  his
         report acknowledged that whilst the account may  be  plausible  the
         determination of whether it was true was a matter for the Tribunal.
         He pointed out this was not a blood feud because there had been  no
         killing but would be considered an  honour  killing.  He  made  the
         point that men are better placed to take evasive action and, on the
         question of relocation, indicated the person would need to  have  a
         profile to rule this  out  as  an  option.  The  appellant  in  his
         statement said that if his brother were not in the country  as  the
         only male survivor he would then be targeted.

     21. The judge considered the question of relocation paragraph  34.  The
         judge concluded this was not viable because of his youth; his  lack
         of family support and his mental state.  However,  the  psychiatric
         report provided indicated that if  he  received  no  treatment  his
         condition was likely to  be  static.  It  was  suggested  he  would
         benefit from medication  and  cognitive  behavioural  therapy.  The
         report from Dr  Pargeter  indicates  that  public  health  care  is
         available but is poor by Western standards.  Generally,  conditions
         are better in the IKR than outside  in  Iraq.  Whilst  there  is  a
         shortage of  staff  medication  is  available  and  there  is  some
         behavioural therapy.

     22. The judge does not  refer  to  the  medical  assistance  available.
         Whilst at that stage the appellant was a minor he  was  approaching
         adult hood and had managed to support himself for extended  periods
         and to settle in the United Kingdom.

     23. I have considered the decision in its entirety. I  find  the  judge
         has materially erred in law by not providing an adequate assessment
         of the risk for the appellant and the viability  of  relocation  to
         avoid any localised risk.  The  appellant  had  not  been  directly
         threatened and there was no evidence  that  the  family  had  links
         throughout the IKR. The judge did not factor in the assessment that
         medical  treatment  would  be  available  and  the  extent  of  his
         disability.

    Decision

     24. I find the respondent's grounds are made out and that the  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas  materially  errs  in  law  and
         cannot stand. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
         a de novo hearing. None of the facts are preserved.

Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge 2nd April 2018


    Directions.

    1.   Relist for a de novo hearing before any First-tier  Judge,  except
    Tribunal Judge Thomas.

    2.   The appellant's  representatives  are  to  advise  the  First-tier
    Tribunal office if an interpreter is required.
