
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03336/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 29 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     FP
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Uddin, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to her asylum claim and sensitive medical evidence concerning her.

      2. The appellant has appealed against a decision  made  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge O'Brien, sent on 26 April 2018 in which  her
         appeal on protection and human rights grounds was dismissed.

Background

      3. Judge O'Brien took into account  a  medico-legal  report  dated  24
         February 2017, prepared by  Dr  Clark.   This  is  a  detailed  and
         comprehensive report which concludes that the appellant's PTSD  and
         depressive symptoms as well as her scarring,  are  consistent  with
         her claimed detention and torture in Cameroon, prior to  coming  to
         the UK in 2014.

      4. At [41], Judge O'Brien accepted Dr Clark's  "physical  observations
         and psychological diagnosis" of the  appellant  but  described  her
         report as "far from determinative of the appellant's account of the
         latter events in Cameroon".  In so finding, Judge O'Brien  observed
         that Dr Clark failed to take into account the possibility that  the
         appellant's scars may have been caused during her first  period  of
         detention in 2012, and not as claimed by the appellant  during  her
         second period of detention in 2014.  Judge  O'Brien  observed  that
         when the appellant's asylum claim was first considered by FTT Judge
         Jerromes, in a decision dated 18 April 2016 (and  therefore  before
         Dr Clark's report), the appellant's claim to have been detained and
         tortured in  2012  was  accepted,  but  subsequent  claimed  events
         leading to a claimed 2014 detention were not.  Judge  O'Brien  also
         noted that Dr Clark failed  to  consider  whether  the  scars  were
         caused during the appellant's childhood when she reported  beatings
         by a relative.  Judge O'Brien did not accept that  the  appellant's
         injuries were caused in the  manner  claimed,  found  her  evidence
         relevant to the 2014 detention to be unreliable and  dismissed  the
         appeal on all grounds.

      5. The appellant sought permission to appeal against  Judge  O'Brien's
         decision in wide-ranging grounds of appeal, that mostly focus  upon
         the  approach  to  Dr  Clarke's  evidence   and   the   appellant's
         vulnerability in the light of  it.   The  FTT  and  Upper  Tribunal
         ('UT') both refused to grant the appellant permission to appeal.

      6. In a decision dated 13 March 2019, HHJ Worster, sitting as  a  High
         Court Judge, granted the appellant permission to challenge the UT's
         refusal to grant permission to appeal, by way of  judicial  review.
         The matter now comes before me to determine whether Judge O'Brien's
         decision contains an error of law, as identified in the grounds  of
         appeal.





Vulnerable witness

      7. At the beginning of the hearing before me, the parties agreed  with
         me that the appellant should be treated as a  vulnerable  appellant
         in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2  of
         2010 ('the Guidance').  Judge O'Brien accepted Dr Clark's diagnosis
         of PTSD and depressive symptoms.

SSHD's concession

      8. I did not need to hear from Mr  Uddin  because  Mr  Mills  conceded
         there was an error of law in the FTT's decision, such that it needs
         to be remade entirely.  The appellant should have been treated as a
         vulnerable appellant by the FTT. The failure  to  do  so  expressly
         meant that the FTT failed to apply the Guidance when assessing  the
         appellant's evidence, and failed to make credibility findings  with
         the Guidance in mind.  The  FTT  failed  to  properly  address  the
         detailed evidence in Dr Clark's carefully prepared  medical  report
         regarding  the  appellant's  mental  health,  and  its  credibility
         assessment contained errors of law as a result.

Legal framework

      9. In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, Sir Ernest  Ryder,
         the Senior President of Tribunals, considered an appeal involving a
         young man from Afghanistan with a claimed traumatic  history.    In
         AM's case the psychologist offered advice as to how AM could obtain
         effective access to justice given his  psychological  difficulties.
         It was agreed before the Court of Appeal  that  insufficient  steps
         had been taken to ensure that the proceedings were fair.  Ryder  LJ
         said this in AM (my emphasis):

             "30.      To assist parties and tribunals a Practice Direction
             'First-tier and Upper Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
             Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by the Senior President,  Sir
             Robert Carnwath, with the agreement of the Lord Chancellor  on
             30 October 2008. In addition, joint Presidential Guidance Note
             No 2 of 2010 was issued by the then President of UTIAC,  Blake
             J and the acting President of  the  FtT  (IAC),  Judge  Arfon-
             Jones. The directions and guidance contained in them are to be
             followed and for the convenience of  practitioners,  they  are
             annexed to this judgment. Failure to  follow  them  will  most
             likely be a material error of law. They are to be found in the
             Annex to this judgment.

             31. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance]  provide  detailed
             guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal  to  an
             incapacitated or vulnerable person.  I  agree  with  the  Lord
             Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

                  a.   the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                  is encouraged, if at all possible, before any  substantive
                  hearing through the use of a CMRH  or  pre-hearing  review
                  (Guidance [4] and [5]);

                  b.   a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                  need to attend as a witness to give  oral  evidence  where
                  the tribunal determines that "the evidence is necessary to
                  enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and  their  welfare
                  would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD [2] and  Guidance
                  [8] and [9]);

                  c.   where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                  oral evidence, detailed provision is to be made to  ensure
                  their welfare is protected before and during  the  hearing
                  (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

                  d.   it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                  of the  personal  circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                  vulnerable person in assessing  their  evidence  (Guidance
                  [10.2] to [15]); and

                  e.    relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                  identified in the Guidance  including  from  international
                  bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).

     10. At [33] Ryder LJ observed that the emphasis on the determination of
         credibility in an asylum appeal is such that  there  is  particular
         force in the Guidance at [13] to [15], which states as follows:

             "13.       The  weight  to   be   placed   upon   factors   of
             vulnerability may differ depending on the matter under appeal,
             the burden and standard of proof and whether the individual is
             a witness or an appellant.

             14. Consider the evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  appellant  compared
             to those are not vulnerable, in the context of  evidence  from
             others  associated  with  the  appellant  and  the  background
             evidence before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in
             the oral evidence, consider the extent  to  which  by  mental,
             psychological or emotional  trauma  or  disability;  the  age,
             vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
             that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

             15. The  decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
             concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable
             or  sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the
             identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence  before
             it and thus whether the Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the
             appellant had established his or  her  case  to  the  relevant
             standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
             to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a
             state of mind."

Error of law

     11. As set out above, Mr Mills was correct to make  the  concession  he
         did.  Given that the respondent agrees that the  decision  must  be
         set aside and remitted to the FTT,  I  can  set  out  my  reasoning
         briefly.  However it is important to  set  out  this  out  so  that
         hopefully lessons can be learnt.  I recognise the FTT's decision is
         carefully  drafted  and  makes  wide  ranging  adverse  credibility
         findings as well as endorsing the adverse findings  made  by  Judge
         Jerromes.  It is not necessary  for  me  to  address  each  of  the
         grounds of appeal regarding the credibility findings or indeed  the
         other findings made by the FTT,  because  there  has  been  such  a
         fundamental error of approach to the approach  to  the  appellant's
         vulnerability and the observations in relation to it in Dr Clarke's
         report, that the entire decision must be set aside.

     12. Judge O'Brien failed to take  into  account  the  matters  set  out
         below.

          i) The medical evidence pointed in one direction:  the  appellant
             should have been treated as a  vulnerable  appellant.   After,
             all the rule 35 report led to  the  appellant's  release  from
             immigration detention for the reasons  set  out  in  the  Home
             Office's summary  dated  6  January  2017  and  Judge  O'Brien
             accepted Dr Clarke's psychological diagnosis.

         ii) The failure to do so meant that Judge O'Brien failed to  apply
             the Guidance when assessing the evidence, and therefore failed
             to take account of the importance of the matters  set  out  at
             10.3, 14 and 15 of  the  Guidance  (see  above).   Failure  to
             follow the Guidance in a case  such  as  this  constitutes  an
             error of law.

        iii) Judge O'Brien failed to properly address the detailed evidence
             in Dr Clarke's carefully prepared report, when making  adverse
             credibility findings and  in  rejecting  her  account  of  the
             events  surrounding  the  2014   detention.    This   evidence
             includes, inter alia at [6.5]  of  the  report:  the  multiple
             layers of trauma and  the  likely  multi-factorial  PTSD;  the
             timeline for the commencement of  trauma  symptoms  after  the
             second detention; a  reasoned  conclusion  that  the  PTSD  is
             particularly  related  to  detention  and   ill-treatment   in
             Cameroon.

         iv) When addressing the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's  fears,
             Judge O'Brien also failed to address Dr  Clarke's  opinion  at
             [6.7] that her fears of ill-treatment in Cameroon is a  "major
             stressor  and   therefore   appears   a   predominant   factor
             exacerbating psychological symptoms".

          v) Judge O'Brien failed to  consider  whether  the  discrepancies
             identified at [43 and 44] and [48] of the decision,  might  be
             explained by the appellant's PTSD, in the light of Dr Clarke's
             report, particularly at [6.10].

Conclusion

     13. It follows that the criticisms in the grounds of  appeal  aimed  at
         the FTT's approach to Dr Clarke's report and  failure  to  properly
         apply the Guidance are made out.  There are material errors of  law
         in the decision of the FTT.

Disposal

     14. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  This  is  because
         completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.



Decision

     15. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     16. The appeal shall be remade in the FTT de novo,  by  a  judge  other
         than Judge O'Brien.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 29 August 2019
