
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03015/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th March 2019                   |On 11th April 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                SHAHRAMI [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant who claims to be a national of  Iran  was  born  on  10th
    October 1993.  He was represented  by  Mr  Bass.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Howells, a Senior Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in July  2015  and  claimed
    asylum  shortly  after  arrival.   The  Respondent  had   refused   the
    Appellant's claim on 14th March  2017.   The  Appellant  appealed  that
    decision and the appeal had firstly  come  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyes on 9th June 2017.  He had dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
    at a hearing where the  Appellant  and  his  representatives  were  not
    present.  That decision had been appealed and by reasons promulgated on
    4th May 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips found that a material
    error of law had been made and directed that the  matter  was  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 3. The matter came back before First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  sitting  at
    Newport on 21st August 2018.  The judge had dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal  was  made
    and granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 14th November 2018.   It  was
    said that it was arguable that the judge had erred when concluding that
    the Appellant was from Iraq rather than from Iran because he had failed
    to look at all the available material evidence.  Directions were issued
    for the Upper Tribunal firstly to consider whether an error of law  had
    been made in this case and the matter came before me in accordance with
    those directions.

The Proceedings

 4. I heard submissions on behalf of the Appellant highlighting those areas
    where it was said the judge had  failed  to  pay  regard  and  had  not
    therefore  looked  at  all  the  available   material   evidence   when
    considering that initial point as to the Appellant's nationality.

 5. Mr Howells on behalf of the Respondent  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in the manner described within the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and within submissions.  It was agreed that it  was  appropriate
    for this case to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  make
    the decision afresh in light of those  material  errors  and  that  the
    matter should be listed before a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than
    Judges Page and Boyes.

Notice of Decision

By agreement a material error of law was made in this  case  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge and I therefore set aside the decision of that  Tribunal
and direct that the matter proceed to a fresh hearing on all matters  before
a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Page or Boyes.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

