

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03712/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|Centre                                 |On 17 April 2019                    |
|On 10 January 2019                     |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                     HC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by the Greater
Manchester  Immigration Aid Unit.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Devlin dated 1 May 2018 following a hearing at the
      Manchester hearing centre on 19 April 2018.

2     The appellant is a national of Guinea  who  last  entered  the  United
      Kingdom on 4 February 2017. He made a  protection  claim  on  4  April
      2017, asserting  that  he  was  at  risk  of  serious  harm  from  the
      authorities in  Guinea  for  reason  of  his  political  opinion.  The
      appellant claims to have been politically active for the  UFDG  party,
      and also to have set up an Non-Governmental  Organisation;  there  was
      some suggestion that the authorities  suspected  that  his  activities
      within this NGO were also political. The Respondent had  rejected  the
      appellant's claim and the appellant appealed  to  the  judge.  He  was
      unrepresented before the judge.

3     The judge noted at [37] that  the  appellant's  account  had  remained
      consistent in its basic focus and  outline  throughout.  However,  the
      appellant's account involved a sequence of events occurring in  Guinea
      between 20th and 25th February 2017,  ie  after  he  had  entered  the
      United Kingdom. The judge noted conflicts in the oral and  documentary
      evidence as to the number, dates, and locations of certain raids  said
      to have taken place on the appellant's property (whether his home, the
      office of his own business, or his NGO office)  and  whether  and  how
      many times his office manager, FS, had himself  been  arrested  during
      those events. The judge considered these matters within  his  decision
      between [43]-[60], and found that the Appellant's  evidence  on  these
      mattes was unreliable (end of [58]).

4     Although the judge rejected at [38]-[42]  and  at  [92]-[100]  certain
      other concerns raised by the respondent about the appellant's account,
      the judge held that certain other elements of the account were  to  be
      regarded as 'somewhat suspect': at [72], the appellant's claim that he
      had remained at home following his own arrest and detention in October
      2016 because his lawyer had advised him to do so; and at [82], that  a
      wanted person's warrant had been  issued  in  respect  of  him  on  20
      February 2017. Further, certain discrepancies in the  arrest  warrant,
      considered at [84]-[91] and at [101]-[110] were held by the  judge  to
      adversely affect the weight that the judge was prepared  to  attribute
      to it. The Judge also noted that the Appellant had  not  produced  any
      medical evidence in support of his appeal. The appeal was dismissed.

5     The appellant, or someone assisting him, prepared  manuscript  grounds
      of appeal challenging the judge's decision. These argued, in  summary,
      that the judge had erred in law in:

      (i)   failing to adjourn the appeal to enable the appellant to  obtain
           medical evidence;

      (ii)  failing to have regard to certain GP notes which were before him
           which were said to establish that the GP had diagnosed that  the
           appellant was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder;

      (iii) making inadequate findings  of  fact  and  providing  inadequate
           reasons for findings made within the decision;

      (iv)  making inadequate conclusions regarding the emails from SF;  the
           grounds provide: "...while I  have  mentioned  that  I  have  an
           important email in French received on24/02/2017. The  email  was
           not translated because I did not have a solicitor yet."

6     Permission to appeal was initially refused by Designated Judge of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft in a decision dated22 June 2018.

7     A renewed application for  permission  to  appeal  was  filed  by  the
      appellant in person on 11 July 2018, although now supported  by  typed
      grounds of appeal which I am informed were prepared  pro  bono  by  Mr
      Schwenk. Those grounds argue, in summary, that the judge erred in  law
      in:

      (i)   preceding unfairly; Mr Shwenk's grounds purport  to  quote  from
           the Appellant's original manuscript grounds: "I told [the  FTTJ]
           that I have  an  important  email  in  French  that  I  received
           on24/02/2017 ..."; it  was  argued  that  the  content  of  that
           email (which was submitted  with  the  renewed  application  for
           permission to appeal with an uncertified  translation)  included
           relevant evidence as to the sequence of events commencing on  20
           February 2017; the existence of that email having seemingly been
           brought to the judge's attention, it was argued that  the  judge
           proceeded unfairly by failing to admit the email, or  to  permit
           the  appellant  to  read  it  out  orally,  and  for  the  court
           interpreter to have interpreted that  part  of  the  appellant's
           evidence;

      (ii)  failing, when treating the Appellant's lack of medical  evidence
           as undermining the credibility of  his  account,  to  take  into
           account the fact  that  the  appellant  had  been  unrepresented
           before the judge; and in any event the judge had failed to  have
           regard to the content of the GP's records;

      (iii) failing, when considering the  weight  to  be  attached  to  any
           discrepancy within the appellant's account, to  have  regard  to
           the appellant's assertion that he had been tortured, the  effect
           of  which  might  itself  have  resulted  in  discrepancies   or
           inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.

8     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  on
      15 October 2018 on  the  basis  that  the  first  challenge  raised  a
      properly  arguable  issue  which  should  be  explored  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal, but it was noted that all grounds may be argued.

9     Upon  the  matter  coming  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Schwenk,
      previously assisting pro bono,  was  now  instructed  by  the  Greater
      Magister Immigration Aid Unit. However, Mr Schwenk informed me that it
      had thus far been difficult to collate all the papers in  the  matter;
      he did not, for instance, have a copy of the Appellant's bundle before
      the FTT, referred to in the decision at [12] as comprising 5 items and
      running to some 167 pages.  It is to be noted from [13] that the judge
      described an item within that bundle as being a witness  statement  of
      the Appellant, being 5 pages. The judge does not mention the  date  of
      the witness statement.

10    Mr Schwenk first sought to rely upon the procedural fairness  argument
      which I have summarised at  [6(i)]  above.  However,  I  drew  to  the
      parties attention an apparent discrepancy as  to  what  the  appellant
      himself had asserted in his original grounds of appeal. The  assertion
      is made in the Appellant's original manuscript grounds of appeal, that
      he had 'mentioned that' he  had  an  email  dated  24  February  2017,
      whereas Mr Schwenk in purporting to quote from those original grounds,
      had asserted that the original grounds stated that 'I  told  him  that
      ...'.  It eventually became apparent that there were two  versions  of
      the manuscript grounds of appeal. The grounds  had  been  written  out
      again, with the content remaining unchanged, save for  the  difference
      that I have noted, and the addition of a further sentence at  the  end
      of Ground 4. Mr Schwenk had had sight of the slightly different set of
      manuscript grounds when preparing his types renewed grounds of appeal.



11    It is unclear why  two  handwritten  documents  appear  to  have  been
      prepared by the appellant in which the only material difference  is  a
      change of emphasis as to what the appellant  had  done  to  bring  the
      existence of the email of 24 February 2017 to the  judge's  attention.
      Mr Schwenk obtained instructions on this matter, and informed me  that
      the appellant had indeed prepared, or caused to be prepared, different
      versions of the handwritten grounds of appeal, but Mr Schwenk had  not
      been able to obtain clear instructions as to why that had  been  done.
      Of course, Mr Schwenk cannot be said to have been at fault  in  merely
      seeking to quote from the document  which  had  been  brought  to  his
      attention.

12    I additionally noted that there was  no  witness  statement  from  the
      appellant submitted under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 as to what had actually happened  in  the  appeal
      hearing, or what he had done to bring the email of 24 February 2017 to
      the  judge's  attention.  Wherever  an  appellant  asserts  procedural
      unfairness, the allegation must be properly evidenced. It is not.

13    I am not satisfied, in the absence of any witness statement  from  the
      appellant on this matter, and in the light of the doubt raised by  the
      appellant's two different  versions  of  his  handwritten  grounds  of
      appeal, that there is any satisfactory evidence to establish that  the
      appellant did bring the judge's attention to the existence of an email
      dated 24 February 2017 which may or may not have had a bearing on  the
      judge's analysis of  the  overall  evidence  relating  to  the  events
      between 20 and 25 February 2017.

14    However, during the course of the hearing before  me  another  anomaly
      as to the evidence before the judge became apparent. I have  mentioned
      above that the judge noted in the decision that the bundle before  him
      comprised 5 items, in 167 pages,  and  that  the  appellant's  witness
      statement had been 5 pages long.

15     When  addressing  the  apparent  discrepancies  in  the   appellant's
      evidence as to the events of 20 - 25 February 2017, the judge sets out
      at [47] an extended passage, said to be found in paragraph 20  of  the
      appellant's witness statement.

16    However, the copy of the appellant's bundle which is to  be  found  on
      the Tribunal file, stamped as having been received by the Tribunal  at
      the Piccadilly hearing centre on 16 April 2018, contains only 4 items,
      is 142 pages in length, and contains a witness statement  which  is  9
      pages in length, and was signed by the Appellant on 19 April 2018  (ie
      the date of the hearing). It also contains at paragraph 20 an  account
      of the events between 20 and 25 February 2017 which differs materially
      from the quotation set out in the judge's decision at [47].

17    Although Mr Schwenk informed me that he did not have  a  copy  of  any
      appellant's bundle, he had a copy of the 9 page witness statement.  Mr
      Tan confirmed that the Home Office file contained a copy of the bundle
      which was on the Tribunal file, ie 4 items, 142 pages, including the 9
      page witness statement. There was no copy of a bundle  with  5  items,
      167 pages, including a 5 page witness statement on either the Tribunal
      or Home Office file.

18    It therefore appears that there was another bundle, which was  greater
      in size, although oddly containing a shorter statement, that the judge
      referred to when deciding the appeal. That bundle is not on file.

19    Without setting out the full content of two versions of  paragraph  20
      of the Appellant's two different witness statements, I form  the  view
      that the differences in the accounts given in  these  statements,  set
      out (i) in the quote  at  [47]  in  the  decision,  and  (ii)  in  the
      statement actually on the Tribunal file, are sufficient for me  to  be
      satisfied that the judge may have arrived at a different conclusion on
      the credibility of the appellant's account of events between 20 and 25
      February 2017, if in fact the judge ought to have been considering the
      9 page version of the witness statement rather than the 5 page version
      referred to in his decision.

20    Against that background, I considered what the appropriate  course  of
      action might be. Mr Schwenk canvassed the  possibility  of  adjourning
      the appeal, so that a witness  statement  might  be  prepared  by  the
      appellant as to exactly what transpired at the hearing, and explaining
      how there appeared to be two different versions of his appeal  bundle.
      Given that the appellant was  not  represented  at  the  time  of  the
      hearing before the judge, I agree  that in order for this Tribunal  to
      be satisfied on  a  balance  of  probabilities  as  to  what  actually
      happened during the preparations for the appeal hearing  on  19  April
      2018, and why there appears to have  been  two  different  bundles  in
      existence, oral  evidence  would,  unusually,  be  required  from  the
      appellant, using an interpreter, at this error of law stage.  Further,
      if I were to adjourn the matter, it may be appropriate to  invite  the
      judge to provide a note as to his own recollection of events.  It  may
      also be possible for me to cause enquiries to be made at  the  hearing
      centre Piccadilly to attempt  to  establish  the  whereabouts  of  the
      missing second bundle.

21    I also considered whether an alternate approach  to  determining  this
      appeal may be taken; by considering whether there may have been, to  a
      hypothetical fair minded observer,  the  appearance  that  the  appeal
      proceeded unfairly, arising from a possible error as to which  version
      of the  statement  was  to  be  relied  upon.  However,  there  is  no
      suggestion that the judge was biassed in any way, and it may  in  fact
      not have been apparent to any observer that any confusion had in  fact
      arisen.

22    Rather, without adjourning, and without making any findings as to  how
      and why there were two versions of the appellant's bundle  before  the
      Judge, or making a finding as to which of them he  should  have  taken
      into account, I am satisfied at this juncture that there was an  error
      of law in the judge's decision; by failing to set out  the  fact  that
      there were two bundles, with two differing statements, and to  make  a
      clear finding as to which evidence he was  taking  into  account,  and
      why.  The error was, in essence, to identify the relevant evidence.

23    I take into account, in making that decision, that the 9 page  witness
      statement, giving the account of events from 20 to  25  February  2018
      and which differs from the version set out in  the  judge's  decision,
      was filed with the Tribunal 3 days before the hearing but  appears  to
      have been signed on the date of hearing; indeed  may  well  have  been
      signed by the Appellant at the hearing itself. I am satisfied that  it
      was on the Tribunal file at the date of hearing.

24    I also note that there are two mistranscriptions in the last  2  lines
      of para  [50]  of  the  judge's  decision;  the  judge  there  states:
      "Likewise, the email from (SF) dated 18 January 2018 makes no  mention
      of any arrest on 20 February 2018 - although it does make reference to
      his arrest "Between 24 and 25 February  2015"".   The  judge's  second
      reference in that sentence to 20 February 2018 should be  a  reference
      to 20 February 2017, and the reference to  24  and  25  February  2015
      should  be  a  reference  to  24   and   25   February   2017.   These
      mistranscriptions,  whilst  not  amounting  to  material   errors   in
      themselves, do nothing to reassure the reader of the decision that the
      judge was taking the correct evidence into account.

25    I am satisfied that the judge's error as set out  at  [22]  above  was
      material to the outcome of the hearing. Although  there  were  reasons
      given by the Judge for rejecting the Appellant's  account, other  than
      the alleged discrepancies in the appellant's  evidence  regarding  the
      events of 20 to 25 February 2017, I am of the view that  these  events
      represent the core of the appellant's account, and I am not  satisfied
      that had the error I have identified not been  made,  that  the  judge
      would inevitably have arrived at the same decision.

26    Further, by the end of oral hearing before  me,  Mr  Tan  had  in  any
      event accepted, in the light of my finding that the differences in the
      two versions of the witness statement were capable of  being  material
      to the outcome of the appeal, that the  level  of  uncertainty  as  to
      whether the  judge  had  taken  the  relevant  evidence  into  account
      resulted in the judge's decision being unsafe and not sustainable.

27     Insofar  as  the  error  identified  above  was  not  raised  in  the
      appellant's grounds of appeal, I gave the appellant permission to rely
      on the point, with no objection from Mr Tan.

      Decision

      The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.

      I set the decision aside.

      I remit the appeal to the First tier Tribunal

28    Given the confusion identified above as to exactly what  evidence  was
      or should have been before the judge, it behoves the appellant, who is
      now represented by experienced  solicitors,  to  set  out  in  witness
      evidence exactly what the sequence of events was  between  20  and  25
      February 2017,  and to provide any and all  relevant  evidence  relied
      upon in support of the appellant's account.

      Directions:

      1. The appellant shall file  and  serve  a  consolidated,  replacement
      bundle, not less than 10 days before  the  rehearing  of  this  appeal
      before the First tier.

      2. If the respondent intends to  rely  on  any  evidence  not  already
      contained  within  his  bundle  (for  example,  any  version  of   the
      appellant's witness statement other than the 9 page version  dated  19
      April 2018) he must file and serve it not less than 5 days before  the
      rehearing of this appeal in the First tier.


Signed:                                            Date: 14.4.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 14.4.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan







