
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/03622/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre| Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 April 2019                         | On 24 April 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mr Z A
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Smith, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   In a decision sent on 14 June 2018 Judge Heatherington  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereafter the
    claimant), a national of Afghanistan born  in  May  1998,  against  the
    decision made by the appellant (hereafter the  Secretary  of  State  or
    SSHD) made on 1 March 2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The basis of the claimant's claim was that he had left Afghanistan  due
    to he and his family having been targeted by the  Taliban  because  his
    older brother was working for the Afghan army.  He (the  claimant)  had
    been kidnapped and taken to a Taliban  training  camp  but  managed  to
    escape.  The SSHD did not find his account credible.

3.   In allowing the claimant's appeal the judge  had  regard  to  a  report
    that had been produced for the claimant by Dr Giustozzi and concluded:

         "8.4 Not all is well in Afghanistan.  Dr Giustozzi  identifies  the
             possible reason for the Taliban's interest in the appellant is
             because  his  brother  is  in  the  Army  (page  P29  in   the
             appellant's  bundle).   The  appellant's  evidence  in  cross-
             examination is that he was aged 15 when he was  taken  by  the
             Taliban.  Before then the  Taliban  twice  searched  his  home
             looking for him.  The appellant's evidence later was that  his
             father kept  a  large  quantity  of  cash  at  home.   It  was
             suggested that the Taliban  searches  were  unlikely  as  they
             would have removed the case.   The  appellant's  response  was
             that  the  Taliban  were  looking  for  him,  not  cash.   The
             appellant said in Afghanistan cash was not uncommonly kept  at
             home.  That was not challenged and if that is the case, it  is
             likely that prudent householders take great  care  to  secrete
             cash so that it cannot readily be  found.   That  the  Taliban
             kidnapped the appellant and before that  they  twice  searched
             his home for him is consistent with  the  objective  evidence.
             The country information is  that  forced  recruitment  by  the
             Taliban is unusual.  I do not find that the appellant's  claim
             that he was able to flee from the Taliban is not  implausible.
             The claims are not inconsistent with the objective evidence on
             Afghanistan.


         8.5  Dr Giustozzi report  (page  P51  in  the  appellant's  bundle)
             states:


             (a)  that the appellant would be at risk


                  (i)  from the Taliban especially in Baghlan and  in  other
                      areas of strong Taliban presence


                  (ii) countrywide - from the Afghan authorities


             (b)  if returned to Kabul he would be without a social network
                  or family support and would risk destitution


             (c)  if returned to the  area  in  which  where  most  eastern
                  Pashtuns reside this area would be accompanied  by  higher
                  risks from the Taliban


         8.6  I have considered the recent decision in AS (Safety of  Kabul)
             Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  The country  guidance
             in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00016
             (IAC) remains unaffected by this decision.  The  appellant  is
             only 19.  The events of which he has provided an account  were
             four years ago, when he was a child.   The  respondent  claims
             the appellant's account is implausible.  I  am  reminded  that
             the tribunal must exercise caution  in  rejecting  an  account
             because it is inherently incredible (Y v. Secretary  of  State
             for the Home  Department,  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1223).   I  have
             considered the totality of the evidence including  the  expert
             report  and  objective  evidence.    Having   considered   the
             arguments of both parties, I reach  the  conclusion  that  the
             appellant should be regarded as having given a truthful  about
             what happened to him in Afghanistan.   Taking  each  point  of
             paragraph 339L of  the  immigration  rules  in  turn,  we  are
             satisfied that:


             i.   The appellant has made a genuine effort  to  substantiate
                  his asylum claim;


             ii.  The appellant  has  submitted  all  material  factors  to
                  substantiate his asylum claim that are at his disposal;


             iii. The appellant has given a coherent and plausible  account
                  that does not run counter  to  the  available  general  or
                  specific information relevant to his case;


             iv.  The appellant has made  an  asylum  claim  or  sought  to
                  establish eligibility for humanitarian protection  at  the
                  earliest possible time;


             v.   The appellant is generally credible.


         8.7  Thus, I find that the appellant is  at  risk  of  persecution,
             serious harm and or inhumane or degrading treatment, if he  is
             returned to Afghanistan.  He cannot relocate and remain  safe.
             The evidence is well above the standard of proof the appellant
             must meet.  He only must show a  reasonable  likelihood.   The
             evidence clearly shows that the appellant has discharged  that
             burden."

4.   The SSHD's grounds were threefold, (a further ground was  not  pursued)
    it being submitted that the judge erred in (1)  wrongly  characterising
    the SSHD's reasons for rejecting the claimant's account as credible  as
    being all about the plausibility of the account and as a result failing
    to give adequate reasons for his  findings;  (2)  failing  to  consider
    whether the authorities in the  claimant's  home  area  were  able  and
    willing to protect him; and (3) failing to give  any  adequate  reasons
    for his findings on internal relocation, which was a  material  matter.
    In this regard it was contended that the judge failed to  consider  and
    apply the country guidance case of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  In amplifying the grounds Mrs Aboni submitted
    that in applying the country guidance case of AA (Unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC), the judge had  overlooked  that
    by the date of hearing the claimant was 20 years old.

5.   Before considering the grounds, I would observe  as  a  discrete  point
    that I agree with Ms Smith that just because a claimant has  ceased  to
    be under 18  does  not  preclude  them  from  being  considered  in  an
    analogous position to an unattended child and so, in principle, able to
    benefit from the country guidance in AA.  However, this  point  is  not
    enough on its own to secure the judge's decision against the criticisms
    levelled by the SSHD.

6.   I consider ground (1) is made  out.   The  judge's  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the claimant fails to address the  shortcomings  in  his
    account identified by the SSHD in the reasons for  refusal.   Ms  Smith
    sought to argue  that  the  SSHD's  reasons  were  all  concerned  with
    plausibility.  However, that is not borne out by an analysis  of  these
    reasons.   They  identify  (i)  the  lack  of  congruence  between  the
    claimant's account and the background country evidence as  regards  the
    likelihood of the Taliban recruiting  buy  force  (49-52)(an  issue  of
    external inconsistency); (ii) internal inconsistency in the  claimant's
    account as regards the manner in which the Taliban issued  its  threats
    (46); (iii) lack of consistency in the claimant's account of  being  in
    possession of his mobile phone when he was kidnapped (56); (iv) lack of
    consistency regarding his claim that the Taliban would remove  his  SIM
    card but return his phone (55); and (v)  lack  of  consistency  in  his
    account of the Taliban not following him to his home village  after  he
    escaped (57).  Only (iii), (iv) and (v) could  really  be  said  to  be
    concerned with plausibility.

7.   In any event, the judge's decision simply fails to  engage  with  these
    reasons.  Simply to assert that the Taliban  searching  the  claimant's
    home was "consistent with the objective  evidence",  was  insufficient,
    particularly given that the judge himself in the next sentence observed
    that the gist of the country information was that  "forced  recruitment
    is unusual".  If the judge meant to rely in this regard on  the  expert
    report, he failed to refer to it or indicate how it caused him to  take
    a different view from the COI sources cited by  the  SSHD.   The  judge
    nowhere addresses the  SSHD's  concerns  about  internal  inconsistency
    concerning the manner of the Taliban threats.  Further, in relation  to
    the SSHD's expressed concerns about the inconsistency/implausibility of
    the  claimant's  escape  account,  the  judge  simply  states,  without
    reasons, that it "is not implausible".  There is no engagement with the
    SSHD's concerns about  the  claimant  having  a  mobile  phone  in  his
    possession at the time of the kidnap or about being able to retain  his
    phone.  There is an evident failure to engage with or take into account
    relevant  evidential  considerations.   These  failings   amounted   to
    material errors.

8.   Having found that ground (1) properly identifies a  material  error  of
    law in the judge's decision,  it  is  not  strictly  necessary  that  I
    address grounds (2) and (3) but I would simply record that  I  did  not
    consider ground (2) was made out, as if the claimant's account had been
    established as credible, it was not reasonably likely he would be  able
    to receive effective protection.  Ground (3), of  course,  is  likewise
    predicated on the assumption that the claimant's account  had  properly
    been found to be credible, but even on that basis, there  were  clearly
    serious shortcomings in the judge's treatment, since in respect of  the
    treatment of the viability of internal relocation in Kabul,  the  judge
    simply asserts, without reasons, that "[h]e cannot ... remain safe".

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT Judge's decision must  be
    set aside for material error of law.

10.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Heatherington).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 17 April 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
