
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/03631/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 31 October 2017                    |           On 24 November 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     NZT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, NZT, was born in August 1996 and has an Ethiopian mother
    and an Eritrean father.  The appellant asserts that  she  is  Eritrean.
    The appellant claims that she is a lesbian.  Her claim for  asylum  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by a decision dated  23  March  2017.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 19 June 2017, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Moxon found that the appellant had never spoken to  officials  of
    the Ethiopian Embassy in London  and  did  not  "accept  that,  whether
    expressly asked or not, that she had gone into [the Ethiopian  Embassy]
    she would have failed to give full  material  disclosure  such  as  the
    address of her only relative in Ethiopia."  The judge  did  not  accept
    that a relative of the appellant living in Ethiopia would  not  support
    her upon return to that country although he may have failed to  confirm
    her identity to the Ethiopian authorities.  A witness  (SA)  had  given
    evidence at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   SA  claimed  to  have
    attended the Ethiopian Embassy with the appellant.  He claimed that  he
    had done so on the morning of 3 May 2017.  SA  is  himself  a  refugee.
    The judge did not accept the account of the witness SA.  The judge  did
    not accept "as credible [SA's] account that the appellant had completed
    requisite forms which the embassy official refused to accept."  He  did
    so partly because this detail regarding the forms was missing from  the
    appellant's own statement concerning the same event.  In addition,  the
    judge considered that the fact that the witness refers in his statement
    to "Sara" rather than the appellant by her first  name  indicated  that
    "the witness has previously provided a letter for someone called  Sara.
    He disputes this but I am satisfied his evidence  is  not  reliable  in
    light of the reference to the name Sara in the statement."   The  judge
    also did not accept that the appellant was a lesbian  as  claimed.   He
    gave limited weight to  assertions  from  LGBTI  organisations  in  the
    United Kingdom to the effect that the appellant is homosexual and  gave
    at [67] reasons for not accepting the  appellant's  account  of  having
    been present during a police raid.  Moreover at [73], the  judge  found
    it "damaging to her credibility" that the appellant  claimed  that  her
    girlfriend in Ethiopia had received a prison sentence of  18-25  years.
    The judge found that it was clear from the  objective  evidence"  (sic)
    that the penalty for "homosexual acts is not anywhere  near  so  long."
    The judge found that he was not satisfied "to  the  low  standard  that
    [the appellant] is, or  is  believed  by  anyone  in  Ethiopia  to  be,
    homosexual.  I do not accept that she has had a homosexual relationship
    in Ethiopia or that she has ever or would ever wish to do so."

 3. The judge's decision is challenged on a number of  grounds.   Whilst  I
    have considered these carefully, save for the those grounds with  which
    I address in detail, I find that the grounds of  appeal  amount  to  no
    more than a disagreement with  findings  on  the  evidence  which  were
    available to the judge.  I shall address the grounds  which  have  some
    merit below.

 4. First, it was acknowledged by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing (Mr Diwnycz) that the appellant is referred to on  the
    Home Office file not only by her Christian name (N)  but  also  by  the
    name "Sara".  I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz for bringing this fact to  my
    attention.  Interestingly, the grounds of appeal do not make  the  same
    point but attempt to excuse the witness's  reference  to  "Sara"  as  a
    typographical error.  It is not clear  where  Mr  Diwnycz's  revelation
    leaves us.  It is significant, in my opinion, that the witness himself,
    when questioned by the  judge,  did  not  indicate  that  he  knew  the
    appellant by the name Sara.  It was also clear that the  judge  himself
    was not aware of the use of the appellant of the  name  Sara.   I  find
    that the judge's findings in relation to the witness's evidence remains
    sound.

 5. I also find that nothing turns on the  fact  that  the  witness  speaks
    Amharic, as does the appellant.  I am aware that Amharic is a  language
    of Eritrea but I am aware also that it is used both  by  Eritreans  and
    Ethiopians.  Having considered the decision of the judge as a whole,  I
    am satisfied that it was open to him to make findings  in  relation  to
    the evidence of the witness  to  the  effect  that  that  evidence  was
    unreliable and that  the  appellant  had  not  attended  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy as she had claimed.  The appellant's failure  to  approach  the
    embassy  indicated  that  she  had  not  "made  good   her   claim   to
    international  protection"  as  provided  for  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality  -  return)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC) in particular [105].

 6. The other limb of the appellant's claim  for  international  protection
    lies in her claimed lesbian sexuality.  The  appellant  challenges  the
    judge's finding regarding the appellant's evidence that her  girlfriend
    had "received a prison sentence of between 18-25  years"  for  being  a
    lesbian.  The appellant claims that she was asked by  the  judge  about
    the sentence and that she said that her cousin had told  her  that  the
    prison sentence of 18-25 years might be given for lesbianism  but  that
    she did not know the actual sentence that her girlfriend had  received.
    The question remains whether or not the  judge  has  misunderstood  the
    evidence and has wrongly held this point against the appellant.  I find
    that the judge did not misunderstand the evidence.  It  is  clear  from
    [73] that the judge was aware that the appellant was not  relying  upon
    her own knowledge but that she was relying upon "erroneous  information
    given to her by her cousin."  The judge wrote, "I do  not  accept  that
    [the appellant] relying upon erroneous information given  to  her  from
    her cousin as I find as  a  fact  that  having  sought  to  assist  the
    appellant to flee Ethiopia he would not then seek to mislead or fail to
    ensure that  he  was  giving  accurate  information  about  the  prison
    sentence."  In addition, the judge observed that the "appellant  claims
    to love this lady" and that, in consequence, he had no doubt  that  she
    would have "sought confirmation of the likely prison  sentences,  which
    she could have done by liaising with her legal representatives who were
    in possession of the relevant information of the Ethiopian penal system
    as  demonstrated  by  the  objective  evidence   adduced   within   the
    appellant's bundle."  I acknowledge that  the  reasoning  here  is  not
    entirely clear, certainly in relation to what the cousin may or may not
    have said, but the judge's second point is undoubtedly a good one.   It
    was quite feasible for the appellant in the United Kingdom to find  out
    what the likely prison  sentences  would  have  been,  given  that  she
    claimed  to  have  a  close  relationship  with  the  imprisoned  woman
    concerned, it was  open  to  the  judge  as  it  was  damaging  to  the
    appellant's credibility that she had taken no steps to  ascertain  what
    the actual prison sentence had been.  I find no error  in  the  judge's
    analysis on this matter.

 7. The appellant also complains that the judge has unreasonably criticised
    the appellant for failing to  produce  corroborative  evidence  of  her
    claimed lesbian sexuality.  The appellant said  that  she  has  had  no
    partners whilst living in the United Kingdom so it would be  impossible
    to produce such evidence.  However, I observe that the judge  [69]  was
    aware of the fact that the appellant had  no  partners  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that he has not unreasonably pointed  out  that  she  could
    have obtained witness evidence from those with whom she claims to  have
    attended LGBT events.  The appellant said that that  evidence  was  not
    available  to  her  because  of  "language  difficulties,  her   recent
    attendance at LGBT  events  and  her  mental  health  issues  and  more
    importantly her lack of current partner." (See grounds at [9]).   Other
    than, possibly, 'language difficulties', the other reasons given by the
    appellant for not obtaining the evidence indicated by the judge do  not
    stand up to scrutiny.  It  is  not  clear  why  she  could  not  obtain
    evidence from others at events simply because she  was  only  a  recent
    attendee at such events whilst no indication is given  as  to  why  the
    appellant's mental health issues should have  prevented  her  obtaining
    such evidence given that her condition had not prevented her  attending
    the events in the first instance.  Furthermore, the "lack of a  current
    partner" does not assist  the  appellant  at  all.   The  corroborative
    evidence which the judge refers to here is in no  way  similar  to  the
    corroborative evidence which an  asylum  seeker  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to bring with him or her from  her  country  of  origin.   The
    evidence referred to by the judge could easily have  been  obtained  by
    the appellant whilst in the United Kingdom.  As it  happened,  all  the
    First-tier Tribunal had before it were photographs of the appellant  at
    an event or events; these photographs are silent as to the capacity  in
    which the appellant had attended the events in particular  whether  she
    was an active participant or merely an observer. Consequently,  I  find
    that the ground has no merit.

 8. In the light of my findings  and  observations,  I  see  no  reason  to
    interfere with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because it is dismissed there is no fee order repayable.


Signed                              Date 20 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


