
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03455/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 3, 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               mr Tajrul islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bashir, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Bangladeshi national, arrived in the United Kingdom on
    a visit visa on April 12, 2012.  It is not disputed that he remained in
    this country unlawfully after the expiry of  his  leave  until  he  was
    detained  by  Immigration  Officers  on  September  9,  2015.   He  was
    subsequently released and he made a claim for  asylum  on  November  2,
    2015 but this was refused by the respondent on March 25, 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on April  6,  2016  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bannerman  on
    December 23, 2016.  In a decision promulgated on January  10,  2017  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision and Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern
    granted permission to  appeal  on  May  12,  2017  finding  there  were
    arguable errors in law in  the  way  the  Judge  dealt  with  both  the
    protection and Article 8 claims.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Bashir argued that the Judge had failed to deal with the  Article  8
    claim that had been raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  and  thereafter
    mentioned in  the  appellant's  witness  statement.   He  referred  the
    Tribunal to paragraphs 5 and 6 of that statement.   He  submitted  that
    the Judge should have dealt with the appellant's  Article  8  claim  in
    more detail than he did in paragraph [55] of his decision.  The  second
    ground advanced was that the Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's protection claim.  Whilst it was accepted
    the reasons had been given,  he  argued  that  these  reasons  did  not
    explain why the appeal had been rejected.

 6. Mr Tan opposed the application and submitted that there was nothing  in
    the appellant's witness statement that identified  any  insurmountable.
    With regard to the grounds of appeal  in  relation  to  the  protection
    issue, Mr Tan accepted that the reasons given by the Judge were  brief.
    However, he submitted that the Judge had  addressed  all  the  relevant
    issues in his decision and  in  particular  had  addressed  the  arrest
    warrant  documentation,  concerns  over  the  actual  content  of   the
    documentation, the appellant's lack of knowledge of the BNP  Party  and
    his level of involvement within that party,  the  absence  of  any  sur
    place activities and finally the delayed claim for asylum.

 7. Mr Bashir reiterated that there was an issue of fairness  and  that  in
    his submission the Judge had acted unfairly by making the  findings  or
    by providing few findings in his decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 8. This was a protection claim presented  a  number  of  years  after  the
    appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom.  His claim  was  initially
    considered by the respondent following his interview and having had his
    application refused by the  respondent,  the  appellant  exercised  his
    right of appeal to the Tribunal.

 9. The appellant presented limited which consisted of a  two-page  witness
    statement, a newspaper article and some evidence relating to the arrest
    warrants and other documents from an advocate.  The Judge also had  the
    respondent's bundle.

10. The challenge to the protection decision was that  the  Judge  did  not
    give adequate reasons, and this is a factor identified as  an  arguable
    error of  law  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  in  his  grant  of
    permission.

11. Having considered the paperwork in this case and submissions  advanced,
    I find that although the reasons given  in  the  decision  were  brief,
    nevertheless the Judge considered the relevant issues in respect of the
    protection claim.  The Judge had to consider the  arrest  warrants  and
    contrary to submissions advanced by Mr Bashir the  Judge  did  consider
    those documents and gave reasons why he felt, in the round,  no  weight
    could be attached to them.

12. He had identified the warrants as photocopied documents and  then  went
    on to consider other aspects of his involvement in Bangladesh with  the
    authorities.  He noted the claim regarding his involvement with the BNP
    but concluded that he was a low-level member of the BNP placing  weight
    on the contents of the appellant's witness statement.

13. Importantly, the Judge noted that both arrest warrants were for  events
    that occurred after the appellant had left the country  and  the  Judge
    concluded that these documents could  not  be  relied  on.   The  Judge
    thereafter went on  to  consider  other  issues  in  the  case  and  in
    particular  the  vagueness  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  the  delay
    occasioned by his failure  to  claim  asylum  at  the  first  available
    opportunity and a lack  of  sur  place  activity  carried  out  by  the
    appellant.

14. Whilst the Judge accepted it was not a prerequisite for there to be sur
    place activity, the Judge concluded that the  lack  of  involvement  in
    this country  undermined  his  credibility  to  have  been  so  heavily
    involved with political activity in Bangladesh.

15. In the circumstances, I accept  Mr  Tan's  submission  that  the  Judge
    addressed the relevant issues in the case and find there is no error of
    law on the protection ground of appeal.

16. The second ground of appeal  concerned  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
    Article 8 claim.  I was hampered by the absence of a  court  Record  of
    Proceedings.  There had been no request for  the  court  record  to  be
    obtained from  the  Judge  and  there  was  no  Record  of  Proceedings
    available from Mr Bashir which supported a submission  that  Article  8
    had been argued before the Judge.

17. The statement provided by the appellant was extremely brief  in  nature
    and simply stated that he had established a family and private life  in
    the United Kingdom given the time he had spent in this country and that
    he did not  pose  any  risk  to  the  authorities,  did  not  have  any
    convictions, did not suffer from any infectious diseases and  he  would
    not affect the rights and freedoms of others by remaining in the United
    Kingdom.

18. Against that background the Judge recorded at paragraph  [55]  that  no
    case had been put forward in respect of Article 8.  Whilst I accept the
    grounds of appeal do raise Article 8, I have to look at the material to
    see whether or not the failure by the  Judge  to  specifically  address
    article 8 would be capable of amounting to an error in law.

19. There was nothing in the grounds of appeal of any nature that  assisted
    the Judge and the appellant's witness  statement  did  not  assist  the
    Judge.  There was no evidence that what was recorded in paragraph  [55]
    was not what happened at the hearing and that no argument was  advanced
    at the hearing.  The Judge concluded at the end of paragraph [55]  that
    "against the evidence provided  to  me  he  could  not  have  succeeded
    against the Immigration Rules or ECHR Article 8 tests laid down".

20. I find the Judge's finding was open to him and whilst the Judge has not
    dealt with the Article 8 in any substance, his conclusion was the  only
    outcome available to the Judge based on the information that was placed
    before the Tribunal.

21. In the circumstances, the Judge's failure to go  into  detail  in  this
    matter was not material as there was nothing  before  the  Judge  which
    would enable him to reach an alternative conclusion.

22. For those reasons I do not find there is an error of law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

23. I uphold the original decision and I  do  not  set  aside  the  Judge's
    decision.


Signed                              Date         14 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award made because the original decision has been upheld.

Signed                              Date         14 May 2019


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
