
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03221/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 7 October 2020                    |On 11 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 MD MOSTAFA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 1  July  1986,  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Bangladesh. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 23 March 2019 refusing his  application
    for international protection. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 October 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds of appeal. The appellant claims to be  a  member
    of the political party, the BNP (the Bangladesh  National  Party).  The
    judge found the appellant was unable to provide detailed evidence as to
    the policies of the BNP and that his failure to provide  this  evidence
    undermined his claim to be an active member of the party. The appellant
    complains that the judge failed to make  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claims that, at the interview with the Secretary of State's
    officers, he had sought to provide information regarding  the  BNP  but
    the interviewer had 'moved on'. Further, the judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had attended BNP rallies; it was  therefore  otiose  to  find
    that the appellant had  been  unable  to  provide  further  information
    regarding BNP given the Tribunal's  acceptance  of  his  attendance  at
    rallies in both in Bangladesh and in the United Kingdom. Moreover,  the
    judge had failed to take into account the fact  the  appellant  suffers
    from depression that this may have affected his ability to  give  clear
    evidence. Finally, under this ground the appellant claims that  he  had
    provided evidence of the reasons for his delay in claiming  asylum  but
    that the judge had ignored the explanation [64].

 3. In his oral submissions at the remote hearing on  7  October  2020,  Mr
    Spurling, who appeared for the appellant,  sought  to  make  a  general
    comment in respect of ground 1, namely that the  complaints  raised  by
    the appellant arose from the failure of the judge to give  a  narrative
    of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in the decision and reasons. It was,
    therefore, difficult to know what parts of the appellant's evidence the
    judge had taken into account and whether he had ignored other parts  of
    that evidence.

 4. I find that Ground 1 is without merit. I agree entirely  with  Mr  Tan,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State, that  the  grounds  amount  to
    criticism of the  style  rather  than  the  substance  of  the  judge's
    decision. As  regards  the  appellant's  depression,  I  note  that  no
    application was made before the First-tier Tribunal by the  appellant's
    representative for his client to be treated as  a  vulnerable  witness.
    There was a medical report before the judge from January 2019 but  this
    appeared to link the appellant's depression specifically  to  the  fact
    that he was at that time in immigration detention; there was  no  fresh
    evidence following his release from immigration detention  which  might
    have led the judge to conclude of his own  motion  that  the  appellant
    should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness.  Secondly,  whilst   I
    acknowledge that the judge has not given a detailed  narrative  of  the
    hearing, that failure is not in itself an arguable error  of  law.  The
    judge indicated that  he  had  considered  the  documents  produced  in
    evidence by both parties [26] and I have no reason to believe  that  he
    had not considered the appellant's  witness  statement  which  provides
    some explanation of the delay in claiming asylum. I  am  satisfied  the
    judge has considered and rejected that explanation in  the  context  of
    all the evidence before him. I am also satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    fully entitled on the basis of the evidence to identify the failure  of
    the appellant to give details about the policies of  the  BNP  and  his
    involvement with the party as a reason for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claimed level of involvement. It is also significant that the appellant
    made no complaint  at  all  at  or  immediately  following  the  asylum
    interview that he had been prevented from  giving  evidence  about  the
    BNP.

 5. Ground 2 complains of the alleged failure by the judge to make adequate
    findings on various documents produced by the  appellant  in  evidence.
    These include a letter from the appellant's advocate in Bangladesh;  an
    affidavit  from  the  appellant's  mother;  court/prosecution   related
    documents. The judge did make a finding that arrest warrants could  not
    have been obtained by the appellant or by his legal representatives. In
    respect of that finding, the appellant complains that it is  irrational
    as the legal representative would and should have  been  able  to  have
    obtained all relevant  documents  concerning  the  prosecution  of  his
    client.

 6. I reject this ground appeal also. I am satisfied the judge has,  as  he
    indicated he would at [22], considered the documentary evidence in  the
    context all the evidence and subject to the principle set out in  Ahmed
    [2002] UKIAT 00439. Further, at [42], the judge has noted the statement
    provided  by  the  appellant's  mother  recording  that  this  evidence
    reiterates some of the claims made by the appellant', claims which  the
    judge has given entirely cogent clear reasons for rejecting. As regards
    the letter from the Bangladeshi advocate, the judge  has  explained  in
    detail [43] why he had significant doubts as to  its  probative  value.
    The fact that several letters in support of the appellant's claim  have
    been written using exactly the same wording fully entitled the judge to
    attach little weight to such evidence. Furthermore, at [39], judge  has
    examined in detail the failure of the appellant to have made  reference
    earlier in his evidence to having appeared in  court  and  released  on
    bail, significant elements of the appellant's narrative which appear to
    have been added to his account only very late in the proceedings. I  am
    also entirely satisfied that the judge has  given  sustainable  reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's claims in respect of the arrest  warrant.
    [40-41] and that the appellant's grounds amount to  nothing  more  than
    disagreement with those Tribunal's findings.

 7. Ground 3 concerns the judge's acceptance that the  appellant  may  have
    attended rallies and suffered injury [54] [67] but still  rejected  the
    appellant's claimed level of involvement in the BNP. Ground 3  suggests
    that this latter finding amounts to  perversity  but  I  disagree.  The
    judge makes no firm finding that the appellant did attend such  rallies
    but, whether or not he did do  so,  the  judge  has  provided  entirely
    cogent reasons for finding that the appellant is not at risk because he
    has no identifiable profile with the BNP. Attendance at  a  rally  does
    not necessarily mean that the appellant was involved in the BNP to  the
    extent that he claimed or that, by merely attending a rally,  he  might
    be exposed to a real risk on return to Bangladesh.

 8. Ground 4 complains at the judge failed to give  adequate  consideration
    to the appellant's claimed attendance at rallies in the United Kingdom.
    I refer to the preceding paragraphs of my decision; whether or not  the
    appellant has attended rallies, the judge's  finding  that  he  is  not
    involved with the BNP at the level he claims is unimpeachable.

 9. Ground 5 raises the question of the appellant's employment history. The
    judge had noted that  the  appellant  had  been  arrested  was  working
    illegally at a restaurant in the United Kingdom. The judge went  on  to
    find, in determining the Article 8 appeal, that the appellant  had  not
    'indicated  any  employment  or  career  of  any   significance'.   The
    appellant's student leave had been curtailed on account of his  illegal
    working but the appellant complains that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to determine the issue, asserting  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    offered 'insufficient evidence'. This ground is entirely without merit.
    Indeed, Mr Spurling did not seek to advance it at the initial  hearing.
    There was no evidence that the appellant had challenged the curtailment
    of his leave to remain.

10. For the reasons which I have stated above, I find that  the  judge  has
    not erred in law for the reasons advanced by the appellant or  at  all.
    Moreover, even if I had found that the judge had fallen into error  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds of  appeal  then,  given  that  those
    grounds  concern  the  judge's  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account of past events, the judge's alternative finding  at
    [73] that, 'even on the appellant's own version of events', he would be
    able to exercise the option of internal flight  within  Bangladesh  has
    not been  challenged  at  all  even  though  that  finding  is  plainly
    determinative of the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                              Date 30 October 2020

         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
