
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03906/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, London  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 September 2017                      |On 27 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     DA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Jaquiss, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya and claims that he is at  risk
          of persecution for reasons relating to his  activities  on  behalf
          of gay rights in the United Kingdom.

Procedural history

       3. In a decision dated 7 June 2017 the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
          the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.  In a  decision
          dated  7  August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachey  granted
          permission to appeal observing that the First-tier  Tribunal  made
          no mention of the country expert report.

       4. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 31 August 2017  in
          which it was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
          were open to it.

Hearing

       5. Ms Jaquiss relied upon and amplified her grounds of appeal and  Mr
          Melvin relied upon the rule 24 notice.  At the end of the  hearing
          I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Country expert report

       6. The First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of  the  country  expert
          report prepared by Professor Aguilar, having referred to  it  once
          at [24].  The reference is made in  passing  and  simply  comments
          that the homophobic laws  in  Kenya  are  being  enforced  by  the
          courts and this is a subject  "about  which  Prof.  Mario  Aguilar
          speaks in his  report".   There  is  no  further  mention  of  the
          report.


       7. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to  direct  itself
          to the relevant parts of the country expert report  which  support
          the Applicant's claim that in Kenya he will be perceived  as  gay,
          by reason of his support for gay rights and  those  supportive  of
          gay rights could be  prosecuted  under  Kenyan  law.   This  is  a
          material error of law because the First-tier Tribunal  appears  to
          accept that "undoubtedly" the  appellant  engaged  with  the  LGBT
          community, albeit this was not driven by his  religious  faith  as
          claimed [27-9].  An appellant's  account  of  his  fears  and  the
          wellfoundedness of those fears must be judged in  the  context  of
          the known objective circumstances and practices of  the  state  in
          question and a failure to do so can constitute an error of  law  -
          see AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1123  at  [19b]  and
          [21(e)].

Other findings

       8. The First-tier Tribunal has also made  factual  errors  that  have
          caused unfairness.


       9. First, the  finding  at  [22]  that  there  is  "nothing"  in  the
          material  independent  of  the  appellant  that  speaks  of  named
          persons the appellant claims to have assisted is incorrect.    One
          of the named persons, Andy Nsubuga,  wrote  a  letter  in  support
          dated 15 April 2017, and this is  contained  at  the  end  of  the
          appellant's bundle.

      10. Second, the finding that the Peterborough  LBBT  Equality  Council
          letter dated 10 March 2017 provides "no detail" of  the  work  the
          appellant does at [23] is not  supported  by  the  letter  itself,
          which sets out the appellant's main roles with descriptions.

      11. Third, contrary to the indication at [34] the  appellant  has  not
          claimed to be homosexual. It follows that the First-tier  Tribunal
          misdirected itself at [30] - the  question  was  not  whether  the
          appellant is gay but rather whether (i) he has  been  an  activist
          on behalf of the gay community in the UK;  (ii)  that  information
          will become known to the Kenyan authorities or  he  will  continue
          his activities in Kenya; (iii) the appellant's  behaviour  in  the
          UK and / or in Kenya would lead to a real risk of  persecution  in
          Kenya because the authorities will perceive him to be gay.

Conclusion

      12. When the errors identified above  are  considered  together  I  am
          satisfied   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's   findings    are
          inadequately reasoned, and the First-tier Tribunal has  materially
          erred in law.


Disposal

      13. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.  This is because completely fresh findings  of  fact  in
          relation to detailed evidence are necessary.

Decision

      14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      15. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
26 September 2017
