
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA035752016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd June 2017                      |On 26th June 2017                   |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     ZM
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Hindson,  promulgated  on
   the  8th  December  2016,  in  which   he   dismissed   the   appellant's
   international protection claim.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on  the  [  ]  1996.  His
   claim was (and no doubt still is) that he is at risk of being  killed  by
   both the Peshmerga and a Shiite group known as 'Hashad Al Shabi'  because
   they each wrongly believe him to be a supporter of  ISIS.  Judge  Hindson
   rejected that claim and this is not challenged in this appeal.

3. Judge Hindson nevertheless went on  to  consider  whether  the  appellant
   would be at risk of harm by reason of internal armed conflict within  the
   appellant's  home  area.  However,  he   concluded   that   matters   had
   "undoubtedly progressed" since Kirkuk was found to be a contested area in
   the decision of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  0544  (IAC)  and
   that it was "now under the well-established control of the Peshmerga". He
   accordingly found it reasonable for him to return there.

4. Upper Tribunal Pitt  considered  it  arguable  that  the  judge  had  not
   applied AA "correctly to the facts as found" and  granted  permission  to
   appeal "on all grounds". In fact there are only two  grounds  of  appeal.
   Those grounds are that, (i)  the  judge  had  wrongly  assumed  that  the
   feasibility of return to Iraq was determinative of the appeal,  and  (ii)
   given that the Tribunal in AA had found Kirkuk to be a contested area, it
   was not open to the judge  to  find  to  the  contrary  without  specific
   evidence to support that finding. I take the grounds in turn.

5. At paragraph 21 of his decision, Judge Hindson said as follows -

    "It is not in issue that it is not feasible to return the appellant  to
    Iraq. On my understanding of the current CG case of AA, it must  follow
    that the appellant cannot succeed in his appeal as there is no risk  of
    him being returned."

   However,  Judge  Hindson's  understanding  of  the  (admittedly  somewhat
   Delphic) reasoning in AA was incorrect. The true position is as stated by
   the appellant's  representative  in  ground  1  of  the  application  for
   permission to appeal -

    "AA Iraq simply says that an asylum seeker cannot rely  on  a  risk  of
    serious harm flowing from a lack of documentation, not that his  appeal
    must fail in these circumstances."

   Put another way; given  that  it  is  the  very  absence  of  appropriate
   documentation that stands in the way of a person returning to Iraq,  such
   absence cannot also be prayed in aid as a factor relevant to the risk  on
   return. The judge was therefore in  error  insofar  as  he  purported  to
   dismiss the appeal solely upon the ground that the appellant  lacked  the
   appropriate documentation necessary for his return to Iraq. However, that
   error may not be fatal to the decision if his  alternative  findings  are
   sustainable.

6. As I previously observed, there is no  challenge  to  the  first  of  the
   judge's alternative findings of fact; namely, that the appellant's  claim
   to be at risk by  reason  of  his  perceived  support  for  ISIS  is  not
   credible. I  therefore  pass  on  immediately  to  consider  the  judge's
   assessment of what has come to be known as 'the Article 15(c) risk'.

7. As Mr Worthington correctly noted,  the  respondent's  letter  explaining
   the reasons for refusing the appellant's  protection  claim  had  started
   from the premise that Kirkuk was a contested area (as had been  found  in
   the decision of AA) and had thereafter proceeded to consider whether  the
   appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to   relocate   within   Iraq
   [paragraphs 33 and 50 of the letter]. The question for me  to  decide  is
   whether Judge Hindson was justified in adopting a different  approach.  I
   am satisfied that he was not. Whilst it may well be the  case,  as  Judge
   Hindson suggested, that Kirkuk is now under the settled  control  of  the
   Peshmerga, there was no evidence before him upon which  to  base  such  a
   finding. He was therefore bound to approach the matter on the basis  that
   Kirkuk continued to be a contested area as had been found in the decision
   of AA. That error may not have been material had Mr Diwnizcz  been  in  a
   position belatedly  to  submit  such  evidence  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   However, he confirmed that he was not in a position to do so.

8. I therefore conclude that  both  errors  of  law  were  material  to  the
   decision to dismiss the appeal and that it must therefore be set aside.

9. In considering whether it is appropriate to re-make the decision  without
   a further hearing, I note that Judge Hindson found that relocation  would
   not be reasonable to either Baghdad or the semi-autonomous Kurdish region
   of Iraq. I further note that this finding has not been challenged by  the
   respondent, whether by way of cross-appeal, Rule 24 Notice, or otherwise.
   It is therefore unnecessary to rehearse what I consider to  be  the  good
   and sufficient reasons provided by Judge Hindson for making that finding,
   and I accordingly preserve it. Given that I do not have any  evidence  to
   undermine the finding in AA that Kirkuk continues to be a contested area,
   I am thus driven to conclude that internal relocation is not a reasonable
   option for this appellant, and that  his  appeal  should  accordingly  be
   allowed on the ground that, "the removal of the appellant from the United
   Kingdom would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to
   persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection"  [section
   84(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002]

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  set
   aside and substituted by a decision to allow the  appeal  on  the  ground
   that the removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  would  breach
   the United Kingdom's obligations in relation to persons  eligible  for  a
   grant of humanitarian protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 23rd June 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

