
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03471/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2020                     |On 14 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                E B (Albania)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Ben Amunwa, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of E B who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 28 March 2019 to  refuse  him  international  protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection or leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen  of
    Albania.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Elbasan, in Albania, but lived all  his  life
    in Durres.   His family are Muslim, but non-practising,  including  the
    appellant.  The appellant was educated up to the age of 17 in  Albania:
    at the age of 15, he began work but also commenced a vocational  course
    in tourism and leisure:  the  appellant  was  learning  to  manage  his
    finances and developing independence skills, including cooking.

 3. On 16 December 2014, when he was  17  years  old,  the  appellant  left
    Albania, travelling via Italy and arriving in the United Kingdom on  21
    December 2014.

 4. On 15 May 2015, the appellant was referred  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM) as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking  child  (UASC).   He
    benefited from a positive Reasonable Grounds  decision  made  the  same
    day.

 5. The appellant turned 18 in September 2015.  He was  in  a  relationship
    for a time with a British citizen of Chinese origin: on 23 April  2017,
    they had a daughter.  The final pre-adoption care report refers to  the
    appellant harming and abusing his daughter in the first few  months  of
    her life, and maternal inadequacy.

 6. In October 2017, when she was 6 months old, the child  was  taken  into
    the care of  Social  Services  initially  with  her  mother,  but  then
    separately, because her mother was self-harming in front of the baby.

 7. On 6 March 2018, the London Borough of Sutton made a  final  care  plan
    for the child to be adopted, including  provision  for  final  meetings
    with both parents, and letters which the child could be given later  to
    explain the circumstances of her adoption.  The child  was  not  yet  a
    year old.

 8. On 20 July 2018, the respondent  made  a  negative  Conclusive  Grounds
    decision finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  former  victim  of
    trafficking.

 9. In October 2019, the appellant's child was adopted and at the  date  of
    hearing the appellant had no direct contact with her.  As a  matter  of
    law, the parental bond is broken by adoption.

10. The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal 18 November 2019.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The First-tier Judge made  an  application  to  the  Family  Court  for
    relevant documents from the care proceedings and had  regard  to  them.
    The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  having
    taken account of all the evidence before the Tribunal,  found  that  he
    was not a reliable or credible witness and  that  his  account  of  ill
    treatment in his family home and of trafficking  was  fabricated.   The
    international protection claims were all rejected:  Refugee Convention,
    humanitarian protection, and Article 2 and 3 ECHR.

12. At the beginning of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  the  appellant's
    Counsel confirmed that no stand-alone Article 8 ECHR claim was pursued.
     The Judge's decision dealt briefly with Articles 2 and 3  ECHR,  which
    fell with the other  international  protection  claims.   The  decision
    concluded that 'As indicated, there is no  arguable  Article  8  appeal
    before the Tribunal'.

13. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

14. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "... In a decision promulgated on  10  November  2019,  Judge  Head
         dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal
         of his protection case and his  claim  based  upon  Article  8,  by
         reason of his relationship with his daughter.

          1) The grounds of appeal assert:

             (a)  the Judge has failed to consider the Asylos report, which
             raises protection issues, as there was no reference to such in
             the decision.

             (b)  the Judge has suggested that there is  a  discrepancy  in
             the appellant's evidence re the future care of  his  daughter.
             There is no discrepancy and the finding is irrational.

             (c)  the Judge's  conclusion  that  there  was  no  continuing
             interest from criminal gangs is unsustainable.

             (d)  the Judge has failed to consider Article 8 ECHR  properly
             or at all.

          2) Whilst I may not have given leave in respect of the grounds of
             appeal relating to protection issues, it  is  clear  that  the
             appellant has a child in  the  United  Kingdom  and  a  proper
             assessment of Article 8  the  needs  to  be  made.    All  the
             grounds may be argued."

Rule 24 Reply

15. There was no Rule 24 Reply on the appellant's behalf.

16. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Adjournment request

17. On 26 February 2020, the appellant's representatives wrote to the Upper
    Tribunal  seeking  an  adjournment.   They  had  asked  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for copies of the Family  Court  documents.   They  considered
    that it was likely to take several weeks for the Family Court documents
    to be provided by the First-tier Tribunal and that they would then need
    to peruse the documents and advise the appellant.  Sentinel  Solicitors
    sought an adjournment of 8 weeks for all of that.

18. On 3 March 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor refused the application,
    noting that it had not been established  that  the  adoption  documents
    were relevant to consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred
    in law.

Upper Tribunal hearing

19. At the beginning of the Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  Mr  Amunwa  for  the
    appellant indicated that the appellant would not pursue the application
    for the Family Court documents nor the application for an adjournment.

20. Mr Amunwa had prepared a skeleton argument:  he argued that the  First-
    tier Judge had failed to have regard to the Upper  Tribunal's   country
    guidance on Albanian trafficking in TD and  AD  (Trafficked  women)(CG)
    [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC) or the Asylos report dated May 2019 with reference
    to trafficking in Albania.  Mr Amunwa argued that  had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal given proper weight to these documents, he should  have  found
    that there was a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  to  the
    appellant as a former VOT.

21. In his skeleton argument, Mr Amunwa disputed the finding of  fact  that
    the appellant had lied about his contact with his  parents,  saying  in
    his asylum and NRM claim that he had lost  contact,  but  in  the  care
    proceedings saying that his daughter should be brought up by members of
    his family in Albania.

22. In relation to Article 8 ECHR,  Mr  Amunwa  contended  that  the  Judge
    should have assessed Article 8, despite Ms Reid's confirmation that she
    did not rely thereon.

23. In oral argument, Mr Amunwa relied on his skeleton  argument  and  said
    that the context was key.

24. For the respondent, Mr Bramble reminded me that the adoption  concerned
    a very sick baby girl, who was placed for adoption at  10  months  old,
    due to abuse by the appellant in the first 6 months of  her  life,  and
    her mother's inability to cope and self-harming.  The country  evidence
    had been taken into account in reaching a negative credibility  finding
    and he asked me to uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

25. It is not correct to say that the First-tier Judge overlooked  relevant
    country material. At [35]  in  his  decision,  he  confirmed  that  the
    appellant's credibility  and  the  plausibility  of  his  account  were
    considered in the context of relevant case  law  and  other  applicable
    country  material.   The  Judge  had  set  out  a  number  of   serious
    discrepancies and found the  appellant's  entire  core  account  to  be
    fabricated.

26. The First-tier Tribunal's reasoning  on  credibility  is  unassailable.
    The Judge was fully entitled to  reach  the  conclusions  of  fact  and
    credibility which are set out in the decision, for the reasons given.

27. There is also nothing in the Article 8 point.  The appellant's  Counsel
    told the Tribunal that she was not relying on Article 8 ECHR.   In  her
    skeleton argument prepared for the hearing, she  made  no  submissions.
    The appellant does not have any relationship with his  former  partner,
    and the parental and family life bond with his daughter was broken when
    she was adopted.

28. The grounds of appeal are without arguable merit  and  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.



DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     18 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



