
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03287/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2016                       |14 September 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 Sylvia [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION AS TO ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Nigeria who was born on  14
    April 1988.  She first entered the UK as a visitor on 1 July  2015  and
    claimed  asylum  nineteen  days  later.   Following  a  screening   and
    substantive interview her  application  was  refused  and  the  refusal
    letter is dated 20 November 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before Immigration Judge S Lal sitting at Hatton Cross on 9 May 2016.

 3. In a decision promulgated on  18  May  2016  Judge  Lal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  The appellant now appeals to this  Tribunal  leave
    having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 7 June 2016.

 4. It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to  set  out  the
    claim in any great detail.  Essentially the basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim is that if returned to Nigeria she would face persecution because
    she is suspected of being a witch and that she has failed to  attend  a
    "hearing" if that is the right word to describe this before the Efanedo
    Shrine, the penalty for which was said to be a death penalty.   At  the
    hearing in addition to giving evidence herself the appellant relied  on
    a substantial body of background material as well as a letter  said  to
    be from the Efanedo Shrine and a police  report.   It  should  also  be
    noted that in the refusal letter, although  the  respondent  ultimately
    rejected the appellant's claim it was nonetheless accepted at paragraph
    23 that the appellant had given "an internally consistent  account"  of
    the part of her claim in which she set out her case that she  had  been
    accused of being a witch.

 5. In his very brief decision amounting to only some four pages in  total,
    the judge dismissed the claim on the  basis  essentially  that  it  was
    fabricated and lacked credibility.  It was noted at paragraph  16  that
    the letter said to have been from the Efanedo Shrine (misspelt  in  the
    determination as the "Efandeo Shrine") contained a number  of  spelling
    mistakes and it is said at paragraph 17 as follows:

         "The Tribunal has assessed  this  document  against  the  objective
         evidence referred to by [the appellant's Counsel] which deals  with
         the witchcraft tradition in that  part  of  Africa.   The  Tribunal
         finds that a suspected witch will not be given one months notice as
         to  the  use  of  the  death  penalty  against  them  in   complete
         contravention of Nigerian criminal law.  There is  no  evidence  to
         suggest that this  is  how  suspected  witches  are  treated.   The
         objective evidence suggests a different type of  persecution  where
         individuals are attacked etc. by their community's [sic]  in  often
         extreme acts  of  communal  violence.   The  Tribunal  accepts  the
         existence of such cultural practices in Nigeria but it  cannot  and
         does not accept the evidence that an accepted cultural practice  in
         respect of witch persecution to issue a letter stating that someone
         will attract the death penalty if they do not attend in  a  month's
         time.  This will give  the  suspected  witch  time  to  flee.   The
         explanation given that the shrine is a busy place and  one  has  to
         have an appointment stretches all  credulity  where  the  claim  is
         based on a real risk of severe ill-treatment."

 6. It is then said that "the Tribunal found this  evidence  to  be  wholly
    unsatisfactory and it leads the Tribunal to reject the  entire  account
    of claimed persecution as a suspected witch".  Because of this it seems
    (see paragraph 18) that the judge also rejected the  police  report  as
    not being genuine either.  The Tribunal found that "both are an attempt
    to bolster a weak claim".

 7. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that the judge simply  did  not
    have proper regard to the background material which had  been  advanced
    or at any rate his decision to reject all the evidence is  inadequately
    reasoned.

 8. In my judgment the decision is not adequately  reasoned.   I  have  had
    regard to the evidence which was before the First-tier  Tribunal  which
    included various pieces of evidence suggesting that  the  treatment  of
    suspected witches on occasion did include  killing  them.   I  set  out
    pieces of this evidence.  At page 54 of the  appellant's  bundle  there
    are extracts from the Country Information and Guidance produced by  the
    Home   Office   in    August    2015    on    "Nigeria:    Gender-Based
    Discrimination/Harm/Violence Against Women" and within paragraph  5.7.1
    it is stated as follows:

         "The  CWSI  [Centre   for   Women's   Studies   and   Intervention]
         representative indicated that  if  a  woman  has  been  accused  of
         witchcraft, she may have to carry out 'traditional rites', but this
         depends on the area and cultural beliefs [CWSI 24 April 2013].  She
         indicated that one  such  traditional  rite  could  be  giving  the
         community gifts like gold...

         The CDHR representative said that a  woman  accused  of  witchcraft
         could be killed by 'close relations' or 'kinsmen' (CD HR  25  April
         2013).  She added that this practice is 'rampant' in  some  states,
         such as Akwa Ibom, Cross River, but  is  also  practised  in  other
         states as  well...   The  Director  of  Widows  for  Peace  through
         Democracy (WPD), a UK-based advocacy  organisation  for  widows  in
         developing countries  (n.d.),  without  specifying  ethnic  groups,
         stated that:

             'WPD is well aware... that  women,  especially  older  widowed
             women, may, in  some  ethnic  groups,  particularly  in  rural
             areas, be accused of being witches  where  unexplained  deaths
             occur,  (for  example,  in   context   of   HIV   and   AIDS),
             unprecedented   natural   disasters   happen,   or    harvests
             inexplicably  fail.   Expulsion  from  the  village  and   the
             community; exclusion or forced  seclusion;  in  extreme  cases
             death by stoning might be carried out." (WPD 25 April 2013)'."

 9. This information was gleaned from an information response of  24  April
    2013 by the Research Directorate of the Immigration and  Refugee  Board
    of Canada.

10.  An example of a witch said to have been killed was given at  5.7.2  of
    this report as follows:

         "BBC trending: 'The tragic case  of  Nigeria's  'bird'  woman',  20
         October 2014, showed a scene of a dying woman, burn  and  bloodied,
         who witnesses claimed had been a black bird who had been flying  in
         the sky in Lagos, before striking an electrical cable,  falling  to
         earth and transforming into a woman.  The same eyewitnesses say she
         confessed to being a witch."

    The article went on to say:

         "Accusations of witchcraft remain common in this part of the  world
         says ... 'In a secular society like ours it's very hard to grasp  a
         belief in supernatural forces'.  But  the  notion  of  witches  and
         wizards is embedded in a form of Pentecostal Christianity  that  is
         popular in Nigeria, she explains."

11. At paragraph 79 of the bundle there is a document relied  on  from  the
    Australian Government Refugee Review Tribunal  setting  out  advice  on
    Nigeria.  In question 2 "Are there any  reports  of  suspected  witches
    being harmed in Anambra State?  If so, by whom and in what  ways?   The
    following information is given:

         "Limited information  was  found  on  the  treatment  of  suspected
         witches in Anambra State.  The Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
         Canada documented numerous media reports of ritual killings carried
         out in various Nigerian states, including  Anambra.  [5]  A  United
         Kingdom report from 2009, documented  that  over  30  priests  were
         arrested  in  2004  when  50  mutilated  bodies  used  for   ritual
         sacrifices were found near shrines in Okija, Anambra State. [6] The
         priests were accused of committing human sacrifices and using  body
         parts for ritual purposes. [7]."

12. In answer to question 4, "What is the level  of  state  protection  for
    those suspected of being witches (and harmed or threatened by non-state
    actors)? the following information is given:

         "Information indicates  that  the  level  of  state  protection  is
         undermined by official  hostility  towards  witchcraft  and  police
         corruption.  According to the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
         Canada, 'local  authorities  (as  opposed  to  formal  governmental
         officials) in Nigeria often treat witchcraft as a crime  punishable
         by death". [16]  However, UNHCR indicated that  'cults  and  secret
         societies were widespread, but the protection  within  Nigeria  and
         police assistance would generally be available, although  it  could
         not be 'fully  rule[d]  out  that  a  person  being  victimised  or
         threatened by members of the secret cult would at all times be able
         to find safety'. [17]."

13. In my judgment having looked carefully at the letter said to have  been
    from the Efanedo Shrine it cannot properly be said that  "there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that this is how suspected  witches  are  treated".
    It appears from this decision that having decided that the letter  from
    the shrine was not a genuine letter the judge effectively dismissed the
    other material which had been put before him rather than  reaching  his
    conclusion on the basis of a consideration of all the material  in  the
    round.  It does not of course follow that had  be  considered  all  the
    material in the round he would have been bound to allow the  claim  and
    it may well be that the appellant will still  have  a  high  hurdle  to
    overcome before her appeal is allowed but in my  judgment  the  judge's
    failure at the very least to show in  his  decision  that  he  had  had
    proper regard to all the evidence which had been put before him  is  so
    apparent as to amount to a material error of law.

14. It follows that this appeal must be re-heard and having regard  to  the
    Practice Statement it is appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal because there are no findings of fact which can  be
    retained but the appeal will have to be re-heard afresh and I shall  so
    order.





Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal,  dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal is set aside.

The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, for reconsideration by any judge except Judge Lal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 29 July 2016


