
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03880/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd December 2016                          |On 23rd December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                         MR Mohammed Habibur RAHMAN
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Patel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1979 is a citizen of Bangladesh.  The
    Appellant had made application for asylum and that had been refused  by
    the Respondent on 4th December 2015.  The Appellant had appealed  that
    decision and the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego
    sitting  at  Harmondsworth  on  17th February  2016.   The  judge  had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant had then made application for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.   That  application  had  been  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher on 30th March 2016.  In particular the judge  had
    found that there was no application made for an adjournment contrary to
    the assertion in the Grounds of Appeal even though  the  Appellant  had
    the benefit of representation.  An error over the  date  mentioned  was
    also found not to be material to the decision.

 3. Permission to appeal was renewed and  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 13th April 2016.  The basis of granting  permission  was
    that the applicant had stated that his evidence was that the police had
    visited him on a date in October even though the judge had referred  to
    a date in September and that his claim for asylum in November  may  not
    have had the delay that the judge believed and therefore that may  have
    infected his  belief  that  that  delay  had  damaged  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  The Respondent had opposed that appeal by a letter  dated
    29th April 2016.  The matter comes before me to decide whether or not a
    material error of law had been made by  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by way of directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Miss Patel referred to the disputed date and noted that the Appellant's
    written evidence had referred to a  police  visit  to  him  in  October
    rather than September as referred to by the judge at  paragraph  88  of
    the judge's decision.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr McVeety expressed surprise that leave to appeal  had  been  granted.
    He noted that the Record of Proceedings noted by the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing disclosed the Appellant in evidence had  said  September
    rather than October.  The judge's own observations within paragraph  88
    of his decision disclosed that the Appellant had referred to  September
    rather than October.  It was further noted that although the  Appellant
    had been represented there was no note or Record  of  Proceedings  from
    the Appellant or his representative concerning the oral evidence  given
    at the hearing.  Secondly and in any event Mr McVeety  noted  that  the
    matter was not material to the overall assessment or decision.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. Central to the Appellant's claim for asylum was  that  his  family  and
    another family who were pro-Awami League had been involved  in  a  land
    dispute.  He had claimed that that land dispute had gone to the  courts
    and that originally a decision  had  been  reached  in  favour  of  his
    family.  Thereafter however the other side had appealed  that  decision
    which was still ongoing.

 8. The Appellant had originally come to the UK allegedly  to  escape  this
    family and had come to the UK on a student visa  as  long  ago  as  6th
    February 2011.  Thereafter the Appellant's leave to remain as a student
    had  been  curtailed,  reconsidered  and  reinstated  on  a  number  of
    occasions.  His final student visa had been valid until 23rd May 2015.
    On the expiry of that visa it  is  clear  the  Appellant  had  remained
    unlawfully in the UK.  Throughout that period of time from his  arrival
    in February 2011 allegedly to avoid this family until the expiry of his
    visa in May 2015 there had been no claim for asylum.  In September 2015
    it was said that the Appellant was encountered by  the  UK  authorities
    working illegally.  Thereafter the  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  4th
    November 2015.

 9. The judge had considered the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account.
    He had clearly carefully considered the oral evidence  and  documentary
    evidence provided.  A witness gave evidence who was  a  cousin  of  the
    Appellant and the judge had noted and dealt with her evidence.

10. Given the reasons behind the granting of appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal
    it is first worth noting at paragraph 61 of the decision that the judge
    recorded that the Appellant had said that all his problems arose before
    he left Bangladesh to come to the UK in 2011 but had made no claim  for
    asylum until November 2015.  The judge had also made findings  on  fact
    and credibility and found that there was no credible evidence that  the
    Appellant had been of any political interest to the  Awami  League  and
    had not been for many years active on behalf of the BMP.  The judge was
    prepared to accept that there was a land dispute in Bangladesh but  the
    finding of the court in favour of the Appellant's  family  particularly
    at a time when the Awami League was  in  power  did  not  indicate  the
    matter would not be dealt with judicially.

11. Additional to those findings  at  paragraph  88  that  the  Appellant's
    credibility was further damaged by his delay in claiming  asylum.   The
    judge had specifically referred to the fact that the Appellant realised
    he was in fear of his  life  in  September  2015  and  had  provided  a
    specific date of 25th or 26th September where allegedly his mother  had
    been harassed at the family home  in  Bangladesh  giving  rise  to  the
    Appellant's alleged fear.  The judge had noted however that he did  not
    claim asylum until 4th November 2015 following his arrest  for  illegal
    working.

12. Permission appears to have been granted on the basis that the Appellant
    stated that his oral evidence was that the visit to the  mother's  home
    in Bangladesh had taken place on 25th or 26th October rather than those
    dates in September and accordingly the delay  in  claiming  asylum  was
    somewhat less.

13. The Upper Tribunal Judge appears to have granted permission  to  appeal
    on the basis of the Appellant stating that his evidence  was  that  the
    visit had taken place on 25th or 26th October rather than September.

14. This is a matter that  I  find  troubling  for  a  number  of  reasons.
    Firstly the application for permission to appeal  and  the  renewal  of
    that appeal to the Upper Tribunal were clearly made  by  the  Appellant
    himself rather than representatives.   It  is  within  the  Appellant's
    Grounds of Appeal that this assertion about the wrong date recorded  in
    the determination is made.  Given that the assertion  is  made  by  the
    Appellant himself within the Grounds of Appeal it would in my view have
    been prudent at the very least to have checked that  matter  given  the
    assertion the judge  had  made  a  mistake.   Firstly  the  Appellant's
    representatives did not and have not so far as I am aware ever produced
    a Record of Proceedings to indicate that was the evidence given by  the
    Appellant at the hearing.  However the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    did present their Record of Proceedings indicating that it was recorded
    the Appellant had given the dates in  September  2015  consistent  with
    that which is recorded by the judge himself  at  paragraph  88  of  his
    decision and presumably based upon his own Record of Proceedings.

15. It may perhaps have also  been  prudent  to  look  at  the  documentary
    evidence to see whether in written  evidence  the  Appellant  had  ever
    asserted the police visit to his mother's home being in October  rather
    than September 2015.  An examination of that written  evidence  reveals
    the following.  The chronology of events  at  pages  8  and  9  of  the
    Appellant's bundle makes no reference to a date in October  2015.   The
    Appellant's written witness statement dated 11th February 2016 makes no
    reference to any date in 2015.  The written witness statement  of  Miss
    Azim in like manner makes no  reference  to  any  date  in  2015.   The
    Appellant's screening form at paragraph 4.1 refers to  police  warrants
    being issued in December 2010.  In the Appellant's interview record  at
    question 37 he was asked the following "can you explain to me why it is
    you know the date the police came to your home but you  can't  remember
    the date in 2010 that your problems happened and when your name was put
    on the troublemaker's list?".  The Appellant's response was as follows:



         "I don't remember that date because I was not present on  that  day
         but on the other day in December when they went in search for me  I
         was informed by my mother and  was  shocked  that  they  came  with
         arrest warrant.  I mentioned my problem was in September 2010".

16. There is no other reference so far as I can see within the  Appellant's
    interview record to a date in either September or October 2015.

17. On the face of it therefore there is no evidence that in oral  evidence
    the Appellant had referred to the police visiting his mother's home  on
    behalf of his rival in October 2015 but a clear note made by  both  the
    judge and the Presenting Officer that the Appellant had referred to the
    date as being September 2015.  There was no contradictory note from the
    Appellant's representative.  If  one  then  looks  at  the  Appellant's
    written evidence for any date no date in 2015  appears  in  either  his
    witness statement or the witness statement of Miss  Azim.   Finally  if
    one then looks at the Appellant's screening form and  interview  record
    interestingly the only date referred to as  when  police  came  to  the
    family home with an arrest warrant  is  September  2010  predating  the
    Appellant's arrival in the UK in 2011.  That is  also  consistent  with
    the judge's record within his decision that  the  Appellant's  problems
    had all unfolded before he came to the UK.

18. I am driven to the conclusion based on my reading of the evidence  that
    the assertion made by the Appellant in his application  for  permission
    to appeal asserting the judge had got the date wrong is simply  untrue.
    Secondly I am driven to the  conclusion  that  an  examination  of  the
    written evidence and the Record of Proceedings kept should have alerted
    anyone examining this case to the fact that the  Appellant's  assertion
    appeared either not to be true and certainly not supported by evidence.
     To therefore give permission to appeal based  on  an  assertion  alone
    that may in fact be an untrue assertion is somewhat surprising.

19. Secondly it is entirely clear that whether or not it was  September  or
    October 2015 the delay in claiming asylum  in  fact  emanated  from  as
    early as 2011 when the  Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  with  all  his
    problems in place but failed to make any application.

20. In summary therefore no error of fact was made by the  judge  and  that
    should have been clear from any proper  examination  of  the  evidence.
    Secondly in any event  it  was  not  material  given  his  findings  on
    credibility generally and in terms of  delay  in  claiming  asylum  the
    lengthy delay that had already occurred from 2011 onwards.

Notice of Decision

21. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and I  dismiss
    the appeal and uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Anonymity not retained.






Signed   Date 23/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever









Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
