
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03808/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 2 May 2018                           |On : 11 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                     CM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 24 December  1998.  She
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse her asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 August 2013. She claimed
      asylum on 3 August 2015 after being served illegal entry papers. On 14
      December 2015 a decision was made that there were  reasonable  grounds
      to believe that she was a victim of trafficking and on  10  June  2016
      the Competent Authority concluded that  she  was  a  victim  of  human
      trafficking, but that no leave would be granted on that basis.  On  30
      March 2017 the respondent concluded that the appellant was not in need
      of international protection and refused her asylum claim.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the  basis  that  she  feared
      persecution from her great uncle in Zimbabwe.  She  claimed  that  she
      lived with her grandmother as her mother was living  in  the  UK,  and
      when her grandmother died in 2011 she moved in with her uncle together
      with her sister, in Kwekwe. Her uncle refused to  give  her  food  and
      beat her. Her sister ran away after a month. Her uncle then  began  to
      sexually assault her. She told her paternal grandfather who said  that
      he would report the matter to the police. She also told Brother  A  at
      her church. She told her uncle's wife who spoke to her  uncle  and  he
      denied the accusations and told her he was leaving and would kill  her
      when he returned. Brother A then took her from her uncle's  house  and
      arranged for her to come to the UK with members of the church.


   4. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, found that she  was
      a member of a particular social group, namely women in  Zimbabwe,  and
      accepted her account of the abuse and threats from her uncle.  It  was
      accepted that she had a subjective fear on return to Kwekwe but it was
      not accepted that that fear  was  well-founded  because  there  was  a
      sufficiency of protection available to her  from  the  authorities  of
      Zimbabwe and she could also reasonably relocate  to  another  part  of
      Zimbabwe. The respondent therefore considered that the  appellant  was
      not at risk on return to Zimbabwe and that her removal there would not
      breach her human rights.


   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was heard  on
      9 November 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman. At the  appeal
      hearing, the judge heard from the appellant,  as  well  as  two  other
      witnesses, the appellant's mother  HA  and  the  appellant's  mother's
      former boyfriend GI. The judge noted the appellant's evidence that her
      father and mother both lived (separately) in the UK and that she lived
      with her  mother  and  her  step-father  and  half-brothers.  All  her
      siblings and half-siblings lived in the UK apart from her sister Y who
      was aged 20 at the time. The uncle with whom she lived in Zimbabwe was
      her grandmother's brother. The appellant's mother's evidence was  that
      she came to the UK in March 2000 as a visitor and did  not  return  to
      Zimbabwe. She claimed asylum but her claim was refused,  although  she
      currently had indefinite leave to remain. She was not in contact  with
      her other daughter Y who was living in Kwekwe. She  last  returned  to
      Zimbabwe in 2008 with her boyfriend when her mother died but  did  not
      visit her family. The  appellant's  siblings  and  half-siblings  were
      British. GI's evidence included that he was no longer together with HA
      and that he was not aware that HA had travelled to Zimbabwe. The judge
      did not accept that he had  been  given  a  truthful  account  of  the
      appellant's contacts in Zimbabwe and did not accept that there was  no
      contact with her sister Y. He found that the appellant was  no  longer
      at risk from her uncle in Kwekwe and that she  could  return  to  live
      there or alternatively relocate to another part of  Zimbabwe  such  as
      Harare. He concluded that the respondent's decision did not breach the
      appellant's human rights and he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   6. The appellant then sought permission to appeal the judge's decision on
      five grounds: that the judge had failed to apply the country  guidance
      in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  59;
      that there was procedural unfairness on  the  part  of  the  judge  by
      making findings as to the risk to the appellant  from  her  uncle  and
      membership of a particular social group which  were  contrary  to  the
      agreed issues in the refusal decision; that the judge failed  to  make
      any findings on sufficiency of protection; that the  judge  failed  to
      take  into  account  the  appellant's  specific   circumstances   when
      concluding that she would not be at risk on return as  a  lone  female
      and failed to consider the wider risk of re-trafficking; and that  the
      judge applied the wrong test in considering  the  appellant's  private
      life  under  the  immigration  rules,  failed  to  consider  the  best
      interests of  the  appellant's  half-siblings,  erred  in  finding  no
      special bonds of dependency between the appellant and her  mother  and
      failed  to  take  account  of  various  compelling  circumstances   in
      assessing proportionality.


   7. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on all grounds,  but
      in particular on the second ground.

Hearing and submissions

   8. Mr Sellwood relied and expanded  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.  With
      regard to the first ground he submitted that the appellant fell within
      the risk  factors  in  CM,  in  particular  with  regard  to  internal
      relocation to a high density area, which the judge failed to consider.
      As to  the  second  ground,  the  judge  ignored  the  fact  that  the
      respondent, in the refusal letter, had accepted that the appellant was
      at risk in her home area and was  a  member  of  a  particular  social
      group. With regard to the third ground, the judge made no findings  on
      sufficiency of protection and did not undertake any  analysis  of  the
      evidence produced by the respondent and appellant in that  regard.  As
      for the fourth ground, the judge considered the risk to the  appellant
      as a lone female but did not factor in applicable nuances such as  the
      risk of re-trafficking from others aside from her uncle.  With  regard
      to the fifth ground, the judge  made  four  misdirections  in  law  in
      regard to Article 8, applying the  wrong  test  in  considering  "very
      significant obstacles", making only a limited assessment of  the  best
      interests of the appellant's two half-siblings with  whom  she  lived,
      failing to give proper consideration to the family  ties  between  the
      appellant and her mother and failing to consider  relevant  compelling
      circumstances in the proportionality assessment.

   9. Mr Wilding submitted that the judge had made no errors on any of these
      matters. From his series of findings the logical conclusion  was  that
      the appellant could live in another part of Zimbabwe.  The  judge  had
      not gone behind any concessions made by the  respondent,  but  in  any
      event was entitled to find that the appellant was at no  risk  in  her
      home area. Whilst the judge did not make findings  on  sufficiency  of
      protection that was immaterial as he found that the appellant was  not
      at risk on her home area and in any event could relocate. The  judge's
      conclusion on the risk of re-trafficking was lawful as  the  appellant
      would be facing a completely different scenario on  return  as  an  18
      year old. The judge made no errors in his assessment of Article 8.


  10. Mr Sellwood, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and discussion

  11. Whereas the grounds seek to  break  down  the  judge's  decision  into
      distinct areas and challenge the findings in a piecemeal fashion, I am
      entirely in agreement with Mr Wilding's submission that  the  decision
      needs to be read as a whole as a combination of  findings  leading  to
      the logical conclusion that the appellant could safely and  reasonably
      return to live in another part of Zimbabwe.

  12. I do not consider that the judge was excluded by any concession in the
      refusal decision to find that the appellant would be at  risk  in  her
      home area. The refusal decision makes no  such  concession,  accepting
      only that she had a subjective fear  of  persecution  in  Kwekwe.  The
      judge gave very cogent reasons, at [91],  [92],  [100]  to  [102]  and
      [108], for concluding that the appellant's uncle  no  longer  posed  a
      risk to her in her home area, given the different scenario existing on
      a return to Zimbabwe as opposed to that when she left. I find  nothing
      unreasonable or unlawful about such a finding and it was one which was
      entirely open to the judge on the evidence before him. However, and in
      any event, it  was  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  could
      relocate to another area of Zimbabwe and that her uncle would have  no
      knowledge of her return, nor the means or inclination to seek her out.
      That was a conclusion properly open to the judge and on that basis any
      suggestion that the judge erred in law by going behind a concession in
      regard to risk in Kwekwe is simply immaterial.


  13. Likewise, given the judge's view that the appellant could relocate  to
      another part of Zimbabwe, the challenge at [5] and [6] of the  grounds
      to the judge's decision on risk on return on the basis of a failure to
      consider the country guidance in CM, and at [12]  to  the  failure  to
      consider sufficiency of protection, is plainly immaterial.  The  judge
      clearly had CM in mind when making  his  decision,  referring  to  the
      submissions made by Mr Sellwood in that regard and  having  regard  to
      the risk factors therein at [104], but had no  need  to  consider  the
      position in [3(2)] of the headnote to CM when it was  considered  that
      the appellant would not be returning to a rural area, such as  Kwekwe,
      but could safely relocate to  an  area  such  as  Harare.  It  was  Mr
      Sellwood's submission that the  judge  ought  in  any  event  to  have
      considered the risk on relocation, as set out in CM, to a person  such
      as the appellant who would not be able to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-
      PF. However the relevant finding in CM appears to be  that  at  [3(5)]
      and I fail to see  how  the  risk  factors  in  that  paragraph  could
      possibly indicate any risk to the appellant, given her  profile,  even
      if she would be living in a high density area  as  was  Mr  Sellwood's
      suggestion.  That  was  plainly  the   judge's   finding   at   [113].
      Accordingly, given the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  could
      relocate to another part of Zimbabwe such as Harare, there was no need
      for him to make specific findings on sufficiency of protection in  her
      home area.

  14. It was Mr Sellwood's submission that the judge had not considered  the
      appellant's full profile when concluding  that  she  could  return  to
      Zimbabwe without risk and that a finding that lone  females  were  not
      per se at risk on return and that she did not risk being re-trafficked
      by her uncle failed to take account of the wider picture that she  was
      vulnerable as a past victim of trafficking and sexual abuse, that  she
      had no support network  on  return  and  that  she  risked  being  re-
      trafficked by unknown persons. However, I do not accept that the judge
      failed to take account of the appellant's own  profile.  It  is  plain
      that, having found that lone females were not at risk  of  persecution
      per se, the judge went  on  from  [96]  to  consider  the  appellant's
      particular circumstances. He considered her claim to have  no  support
      network in Zimbabwe and no access to work, but did not believe that he
      had been  provided  with  a  truthful  account  of  her  circumstances
      including her relationships and family contacts in Zimbabwe, given  in
      particular the highly inconsistent evidence  of  her  mother  and  her
      mother's former partner, and concluded that she could at least  obtain
      support from her sister. There was no proper basis for  the  judge  to
      conclude that the appellant was at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked  by
      unknown persons, and the suggestion in the grounds that she  would  be
      at such risk is pure speculation. In any event the judge gave full and
      proper reasons for concluding that the appellant would have access  to
      a safe support system in Zimbabwe. It seems to me  that,  contrary  to
      the assertion in the grounds, the judge gave full and  cogent  reasons
      for concluding that the appellant would be at no  risk  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe and that such a conclusion  took  account  of  all  the  risk
      factors raised by and on behalf of the appellant.

  15. As for the assertion that the judge materially erred in law  by  going
      behind the  respondent's  concession  that  she  was  a  member  of  a
      particular social group, I agree with Mr Wilding that whether  or  not
      she was a member of a particular social group was not material,  given
      that the real issue was risk of harm. In any event it  is  plain  from
      [101] that the judge made findings on the alternative basis  that  the
      appellant was a member of a particular social group and thus  made  no
      error of law by going behind any concessions.


  16. Turning to the judge's findings on Article 8, again I find no merit in
      the grounds. Having found, for reasons fully and cogently given,  that
      it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to  another
      part of Zimbabwe, the judge was fully entitled to conclude that  there
      were no very significant obstacles to integration on the  same  basis.
      The judge was fully aware of the test in paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  as
      mentioned at [114], and I am entirely in  agreement  with  Mr  Wilding
      that it is difficult to see how the judge could have found there to be
      very significant obstacles to integration when finding it  not  to  be
      unduly harsh to return to Zimbabwe. The judge took account of the only
      further and relevant consideration, namely the respondent's  delay  in
      making her decision, and provided cogent reasons  at  [114]  why  this
      could in fact aid, rather than hinder, integration. The judge had full
      regard to the best interests of the appellant's half-siblings and gave
      consideration to the separation of the children from the appellant  at
      [115]. His findings on the appellant's relationship with  her  mother,
      at [116], were entirely open to him on the  evidence  before  him  and
      took account of  all  relevant  matters.  I  do  not  agree  with  the
      assertion in the grounds that the judge failed to take account of  the
      appellant's past experiences in assessing proportionality. Although he
      did not specifically refer to the earlier trafficking and mistreatment
      in Zimbabwe at [118], those are matters to  which  he  had  previously
      given full  consideration  and  would  have  been  in  his  mind  when
      assessing proportionality and there is no proper basis for  concluding
      anything other than that the proportionality assessment  took  account
      of all relevant matters. On the evidence  before  him  the  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to conclude that the proportionality  balance  fell
      in the respondent's favour.


  17. For all of these reasons I find that the judge was fully  entitled  to
      reach the conclusions that he did and to dismiss  the  appeal  on  the
      basis that he did. The judge's decision was  based  upon  a  full  and
      careful assessment of all the evidence  and  the  relevant  background
      materials  and  country  guidance  and  contained  properly   reasoned
      findings and conclusions.  I find no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision. I uphold the decision.






DECISION

  18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier   Tribunal)(Immigration   and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  4 May 2018
