
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03813/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                           |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     M Y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk of Counsel, instructed by Baileys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Andrew promulgated on 24 August 2018 in which she refused the appeal of the
Appellant on protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated
8 March 2018 refusing asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is given as
1 January 1963.  He entered the United Kingdom in 2009 pursuant to a visit
visa granted on 31 March 2009 after a successful immigration appeal.  The
Appellant overstayed his visa.  On 12 June 2014 he was arrested as an
overstayer.  On 19 September 2017 he was detained when reporting to the
immigration services and on 20 September 2017 he claimed asylum.


3.   In his screening interview the Appellant asserted that he "had
problems with my family", claiming

"The main problem is because I came to the UK in 2009 and could not support
them.  They have found out that I have girlfriend here in the UK, she is
supporting me.
They will kill me, because my in-law are powerful.
I fear my in-laws.
Because they warned me if I return to Pakistan they would kill me".


4.   At his substantive interview the Appellant produced threatening
letters that he claimed had been written by his in-laws.  However, it would
appear the Appellant demonstrated little knowledge of, or familiarity with,
the contents of the threatening letters: see question 55 et seq.


5.   The Respondent in due course refused the Appellant's application for
asylum for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated
8 March 2018.  The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim to have been
the recipient of threats from his in-laws, and also rejected the
Appellant's claim to have been in a relationship with a woman in the UK -
which he had stated variously to have commenced in 2013 or 2014.  The
Respondent concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk if returned to
Pakistan.  It may also be noted that the Respondent characterised the
Appellant's claim for protection as not engaging a 'Refugee Convention
reason' because it was essentially rooted in a claimed dispute with family
members and did not arise for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group, or political opinion.


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision and
Reasons of Judge Andrew.


8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which
was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 17 September
2018.


9.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 11 October 2018
resisting the Appellant's challenge to the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, having rehearsed something of the
background to the case and having appropriately directed herself to the
burden and standard of proof, set out her findings of fact at paragraph 19
of the decision in 28 lettered sub-paragraphs (a - bb).  Of particular note
in the context of the issues before me are the following matters, which
include in part an acceptance that there had been an issue between the
Appellant and his wife, and in turn members of her family, over the fact
that he had not been supporting her in the United Kingdom.

"h.  It is not surprising that the Appellant's wife in such circumstances
has made application to the Pakistani Courts for support.  I am satisfied
that, following the death of her father-in-law and her mother-in-law in
2017, and with whom she lived, she would have found it difficult to manage
financially.  I do not find that a Court Order such as the one produced by
the Appellant in his Bundle would place the Appellant at real risk on his
return to Pakistan.

i.   However, it is from his wife's brothers the Appellant claims his fears
arise.  They have taken over his two houses and also wish to take his
ancestral land.  Again, I do not find this surprising.  The Appellant has
neglected to maintain his wife and family for a number of years whilst
apparently carrying on a business in the United Kingdom (see the Court
Order) and I am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that they see this
as some form of compensation for the money that is owed to the Appellant's
wife."


11.  The Judge, having accepted these aspects of the premises of the
Appellant's claim, then addressed her mind to the threatening letters. She
sets out at paragraphs 19k-19q reasons for not attaching any weight to
either the letters or a First Information Report ('FIR') produced by the
Appellant. In my judgement the Judge does so with adequate cogency: the
reasoning is essentially sound, and indeed is not in itself the subject of
any specific challenge. The reasons include that the Appellant had been
inconsistent in his claims in relation to the letters, and had offered a
confused account during the course of interview indicating unfamiliarity
with the letters (a matter raised in the RFRL).  The Judge also considered
that the contents of the threatening letters were inconsistent with the
contents of other supporting documents, in particular the FIR and a letter
said to have been written by the Appellant's sister to the police.


12.  The Judge then went on to consider the Appellant's claim that "his
brothers-in-law had influence with politicians, the Police and Immigration
officials all over Pakistan" - noting that beyond the Appellant's
assertions in this regard nothing had been provided by way of supporting
evidence as to such influence (sub-paragraph 19s).


13.  I acknowledge that this latter assessment may be vulnerable to
criticism in that the Judge appears to have expected the Appellant to be
able to produce something by way of supporting corroborative documentary
evidence of such influence: "Had they had the influence the Appellant
claims I would have expected the Appellant to be able to produce articles
from newspapers or photographs confirming his assertions".


14.  Indeed this is the substance of one of the Appellant's grounds of
appeal: it is convenient to address it at this juncture.


15.  This particular aspect of the Appellant's challenge to the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal is essentially contingent upon being able to
establish his other grounds of appeal. The influence of the Appellant's
brothers-in-law is only relevant if it is shown that they intend him harm.
Accordingly, notwithstanding that in the abstract there may be some
substance to this aspect of the challenge, in my judgement it ultimately
does not avail the Appellant because I am not satisfied he has established
the other bases of challenge.


16.  Returning to the First-tier Tribunal's reasons: at paragraphs 19t-19z
the Judge considered the Appellant's claim to have been in a relationship
with a woman in the United Kingdom - an adulterous relationship given that
he had a wife in Pakistan.


17.  It is a startling feature of the Appellant's case that the woman with
whom he was supposedly having the relationship did not attend the hearing
of his appeal, and did not otherwise provide a supporting statement; nor
did the Appellant provide any other evidence of the relationship.  For the
reasons explained - and it seems to me to what should have been the
surprise of nobody - the Judge ultimately concluded that the Appellant had
failed to demonstrate that he was in, or had ever been in, such a
relationship as he claimed.


18.  Again, no criticism is raised on behalf of the Appellant in respect of
this aspect of the Judge's reasoning and findings.


19.  Necessarily the Judge's consequential finding - "It follows from this
that I am satisfied the claims that news of an extramarital relationship
has not got back to the Appellant's brothers-in-law, as claimed, and this
aspect of the claim has been made with a view to bolstering an already weak
claim." (paragraph 19z) - albeit poorly expressed, is adequately clear and
unimpugnable.


20.  The Judge then states the following conclusion:

"Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Appellant is not at real risk from
his brothers-in-law, as he claims.  I do accept that he may be at risk of
losing his assets in Pakistan, but this is because he has not paid
maintenance for his wife and five children, not for any other reason.  This
does not give rise to a claim for humanitarian protection." (paragraph
19aa)


21.  The Judge then goes on to consider, in the alternative, internal
relocation - stating that she was not satisfied that the Appellant had
shown that his brothers-in-law had any influence in Pakistan.


22.  For completeness I should note that the Judge also took into account
section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act
2004 and found that the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum further leads
her to "find his claims are not credible" (paragraph 20).


23.  The Appellant's appeal was therefore dismissed by the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.


Challenge

24.  The primary ground of challenge that has been pursued and amplified
before me is set out in these terms in the Appellant's grounds of appeal at
paragraph 4:

"In reaching her findings the Judge has made no reference at all to the
expert report of Ms Uzma Moeen.  Whilst the expert of course cannot comment
on credibility which is a matter for the Judge, she is able and in fact
does comment on the plausibility of the account.  This evidence has not
been considered by the Judge at all when making her credibility findings.
Ms Moeen comments in her report in particular that the Appellant's account
of events and in particular the reaction of his wife's brothers is
plausible within the contact of Pakistani society.  Whilst it is
acknowledged that she does not have to refer to every single piece of
evidence, it is submitted that the expert report was an important piece of
evidence and should have been considered."


25.  Ms Isherwood accepts, as it seems to me she inevitably must, that the
First-tier Tribunal Judge does not make any express reference to the report
of Ms Moeen in the decision. (This is also acknowledged in the Rule 24
response.)


26.  It is to be noted that at paragraph 10 of the Decision the Judge does
refer to the bundle produced by the Appellant, which includes the
report.The Judge also states at paragraph 18 that she had given
consideration in the round "to all the evidence that is before me".
Nonetheless, it is to be acknowledged that there is no express reference to
Ms Moeen's report.


27.  In such circumstances the focus of argument before me was on the
materiality of the report of Ms Moeen.


28.  The report is in the 72 page bundle submitted by the Appellant before
the First-tier Tribunal at pages 39-72.  It is dated 9 August 2018.  It is
on the letterhead of the Asian Legal Advice Service. In the opening
paragraphs Ms Moeen sets out the basis of her instructions and something of
her expertise.


29.  For completeness it is helpful if I set out the opening paragraphs of
the instructions as pertaining to the issue before me.  Paragraph 11 of Ms
Moeen's report is, in part, in these terms:

"My instructions are to comment on the following issues in my expert
report:

(i)  Whether [MY]'s claim, as set out in his statement of 06 August 2018
and in his interviews, is plausible in the context of Pakistan, according
to objective country evidence and your own expert knowledge.

In particular:

(ii) Whether it is common for a married man such as [MY] to be targeted,
attacked or even killed by his in-laws or male relatives of his wife for
having extra marital relationship with a woman (in the UK) and that he
stopped paying maintenance money to his wife and children in Pakistan and
whether [MY] would be likely to be at risk of serious physical harm from
his wife's brothers and/or their associates (who have considerable
political influence in Pakistan) if he returns to Pakistan now."

(The other paragraphs of the instructions, (iii)-(vii), are to a very
considerable extent contingent upon the answers paragraph (ii).)


30.  In addressing her instructions Ms Moeen sets out sections of her
report with subheadings that replicate the essential nature of the
divisions of the instruction: accordingly, between paragraphs 14 and 15 of
the report there appears again the text of paragraph (ii) of the
instruction before an attempt is made to address that particular question.


31.  Prior to addressing the express instruction of paragraph (ii), at
paragraph 14 of the report (under the heading "Expert's Opinion") Ms Moeen,
having referred to the Respondent's decision, writes:

"However, by way of background, in order to assess the plausibility of his
fear of serious physical harm and/or even unlawful killing if he is forced
to return to Pakistan, in my opinion, it may help to consider the issue of
honour-based violence and/or fate of men of [MY]'s claimed profile who try
to escape any serious physical harm to be inflicted on them due to their
alleged extra marital relationship and are labelled as irreligious,
rebellious and adulterous."


32.  It may be seen that in defining the context for the consideration of
the issues raised the expert's focus is very much upon the claim that the
Appellant is, and is accused of being, an adulterer.  Indeed, such a
'profile' is an intrinsic part of the questions set out in the
instructions, as recited at paragraph 11(ii).


33.  Necessarily, as might be expected, when the expert begins to address
paragraph (ii) of her instructions she again makes specific reference to
the claimed extramarital relationship: paragraph 15 of Ms Moeen's report
opens in these terms:

"[MY] claims that he fears risk of serious physical harm and/or unlawful
killing, if he returns to Pakistan from his wife's brothers due to his
extra marital relationship with a woman in the UK and that he has stopped
paying maintenance money to his wife and children in Pakistan."


34.  Mr Fraczyk, on behalf of the Appellant, has argued that the expert in
fact gives consideration both (a) to the circumstances of an adulterer and
the risks arising by reason of adultery, and (b) the circumstances of
somebody who fails to maintain maintenance payments, as discrete matters.
He identifies the following passage in the middle of paragraph 16 of the
report:

"Therefore, in my opinion, [MY]'s extramarital relationship with a woman
and/or the stopped payment of maintenance to his wife and children is not
only seen as defiance from Islam in a Pakistani familial setup but such
irreligious act also brings shame, disrespect and dishonour to his wife and
her immediate family in Pakistan."

It is submitted that the use of "and/or" means that the expert is in part
opining that the stopping of maintenance will trigger the same adverse
interest for the same reasons as would the act of adultery.


35.  In my judgement the difficulty with that submission is that the whole
of the rest of paragraph 16 is entirely focused upon adulterous behaviour
and non-marital sexual acts.  Further, immediately after the passage quoted
above, the expert continues:

         "It is plausible that feeling disgraced, his wife's family would
         have threatened him of serious consequences. Such relationships are
         neither legally nor morally or socially acceptable in Pakistan".


36.  I do not accept that at paragraph 16 the expert is seeking to set out
in a discrete manner a separate risk arising by reason of failure to meet
the maintenance requirements. The analysis is in respect of adultery: the
opinion on both plausibility of account and nature of risk is only
supported by contextual references to the attitude towards, and treatment
of, adulterers in Pakistan. There is no reference to the country situation
in respect of those who do not support their families.


37.  Similarly, it seems to me that the further phrase alighted upon by
Counsel at paragraph 18 does not assist the Appellant's arguments.  At
paragraph 18 Ms Moeen writes:

"I must point out that in [MY]'s case (as he claims) where the couple
'dishonoured' their families by entering into a romantic relationship
and/or spending time alone in a house, the risk of serious physical harm to
such men or couples in this situation would become more serious.  I say so
because honour is a multidimensional term that includes familial respect
(izzat) and social prestige (ghairat)."

Mr Fraczyk urges me to consider that the reference to a multidimensional
concept of honour would potentially embrace the failure to pay maintenance.
 I am not prepared to accept that that is what the expert had in mind at
paragraph 18, which, again, is clearly written in the context of a
consideration of a 'dishonourable' relationship outside of marriage.


38.  In all such circumstances I do not accept the absence of any express
reference to Ms Moeen's report amounted to a material omission. The report
is focussed on the plausibility of threats arising in the context of
adultery. The evaluation of the claimed fact of adultery did not turn on
anything in the report. The Judge having concluded that the Appellant had
not shown that he was an adulterer, or had been reported to be an adulterer
to his in-laws, would have gleaned from the report no material assistance
in evaluating risk on return.


39.  Beyond those particular passages in the report of Ms Moeen, I have
also been taken to a number of examples of incidents involving family feuds
that have resulted in violence - including killings described as 'revenge'
killings or 'honour' killings.  It seems to me that none of those matters
can be shown to be specifically 'on point' with regard to the maintenance
issue.  Moreover, in any event the fact that the sort of terrible things
described - and which the Appellant claims to fear if he were returned to
Pakistan - do occur in Pakistan, does not mean that they are reasonably
likely to happen in the instant case.  Something more is required to make
good a claim for protection: either that such matters are so endemic that
anybody failing to make a maintenance payment can expect to be at risk, or
that there is something particular about the Appellant's case that puts him
at risk.


40.  As regards maintenance of his family, it seems to me not irrelevant to
note that on the Judge's findings the failure to make payments had in
substance been remedied by the actions in taking the Appellant's land and
applying it to the benefit of his wife and children.


41.  Be that as it may, in any event on the Appellant's evidence the factor
that was particular about his case that went to demonstrate a specific risk
to him, was the written threats that had been received. The Judge entirely
rejected those threats for cogent reasons.  It is to be recalled that the
Judge not only rejected that element of the Appellant's case, but also
found that the Appellant had not been able to discharge the burden of proof
in respect of a matter that was readily provable in this country - that is
to say in relation to his supposed adulterous relationship.


42.  It is adequately clear that for sustainable reasons the Judge found
the Appellant to lack credibility on the core elements of his account.  In
short, the Appellant did not make good on his claim that he had been the
recipient of written threats.


43.  It is submitted in the grounds of challenge that this should not
inevitably have been fatal to the Appellant's application: "The rejection
of the documents does not lead to the conclusion that [the in-laws] would
not harm him upon return" (paragraph 5 of the grounds).


44.  However, the rejection of the documents meant that there was nothing
left to support the Appellant's claim other than his oral testimony that he
had been the recipient of threats.  Moreover, the rejection of the
documents actively undermined his account and his credibility.  In such
circumstances, it seems to me that even if in general terms his account
could be said to be plausible in that violent family feuds occur in
Pakistan, this does not avail the Appellant.  It is all very well to say
that his account is plausible in the abstract, but if the Judge does not
accept that he ever received any threats, the core of his claim is
rejected, and, quite simply, his case fails .


45.  I have already noted above that there was a third element to the
challenge in respect of the 'reach' and influence of the Appellant's
brothers-in-law, but that becomes an irrelevant consideration if the
Appellant has not been able to establish that he is at risk in the first
place.


46.  Accordingly, notwithstanding the apparent error in failing to make
express reference to the report of Ms Moeen, I find no material error of
law.


47.  Even if I were minded that the omission of reference to Ms Moeen's
report was more problematic I would not be inclined to exercise the
discretion conferred upon the Tribunal by section 12(2) of the Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to set aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.  In circumstances where an Appellant claims that he is at risk in
consequence of being an adulterer and of having received threats related
either or both to his adultery and to his failure to support his wife, but
fails to establish either the fact of adultery or the fact of having been
the recipient of threats it seems to me that he does not have a meritorious
case for protection.


48.  I reject the Appellant's challenge to the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.


49.  An anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings.  By
oversight, I did not invite the representatives to address me on the
continuation of that order.  For my own part - and with the caveat that I
have not heard from the parties - I cannot see any particular reason why
anonymity should be continued. However, in circumstances where I have not
invited submissions it seems to me appropriate that the order be continued
for the present. If for any reason these proceedings continue in any other
forum it may be that the appropriateness an anonymity order can be
revisited.


Notice of Decision

50.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
of law and stands.


51.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

