
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03743/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2018                        | On 03rd May 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    h i n
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Rivington Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  in  1989.  She  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A  Khan  dismissing
    her appeal against the  refusal  of  her  protection  claim  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


The Appellant's Immigration History

2.   The Appellant entered the UK on 16 December 2009 as a student. She  was
    granted further leave to remain  as  a  student  until  June  2013.  In
    December 2012, the Appellant submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, which was refused on 18 June
    2015 on the basis that she had submitted false documents.  She did  not
    appeal the refusal and on 8 October 2015 made a claim for  asylum.  Her
    claim was refused on 19 March 2016 and she appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   The Appellant's asylum appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sweet on 7 October 2016. She appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  who
    found an error of law in that the judge failed to make firm findings of
    fact whilst appearing to accept the account given by the  Appellant  as
    true and accurate. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane  found  that  the
    judge's analysis was inadequate, primarily because he  failed  to  make
    clear findings of fact regarding the state of the relationship  between
    the Appellant and her father and the likelihood of the father assisting
    the Appellant upon return to Bangladesh. The decision  of  Judge  Sweet
    was set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lane stated that the First-tier Tribunal would  need  to
    concentrate only upon the risk to the Appellant on return to Bangladesh
    with two children born out of wedlock. He set aside  such  findings  as
    the judge made on that issue and directed that the First-tier  Tribunal
    make clear, unequivocal findings of fact as regards:-
    (i)  The likelihood of  the  Appellant's  unmarried  status  coming  to
         light;
    (ii) If it does come to light, whether she will face real risk  of  ill
         treatment;
    (iii)    Whether she is likely to enjoy the support of  her  father  or
         others in Bangladesh and the extent  to  which  such  support  will
         mitigate any risk;
    (iv) The extent to which the Appellant may  be  able  to  overcome  any
         potential difficulties in Bangladesh because she is  well  educated
         and has employment skills.

4.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge M A  Khan.  There  was
    an application for an adjournment  because  at  the  beginning  of  the
    hearing Counsel for the Appellant withdrew from  the  proceedings.  The
    Appellant sought an adjournment in order to be able to instruct another
    legal  representative.  The  judge  refused  the  application  for   an
    adjournment and proceeded with the appeal.

5.   The judge found that the Appellant was not a credible witness  for  the
    following reasons. She  came  from  a  very  strict  Muslim  family  in
    Bangladesh and until she came to the UK, at the age of  about  20,  she
    had been educated, trained and practised  the  strict  Islamic  culture
    herself. She still dressed in traditional Bangladeshi  dress  and  kept
    her head covered. The Appellant said in evidence that  she  was  taught
    from childhood onwards that to have a relationship outside marriage and
    have sex was an absolute sin. The judge did not  find  it  credible  or
    consistent that, approximately two years after her arrival in  the  UK,
    she would have entered into a relationship outside marriage.

6.   The Appellant stated that she continued to live with the father of  her
    children  in  an  unmarried  relationship  until  June  2015  when  her
    application was refused. She said to him that they should  get  married
    and return to Bangladesh. He said he was not  returning  to  Bangladesh
    and walked out of the house, abandoning her and their two children. The
    judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence that  her  partner  would
    have walked out in such a manner.  The  culture,  religious  background
    and, in particular, the Appellant's upbringing led him to believe  that
    the Appellant would not have lived with her  partner  without  entering
    into a religious marriage and she would not have  given  birth  in  the
    circumstances stated by her.

7.   The Appellant made her asylum claim after her Tier  1  application  had
    been refused for submitting false documents. She claimed to  have  been
    living with her partner since 2011 and had given  birth  to  their  two
    children. She claimed that her father  stopped  financially  supporting
    her in 2011. The judge concluded that, if this was the case,  then  the
    Appellant should have at least made her asylum claim in 2011. He  found
    that she delayed her claim until October 2016  and  Section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 applied.



8.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the  adjournment  was  unfair  because  the  Appellant  was  not
    prepared to represent herself  and  had  been  severely  prejudiced  by
    circumstances not of her own making. The  judge  erred  in  relying  on
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act and the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum.
    The Appellant was unrepresented at the hearing and the judge's findings
    on credibility were based on answers in cross-examination. There was no
    discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence and,  had  the  Appellant  been
    represented, any potential discrepancies could have been cleared up  in
    re-examination. The judge took into account  irrelevant  considerations
    in assessing credibility.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  on  25
    January 2018.  She states: "It is arguable that Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal M A Khan's refusal to adjourn  the  hearing  has  led  to  the
    Appellant's hearing being unfair, given that Counsel for the Appellant,
    who plainly attended to represent her on the  day,  withdrew  from  the
    case. Grounds 3 and 4 are also arguable. Although ground 2 is  weak,  I
    will not refuse permission on ground 2 in the particular  circumstances
    of this case. It may be that any error (if made) in relation to the s.8
    of the 2004 Act may be  material  when  taken  with  other  errors  (if
    made)."

10.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  gave  the  following  directions:  "If  the
    Appellant intends to rely upon the explanations given in ground 1 as to
    the circumstances that led to Counsel withdrawing from  the  case,  she
    must comply with the following directions:


         1.    She  must  produce  a  witness   statement   explaining   the
             circumstances that led to Counsel withdrawing from the case.


         2.   She must confirm to Counsel that she waives her  privilege  to
             the extent necessary for Counsel to  comment  on  her  witness
             statement. She must provide Counsel with a copy of her witness
             statement referred to in 1. above.


         3.   No later than 10 days before the hearing date, she  must  file
             and serve copies of any and all communication between  herself
             and [Counsel] on the subject, together  with  a  copy  of  her
             witness statement.


         If the Appellant fails to comply with  the  above  Directions,  she
         will be precluded from relying upon the assertions in ground  1  as
         to the reasons why Counsel withdrew from the case."

11.  In response to directions the  Appellant  submitted  a  signed  witness
    statement dated 3 April 2018 stating:

         "1)  I am the Appellant in the above mention appeal and  my  appeal
             was listed for hearing on 15 May 2017. I  was  represented  by
             the solicitors Messer Taj Solicitors.


         2)   My solicitors arrange the counsel Ms AN to represent me at the
             hearing.  They forward all the documents and give briefing  to
             her. I confirm that I never met her before the hearing date.


         3)   On the date of hearing, counsel Ms AN had conference  with  me
             before  going  to  hearing  room.  There  was  no  interpreter
             present.  Ms N do not speak Bengali (Sylheti).


         4)   My friend Brother Mr AR was accompanying me at the hearing. My
             children were comfortably sitting with Mr AR and Ms N asked me
             if AR is MU?  Mr AR offered to show his driving licence to  Ms
             N but Ms N had her doubts.


         5)   Ms  N  informed  me  that  she  would  not  represent  me  and
             accordingly she informed the judiciary.


         6)   As a result, I have to do personally represent my case.  I was
             not prepared so to be self-represent which is different  to  a
             litigant in person, who  knew  they  are  going  to  represent
             themselves  and  can  prepare  accordingly.   Hence,  I   file
             permission to appeal  to  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  ground  of
             fairness, which is now granted.   A  copy  of  the  permission
             decision is enclosed herewith."

12.  There was also a statement of 9 April 2018 which states: "I H  I  N  of
    ... hereby confirm that I waive my legal profession  privilege  to  the
    extent necessary for you to comment on my  enclosed  Witness  Statement
    dated 03rd April 2018."

13.  The Appellant submitted a witness statement from  Counsel,  signed  and
    dated 12 April 2018, which states:
         "4.  I was instructed by Taj Solicitors to represent Ms  N  at  her
             appeal hearing on 15 May 2017. The  events  of  that  day  are
             still very clear in my mind because they were so unusual.
         5.   I do not agree with Ms N's account in her witness statement of
             the circumstances that led me to withdraw from the proceedings
             on 15 May 2017.  I  strongly  refute  any  suggestion,  either
             express or implied, that my conduct was improper.   I  made  a
             detailed contemporaneous note of what happened that day and e-
             mailed an attendance note to Taj Solicitors on 16 May 2017.  I
             attach a copy of that attendance note (a privileged document).
              I have edited it slightly for  relevance.  This  makes  clear
             that during a pre-hearing conference, Ms N confirmed that  she
             is married, that her husband was waiting outside  in  the  car
             and that her solicitor had 'made' the case.   She  refused  to
             answer my detailed questions  and  insisted  I  speak  to  her
             solicitors.
         6.   The issue of a lack of interpreter during  the  conference  is
             addressed at �9 of the Attendance Note. I do not recall having
             any difficulty in understanding Ms N when we spoke in English.
         7.   I was professionally embarrassed at court for the reasons  set
             out in my attendance note and was therefore obliged to  return
             my instructions, pursuant  to  the  Bar  Code  of  Conduct.  I
             confirm that I take my professional  and  ethical  obligations
             very seriously and would  never  abandon  a  client  at  court
             because I 'had [my] doubts', as alleged. In this situation, my
             professional duties  were  clear.  I  had  no  choice  but  to
             withdraw.
         8.   I was first contacted by (sic) in regard  to  this  matter  by
             Rivington Solicitors on 5 April  2018  at  18.30.  I  was  not
             provided with confirmation that  Ms  N  had  waived  privilege
             until 16:36 on 9 April 2018.  This Response has been  produced
             as soon as possible  after  that  bearing  in  mind  my  other
             professional commitments.
         9.   This response is being provided to Ms N's Solicitors and it is
             up to them whether they provide the Upper  Tribunal  with  the
             response I have given."

14.  In her attendance note, Counsel states that she  was  notified  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors that she would be late arriving at court because
    there had  been  an  accident.  While  speaking  on  the  telephone  to
    instructing solicitors Counsel saw the Appellant arriving at court with
    a man and  she  asked  her  instructing  solicitors  who  he  was.  Her
    instructing solicitors, Taj Solicitors, stated  "That's  her  husband".
    Counsel asked what she meant and expressed shock  since  the  case  was
    being run on the basis that the Appellant was a single mother.  Counsel
    had a conference with the Appellant and explained what had happened  in
    the conversation with her instructing  solicitors  that  morning.   The
    Appellant stated that the man who was with her and who was playing with
    the children was not her husband but was the brother of  a  friend  who
    had come to court  to  look  after  the  children.  Counsel  asked  why
    instructing solicitors would say that the Appellant was coming to court
    with her husband and the Appellant stated that her husband was  waiting
    in the car. Counsel pressed the Appellant on this point and  asked  the
    Appellant why she had stated in her witness statement that she had  not
    seen her partner, MU, the father of her children, since June 2015.  The
    Appellant did not answer and became angry and frustrated. The Appellant
    stated that the solicitor had made the case and that she did  not  know
    what was in the papers. Counsel contacted Taj Solicitors and  explained
    that she was in  professional  difficulty  having  explained  what  had
    happened. On having a further  conversation  with  the  Appellant,  she
    confirmed that her husband is MU and that his status in the UK is as  a
    student. When the matter was called on Counsel withdrew from  the  case
    and explained that the Appellant would want the matter to be  adjourned
    so  she  could  obtain  alternative  representation.  Counsel  did  not
    disclose the reason for the withdrawal.


Submissions

15.  Mr Eaton submitted that the Appellant attended court  expecting  to  be
    represented. The circumstances set out in the  two  witness  statements
    submitted by the Appellant and by Counsel were disputed.  The Appellant
    was  not  represented  at  the  appeal  and  her  application  for   an
    adjournment was refused, such  that  she  was  forced  to  proceed  and
    represent herself through an interpreter. The judge was unaware of  the
    reasons for why the Appellant was unrepresented and it  was  unfair  in
    the circumstances for him not to grant an adjournment. The  matter  was
    not even stood down  to  enable  the  Appellant's  solicitors  to  seek
    further representation.

16.  In refusing the adjournment the judge stated at paragraphs 9 and 10:
         "9.  After Counsel had withdrawn from the case, the Appellant  said
             that she needed to be represented and wished to have more time
             to  instruct  another  legal  representative.  Mr  C  for  the
             Respondent opposed the Appellant's request for an adjournment.
             Mr  C  submits  that  it  is  not  known  if  the  Appellant's
             solicitors are able to continue to act for her and  this  case
             was listed for a re-hearing in March 2017,  I  should  proceed
             with the appeal.


         10.  Having heard both the Appellant and Mr C for the Respondent, I
             informed the Appellant that I was refusing her request for  an
             adjournment on the basis that it is in the interest of justice
             and fairness to proceed with the hearing. I  further  informed
             the Appellant that I will be only dealing  with  part  of  her
             asylum claim which deals  with  her  claimed  unmarried  woman
             having two children  outside  weddlock  (sic),  not  with  her
             father's BNP involvement."

17.  Mr Eaton submitted that the reasons for refusing the  adjournment  were
    cursory and it was clearly not in the interests of justice  to  proceed
    with the appeal. Given that it was a complicated asylum appeal, it  was
    not appropriate to proceed  whilst  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented.
    There was  no  interpreter  provided  by  the  Appellant's  instructing
    solicitors in order to enable her to communicate with Counsel prior  to
    the hearing in conference. The Appellant had always given her  evidence
    via an interpreter and the conversation with Counsel  was  not  in  the
    Appellant's first language. The standard of English in order to make  a
    Tier 1 application was not proficient, such that  the  Appellant  could
    easily be understood. Although Counsel, AN, thought she understood  the
    Appellant in English, this did not mean that the Appellant was able  to
    communicate effectively.

18.  It was very unusual that the Appellant had said she did not  know  what
    was in the papers given that she had given  evidence  on  two  previous
    occasions when the appeal was previously heard. The witness  statements
    would obviously form part of the Respondent's case if  the  matter  was
    reheard.  Mr Eaton submitted that it should be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis that the judge had acted  unfairly  in
    failing to grant an adjournment.

19.  Further, the judge failed to consider any of the written evidence.  His
    findings at paragraph 41 were based on cross-examination and there  was
    no opportunity for re-examination given  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    represented. The judge basically decided at paragraph 41(a) that he did
    not believe a strict Muslim would have a child outside wedlock  and  he
    did not believe the Appellant's husband would have left her because she
    wanted to get married.

20.  There was also a misdirection in relation to Section 8.  The  delay  in
    claiming asylum amounted to six weeks and this matter was dealt with in
    the asylum interview at paragraph 101. Similarly, the Appellant had not
    spoken to her mother since childhood because her parents were separated
    when she was 10 years old. There was no inconsistency in  the  evidence
    about contact  with  her  father,  and  in  any  event,  any  potential
    discrepancy could have been explained in re-examination. The  Appellant
    was well aware that her husband had made a student application.

21.  Mr Eaton submitted that the judge's credibility findings were  spurious
    and based on plausibility with a selected view of the facts. There  was
    no reference to the interview which dealt with the points  relied  upon
    by the judge. Paragraph 276ADE applied.  There  were  very  significant
    obstacles to re-integration and the judge failed to consider this.

22.  Ms Pal submitted that Counsel's statement would be  relied  on  by  the
    Respondent. She conceded that it the judge had failed to make  adequate
    findings of  fact.  Ms  Pal  agreed  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness in failing to adjourn the appeal and that the matter  should
    be remitted.

Discussion and Conclusions

23.  On the particular facts  of  this  case  and  the  late  withdrawal  of
    Counsel from representing the Appellant, I find that the refusal of the
    adjournment was unfair.  The Appellant has been represented  throughout
    the proceedings.   She  had  attended  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  a
    previous occasion and given  evidence.  The  matter  was  remitted  for
    rehearing on a specific basis that she was a single mother returning to
    Bangladesh with two illegitimate children. The judge was given specific
    directions as to the issues he should consider on the appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lane. It is clear that  these  issues  were  complex  in
    nature and it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    unrepresented. She was obviously not aware that Counsel would  withdraw
    from the case prior to the hearing and, in all the  circumstances,  the
    refusal of the adjournment was unfair.

24.  The Appellant appreciates the contents of the witness  statements  will
    be relied upon by the Respondent at any rehearing of  the  appeal,  and
    notwithstanding the content of those statements, I am still of the view
    that the refusal of the adjournment was unfair  because  the  Appellant
    was left unrepresented at very late notice. The  Appellant  has  waived
    privilege and has submitted her witness statement and Counsel's witness
    statement exhibiting the attendance note. It will be a matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to deal with any dispute arising  from  those
    two witness statements and to assess the Appellant's claim.

25.  I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan acted unfairly  in  refusing
    the adjournment and therefore there was procedural impropriety  in  the
    conduct of the appeal, such that there is an error of law. I set  aside
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan dated 21 July 2017 and I
    direct that the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan.

26.  The First-tier Tribunal is directed to deal with the following points:-


    (1)  Whether the Appellant is married and if not whether she would face
         a real risk of ill treatment.
    (2)  Whether she is likely to enjoy the support of her father or others
         in Bangladesh and the extent to which such support may mitigate any
         risk, and the extent to which the Appellant may be able to overcome
         any potential difficulties  in  Bangladesh  because  she  is  well-
         educated and has employment skills.


Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan dated 21  July  2017  is
    set aside in accordance with paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice  Directions
    of 25 September 2012. None of the judge's findings are  preserved.  The
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The issue
    is whether the  Appellant  would  be  returning  to  Bangladesh  as  an
    unmarried mother of two children and whether she would be  at  risk  of
    return.

28.  The Appellant to file and serve any further  evidence  upon  which  she
    intends to rely fourteen days before the  hearing.  A  Bengali  Sylheti
    interpreter is requested. Time estimate: two hours.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

     J Frances

Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Frances
Date: 27 April 2018
