
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03586/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2017                            |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    [l h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of China.  By a  decision  sent  on  9  June
    2017 Judge Mitchell of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissed  her
    appeal against a decision made by the respondent on  5  April  2017  to
    refuse her asylum and humanitarian protection.

2.   At the hearing before the FtT judge the appellant  was  represented  by
    Counsel, but for this hearing before the Upper Tribunal her  solicitors
    sent a letter several days beforehand stating that the claimant had not
    put them in funds and so they were no longer  instructed  to  represent
    her.  I established from the file that the appellant had  been  sent  a
    notice of today's hearing at her given address.  No  communication  had
    been received from her explaining or excusing  her  absence.   In  such
    circumstances I decided to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of
    one of the parties.  I heard briefly from Mr Tufan.

3.   The written grounds of appeal are lengthy and somewhat  discursive  but
    raise essentially three main points of  challenge.   First  of  all  it
    appears to be submitted that the judge erred by failing to take account
    of the fact that the appellant had been detained  for  a  period  since
    March 2017 which prevented her from being able to  adduce  evidence  to
    support her claim to have been trafficked into  the  UK.   Second,  the
    judge appears to have disregarded the fact that the respondent had  not
    followed her own published guidance as set out  in  Victims  of  modern
    slavery  -  Competent  Authority  guidance,  21  March  2016  requiring
    consultation  with  third  party  organisations  when   assessing   the
    appellant's  claim.   This  failure  demonstrated  a  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny.

4.   Third, the judge applied a higher burden of proof than required by  the
    Competent  Authority  (which  was  reasonable  grounds   to   believe).
    Fourthly, it was submitted that  no  consideration  was  given  to  the
    appellant's special circumstances and/or her Article 8 rights and  ties
    with the UK, having lived here for over nine years.

5.   It is most unfortunate that the appellant did not  attend  the  hearing
    as she has thereby denied  herself  the  opportunity  to  be  heard  in
    person.  Fortunately for her, the written grounds of appeal set out her
    case to full effect.

6.   As regards the fourth ground the appellant's nine years in the  UK  was
    characterised  by  illegal  working  and  evasion  of  the  immigration
    authorities through use of a false identity.  She was  also  unable  to
    identify any close family or private life ties.

7.   I am not persuaded that the grounds disclose a material error of law.

8.   The first ground appears in part to challenge  the  decision-making  of
    the Competent Authority (who interviewed her and decided she was not  a
    victim of trafficking). That Authority's decisions are  not  appealable
    before a Tribunal.  Insofar as it also appears to challenge the judge's
    decision-making, the papers reveal that the appellant was no longer  in
    detention by the end of April.  That means she had over four  weeks  to
    prepare her case freely.  There was no application for an  adjournment,
    nor any notification of pending inquiries in China.

9.   As regards the second ground, it suffers from the  same  disability  as
    that already mentioned in respect of the  first  -  it  challenges  the
    decision made by the Competent Authority  in  the  context  of  the  UK
    implementation of anti-trafficking and  anti-slavery  measures.   There
    was no obligation on the officers deciding her international protection
    claim to contact third party organisations.

10.  The third ground is puzzling to say the least since  whatever  standard
    of proof is applied by the Competent Authority (Mr  Tufan  says  it  is
    balance of probabilities; the Competent Authority Guidance suggests its
    "reasonable grounds" test is either  a  variant  of  that  or  slightly
    lower), it is certainly not  lower  than  the  low  standard  of  proof
    applied by the judge to the appellant's international protection claim,
    namely substantial grounds for  believing/real  risk:  see  paras  6-7.
    Insofar as this ground also alleges a failure on the part of the  judge
    to apply anxious scrutiny by not weighing in the balance factors in the
    appellant's favour, that is belied by a reading  of  the  determination
    which not only notes that the appellant  had  mental  problems  but  at
    several points demonstrates that the judge was  careful  not  to  treat
    negative factors as necessarily undermining  the  appellant's  account:
    see e.g. paras 22, 23, 39, 44, 48 and 51.  As regards  the  appellant's
    mental health problems, the judge noted  at  para  51  that  "they  may
    support the appellant's claim to a degree".   This  determination  does
    not disclose any lack of  anxious  scrutiny:  the  judge's  credibility
    assessment weighed factors in favour of the appellant as well as  those
    against. The judge also considered the appellant's claim from a  number
    of angles, looking at  consistency,  plausibility  and  sufficiency  of
    detail.  The judge's reasoning discloses no error of law.


11.  As regards the fourth ground, the appellant's nine years in the UK  was
    characterised  by  illegal  working  and  evasion  of  the  immigration
    authorities through use of a false identity.  She was  also  unable  to
    identify any close family or private life ties.

12.  For the above reasons the grounds of appeal are not made out.  I  would
    observe  that  even  had  the  judge  accepted  the  entirety  of   the
    appellant's account, it was not one that established that she would  be
    at real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill-treatment on  return
    to China.  Both Upper Tribunal  country  guidance  and  the  background
    country  information  demonstrate  that  for  persons  owing  money  to
    snakeheads or  loan  sharks  there  is  in  general  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and also, in the alternative, a viable  option  of  internal
    relocation.  On the appellant's own account of being able to elude  the
    loan sharks for a year in China,  there  was  an  insufficient  factual
    basis for considering that her individual circumstances would  put  her
    at risk on a return to China some nine years since she left.

Notice of Decision

13.  The grounds of appeal do not disclose an error of law  and  accordingly
    the decision of the FtT Judge must stand.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:                             Date: 10 November 2017

           [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
