
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03593/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th July 2016                         |On 29th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              miss Fatmira Muca
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms I Mahmud (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of  State
    in relation to a Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid who  heard
    the case at Taylor House on 11th May 2016 and promulgated his  Decision
    and Reasons on 19th  May  2016.   It  was  an  appeal  by  an  Albanian
    Appellant born on 8th April 1989 against the refusal  of  a  protection
    claim.

 2. It appears, although it is not terribly clear  from  the  Decision  and
    Reasons, that the basis of  her  claim  was  principally  fear  of  her
    father. However the judge, despite writing  seventeen  paragraphs,  has
    made no reasoned findings whatsoever, has not engaged with  the  facts,
    has not engaged with the reasons for refusal and the only  place  where
    anything relevant is said is at paragraph 11 where he says that:-

         "... in her witness statement of 11th May 2016  the  Appellant  has
         highlighted the attitude of the father and left  him  in  no  doubt
         that she had been asked to abort her child and she was not  willing
         to do that.  In this situation she should be granted asylum in  the
         UK".

 3. There is a lot wrong with that paragraph.  First of  all  there  is  no
    reasons as to why he finds her claims credible.  Secondly if the person
    she fears is her father he  does  not  explain  how  that  engages  the
    Refugee Convention.  The determination cannot stand.   It  is  woefully
    inadequate and I set it aside in its entirety.

 4. Because it cannot be said this Appellant has  had  a  fair  and  proper
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it is  appropriate  that  it  be
    remitted to that Tribunal for  a  full  rehearing  before  a  different
    judge.

Decision

 5. The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

 6. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a
    full rehearing on all issues


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 29th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


