
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03148/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 April 2018                        |     On 10 May 2018               |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                  Mr s n h
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this decision I will refer to  the  parties  by  their  designations
    before the First-tier Tribunal (FTT).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on [ ] 1983.

 3. The appellant claimed that he was a refugee within  the  UN  Convention
    relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  1951   (Refugee   Convention),
    alternatively, that he would suffer  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
    which would offend article 3 of that Convention if he were returned  to
    Somalia. Further, or in the alternative, he claimed to be  entitled  to
    international humanitarian protection within paragraph  339  C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The respondent refused his application on  15th  March  2017,  but  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (FTT).  His  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Blake  on  28  November  2017.
    Judge Blake allowed his appeal on human rights grounds  and  on  asylum
    grounds but decided that the appellant did not qualify for humanitarian
    protection.  His decision was promulgated on 14 December 2017.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal and on  9th
    January 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley considered  his  grounds
    to be at least arguable, pointing out  that  there  appeared  to  be  a
    failure on the part of  Judge  Blake  to  follow  the  leading  country
    guidance case at that time of MOJ [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC).  In  addition,
    it was arguable that the appellant would not be at risk of serious harm
    if  he  returned  to  Mogadishu,  from  whence  he  came.  Further   or
    alternatively, it was arguable that Judge  Blake  had  failed  to  have
    adequate regard to other country guidance material.

The hearing

 6. At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.

 7. The respondent argued that judge Blake has failed to  engage  with  the
    country guidance case MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (CG) [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC). Had Judge Blake properly considered  that  case  he  would
    have noted that Al Shabaab had largely withdrawn from Mogadishu  before
    2014. He referred to the head note of MOJ  and  in  particular  (ii)  -
    (iii) where it states  that  "ordinary  civilian  not  associated  with
    security forces or any aspect of government official administration  or
    any NGO or international organisation on returning to Mogadishu after a
    period of absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm
    such as would require protection under Article 3 of the ECHR Article 15
    (c) of the Qualification Directive". Secondly, there has been a durable
    change in the sense that the Al Shabaab terrorists had  withdrawn  from
    Mogadishu completely and there is  no  real  risk  of  them  being  re-
    established there.

 8. Ms Ahmad submitted that the FTTJ judge had failed to  engage  on  these
    points and had therefore made a material error of law. Having found  at
    paragraph 113 that the appellant would probably be  living  in  an  IDP
    camp or  makeshift  shelter  which  would  amount  to  "adverse  living
    conditions", Judge Blake ought to have  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would have been perfectly safe. Even taking account of the  appellant's
    own history and the fact that he did not apparently have  close  family
    to which he could turn, the Immigration  Judge  should  have  concluded
    that the appellant would not be at risk in Mogadishu.  The  Immigration
    Judge had  failed  to  consider  the  opportunities  available  to  the
    appellant who may have had a wider family network to consider. In those
    circumstances there was no need for family members to be  available  to
    provide the appellant with support. The judgment failed to engage  with
    these factors and circumstances decision contained a material error  of
    law.

 9. Ms Loughran on behalf of the appellant submitted that Judge  Blake  had
    engaged with the case of MOJ, as he demonstrated at several  points  in
    his decision. He also fully considered article 3 of the ECHR, as can be
    seen from paragraph 113 of his decision. However, the  appellant's  own
    story began after MOJ was decided. His account had been fully  accepted
    by Judge Blake, who had indicated why he would be at particular risk on
    return. There were limited opportunities available to the appellant  if
    he returned to Mogadishu, where  he  did  not  have  a  family  support
    network in place. It was feared that  the  appellant  may  in  fact  be
    targeted  given  his  recent  history.  No  error  in  law   had   been
    demonstrated by the respondent, so the Upper Tribunal  was  invited  to
    leave the decision of the FTT in place. Furthermore, a  number  of  the
    paragraphs in the decision, the appellant's  representative  submitted,
    showed that the Immigration Judge had grappled with the  issues.  Thus,
    for example, details of the head note from MOJ  appeared  in  paragraph
    112 of the decision. I was then referred to that paragraph,  where  the
    Immigration Judge set out a number of paragraphs from the case  of  MOJ
    that he considered important. The Immigration Judge's  decision  should
    be left alone as, it was submitted, he had made clear findings.

10. The Respondent's representative did not exercise her right  to  have  a
    reply to the appellant's submissions.

11. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was an error of law and the correct means of disposal.

Discussion

12. It is alleged by the respondent that the Immigration  Judge  failed  to
    have adequate regard to the recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  of
    MOJ & Ors. The respondent says that the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to
    make an adequate assessment of risk or  properly  analyse  the  country
    guidance,  particularly  that  contained  in  the   above   case.   The
    Immigration Judge ought to have concluded that the appellant would  now
    no be longer be at risk from Al Shabaab, so  that  Mogadishu  would  be
    perfectly safe for him to live in. It  is  said  that  the  Immigration
    Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusions.

13. I have regard to the following findings by the Immigration Judge:

      i) The Immigration Judge found (at paragraph 100) that  the  appellant
         was a target for Al Shabaab and that his brother had been  murdered
         by them;

     ii) The Immigration Judge accepted the appellant's  evidence  as  being
         "overall"  credible,  unlike  the  respondent,    who   found   the
         appellant's account to be internally inconsistent and contradictory
         (see paragraph 63 and paragraph 78);

    iii)  The  Immigration  Judge  also  accepted  the  evidence  from   the
         appellant's expert Miss Mary Harper, who opined that an  individual
         who sells good to the Somali government would be likely to come  to
         the attention of Al Shabaab;

     iv) The Immigration Judge found that the appellant would not be able to
         leave Mogadishu for other areas in Somalia  because  there  was  no
         safe route for him to travel to these areas (see paragraph 101);

      v) He found that the appellant had sold goods to the Somali government
         and other groups (paragraph 96 and paragraph 97);

     vi) More controversially, the Immigration  Judge  accepted  submissions
         that since the country guidance case  of  MOJ  there  had  been  an
         increase in the amount of indiscriminate violence in Mogadishu;

    vii) The Immigration Judge quoted verbatim (ix) -  (xi)  from  the  head
         note of MOJ (at paragraph 112);

   viii) Crucially, the Immigration Judge found that the appellant  did  not
         enjoy any family support or anyone to whom he can turn on that form
         seems to have formed the basis of his conclusion that the appellant
         was likely to end up in an "IDP camp or makeshift shelter".

14. It is no function of this Tribunal's role to interfere  with  decisions
    of fact made after proper consideration of the evidence.  In  analysing
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal it is  necessary  to  ask,  not
    merely whether this Tribunal would have reached a different  conclusion
    (here, it  may  well  have  done)  but  whether  the  conclusions  were
    reasonably open to the Immigration Judge on the evidence he  heard?  It
    is only if this question were answered in the negative that I would  be
    able to find a material  error  of  law  such  as  might  require  this
    Tribunal to set aside the decision of the FTT.

Conclusions

15. I have carefully considered the submissions made  on  the  respondent's
    behalf but consider  the  Immigration  Judge  made  sufficiently  clear
    findings on the facts for  the  respondent's  appeal  to  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the ultimate conclusion, rather than  to  identify  a
    clear error of law. In particular, the Immigration Judge found that the
    appellant had been a credible witness, that  he  had  traded  with  the
    government and that the appellant did not have family members  to  whom
    he could turn in Mogadishu. His finding that the level of  violence  in
    Mogadishu had deteriorated is clearly controversial, although he  cited
    some evidence in support. In my view,  the  Immigration  Judge  can  be
    criticised for  not  mentioning  the  appellant's  clan  membership  or
    whether in fact the appellant would have been able to avail himself  of
    the  economic  opportunities  which,  apparently,  are   available   to
    returnees  to  Somalia.  However,  his  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's evidence, the  expert  witness  evidence  obtained  on  the
    appellant's behalf and the extent to which he had family  to  whom  you
    could turn in Mogadishu, were findings that  this  Tribunal  ought  not
    properly interfere with. Accordingly, there was no material  errors  of
    law which would have been sufficiently material to justify  interfering
    with the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The respondent's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  I  have  decided  not  to
    interfere with the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant asylum and protection on human rights grounds in the UK.

17. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    anonymity is continued on the terms set out below.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 04 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 04 May 2018

Judge Hanbury
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


