
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03973/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 18 December 2017                   |            On 9 January 2018         |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                          clement munyinda masheke
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Clement Munyinda Masheke, was born on 29 May 1969 and is
    a male citizen of Zambia.   The  appellant  had  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 7 April 2017 to refuse him  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Greasley) which, in a decision promulgated on 2  June  2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The Upper Tribunal has received a letter from the appellant's  previous
    solicitors (Nathan  Aaron)  which  indicated  that  they  were  without
    instructions and were unable to continue the retainer.  I note that the
    notice of hearing for 18 December 2017 was served by second class  post
    on both the appellant and his last known address in London and  on  the
    solicitors on 13 November 2017.  Given that the solicitors did not seek
    to withdraw until 4 December 2017, there has  been  good  service  upon
    them and, in the light of the fact that there is nothing on the file to
    indicate that the copy of the notice sent directly to the appellant has
    failed to reach him, I was satisfied that he has been duly served.  The
    appellant has not given any reason for  failing  to  attend  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  I  should
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.

 3. The appellant complains that the judge erred  in  law  by  refusing  to
    grant an adjournment made at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  by  his
    representative.  After the judge had heard the representations of  both
    representatives on the adjournment application, the judge  had  refused
    it and the appellant's representative withdrew, taking no further  part
    in the proceedings.  The appellant  himself  was  not  present  at  the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge  considered  the
    adjournment application and his reasons for  refusing  it  at  [25-27].
    The judge relied upon and cited Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 418 (IAC).  The judge declined to place reliance upon a  photocopy
    of a statement of fitness  for  a  work  certificate  provided  to  the
    Tribunal; it was claimed that the appellant had acute back pain and was
    not fit to work and had been advised to rest in bed for one  week  from
    23 May 2017.  The hearing before Judge Greasley took place  on  24  May
    2017 at Hatton Cross.  The judge recorded the fact that  there  was  no
    "adequate  explanation  indicating  why  the  lateness  statement   [of
    unfitness for work] advised bed rest for one week at an earlier  letter
    issued by the same doctor on 19 May [2017] made no  such  reference  to
    such advice and simply mentioned that  the  appellant  had  been  given
    analgesia to relieve pain and an expression of hope the appellant would
    be better in one week."  The judge drew attention to the fact that  the
    earlier statement made no reference of the  appellant  being  unfit  to
    work.  The appellant's representatives had also complained to the judge
    that his firm had only been instructed to act by the  appellant  on  19
    May 2017, four days prior to the hearing.

 4. I find that it was open to Judge Greasley  to  draw  attention  to  the
    inconsistent nature of the medical evidence (such as it was).   It  was
    also open to the judge to attach little weight  to  a  photocopy  of  a
    fitness for work statement where no explanation appears  to  have  been
    given for the unavailability of the original  document.   In  addition,
    although the judge does not say so in terms, it is patently clear  from
    the facts in this  case  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  which
    indicated that the appellant was unfit to attend the Tribunal  hearing;
    an individual may be unfit for work but may  still  be  fit  to  attend
    court.  I also find that, notwithstanding the late date  on  which  the
    appellant's representatives had been instructed, it  was  open  to  the
    judge to conclude that the representatives had sufficient  time  within
    which to prepare the case.  But I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has
    addressed all the issues arising from the adjournment  application  and
    he has determined those issues in a way which was open to  him.   I  am
    satisfied that he has had  regard  to  relevant  legal  provisions,  in
    particular the need to provide a fair hearing to the appellant.

 5. The grounds of appeal appear to deal solely with  the  refusal  of  the
    adjournment application.  The grant of permission likewise concerns the
    adjournment although I have struggled to understand the first  sentence
    of  [3].   Given  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  solely  concern   the
    adjournment, I see no reason to interfere  with  the  determination  by
    Judge Greasley in so far as it addresses the merits of the appeal.  The
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 3 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
