
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03820/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 14 November 2018                    |On 6 December 2018            |
|Prepared on 26 November 2018                 |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR SHAMEEM AHMED
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss I Sriharan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 February 1999.  He
      appeals against a decision of the Respondent dated 10  March  2018  to
      refuse the Appellant's application for international protection.   His
      appeal was initially dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Frankish sitting at Taylor House on 24 April 2018. The  Appellant  was
      granted permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier
      and the matter came before me on 5 September 2018. I set the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal aside and directed that the  appeal  should
      be reheard by me in the Upper  Tribunal.  There  is  annexed  to  this
      determination a copy of my decision finding a material  error  of  law
      and directing this re-hearing.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  or  about  29  or  30
      December 2009 and was granted a series of student visas valid until 14
      March 2015. On that day he applied for leave to remain  as  a  tier  4
      general student, but that application was considered inappropriate and
      was voided. On 1 April 2015 he applied for leave to remain outside the
      immigration rules on compassionate grounds, but this was refused  with
      no right of appeal. On 25 April 2017 he was  arrested  by  immigration
      officers and served with removal directions. On 2 May 2017 he  applied
      for leave under Article 8 which was refused  and  certified  as  being
      without merit.

 The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 24 May 2017 arguing  that  he  was  at
      risk upon return  because  of  his  involvement  with  the  Bangladesh
      National Party (BNP) since 2008 which had caused him to be  persecuted
      by the rival Awami league. He was a student leader of the BNP. A  case
      had been filed against him at a police station and the police had come
      to his house with a warrant looking for him. The police were dominated
      by the Awami league and were still enquiring about him even though  he
      was now in the United Kingdom. His mother was also involved  with  the
      BNP in a senior position.

The Law Relating to the Claim Under The Refugee Convention

   4.  The  Appellant  appeals  under  Section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the ground that the Respondent  has
      refused a protection claim and in doing so is in breach of the  United
      Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  1951  United  Nations   Convention
      relating to the Status  of  Refugees  and  the  later  Protocol  ("the
      Refugee Convention").  It is for the Appellant to show that  he  is  a
      refugee.  By Article 1A (2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is  a
      person who is out of the country of his or her  nationality  and  who,
      owing to a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  reasons  of  race,
      religion, nationality or membership of a particular  social  group  or
      political opinion, is unable or unwilling to avail him or  herself  of
      the protection of the country of origin and who  is  not  excluded  by
      Articles 1D, 1E or 1F of the Refugee Convention.

4.   The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
      entitlement to asylum is decided on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
      standard of the balance of probabilities.  This  was  expressed  as  a
      "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility" or  "substantial  grounds
      for thinking" in the various authorities.  That basis  of  probability
      not only applies to the history of the matter and to the situation  at
      the date of decision, but also to the question of persecution  in  the
      future if the Appellant were to be returned.

The Law Relating to the Claim for Humanitarian Protection

  5. Paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  for  a  grant  of
     humanitarian protection in  circumstances  where  a  person  does  not
     qualify as a refugee but can show substantial  grounds  for  believing
     that they would, if returned to their country of return, face  a  real
     risk of suffering serious harm, for example  due  to  general  country
     conditions.  The applicant must  be  unable  or  owing  to  such  risk
     unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country  and  not
     be excluded by the factors in paragraph 339D.

The Law Relating to The Claim Under the Human Rights Convention

 6. This appeal is also brought under section 82 (1) (b) of  the  2002  Act
    because the Respondent has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  The
    burden of proof of establishing such a claim rests  on  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant has in particular relied upon Articles 2 (Right to Life),
    3 (Prohibition of Torture) and 8 (Right  to  Respect  for  Private  and
    Family Life). The standard of proof in respect of Articles 2 and 3  can
    be equated with the standard of proof in asylum cases.  The  burden  of
    establishing a breach of Article 8 also rests upon  the  Appellant  but
    the standard of proof this time is the usual civil standard of  balance
    of probabilities.

Documentation Considered

  7. On the  file  was  the  Respondent's  bundle  comprising:  immigration
     information on form PF1; visa application details; screening interview
     and substantive asylum interview;  refusal  letter  with  reasons  and
     notice of appeal.  The  Appellant  had  produced  a  bundle  at  first
     instance which comprise the witness statement of the  Appellant  dated
     24 April 2018; background information about Bangladesh;  news  reports
     and the Appellant's Bangladesh identity card. I also had copies of the
     documents to which I refer at paragraph 7 of my error of law  decision
     comprising two affidavits, one from the  Appellant's  mother  and  the
     other from his sister; certificate; first information report (FIR) and
     statement from the person lodging the FIR; a  warrant  of  arrest  and
     English translation thereof.

Explanation for Refusal

  8. The Respondent noted in his refusal letter  that  there  were  certain
     gaps in the Appellant's knowledge of the  BNP,  which  if  he  was  as
     closely involved  with  the  BNP  as  claimed  would  not  exist.  The
     Appellant had claimed his role in the  party  was  to  inform  student
     members to attend rallies and talk to  them  about  the  party  in  an
     effort to recruit them yet he was not aware of an important figure  in
     the BNP called Ilyas Ali. The Appellant gave the wrong date when a 19-
     point programme for the party was unveiled. He had omitted to  mention
     payment of a subscription fee when describing how he  had  joined  the
     BNP which considering his role was to recruit members  undermined  the
     credibility of his account. His reasons for joining the party appeared
     to be to gain respect rather than because he  felt  anything  positive
     about the party. He had given a series of vague responses to questions
     about how he recruited members. His response to  what  were  the  core
     values of the BNP was considered vague referring  only  to  the  party
     working for the economic development  of  the  people,  democracy  and
     socialism whereas the party's own website had 17 named objectives.


  9. The Respondent noted that there were  no  supporting  statements  from
     other party members. His claim to have received threats from the Awami
     league was not considered credible. He had claimed to be  involved  in
     an incident in March 2009 but  no  objective  information  about  this
     incident had been found. The  Appellant  had  claimed  that  to  avoid
     arrest by the police he had gone to stay with an aunt for four to five
     months before leaving Bangladesh. The Respondent did not  consider  it
     reasonable he would be able to stay that long at  a  relative's  house
     without being arrested if there was a warrant out for the  Appellant's
     arrest. It was unclear how the Appellant had been  able  to  get  past
     security at the airport and exit Bangladesh lawfully if there was such
     a warrant.

 10. Although there appears to have been a typing error at paragraph 62  of
     the refusal letter the point made was that it was  not  credible  that
     the Appellant would still be subject to threats from the Awami  league
     eight years after leaving  Bangladesh  given  that  he  had  not  been
     politically  active  since  arriving  in  the  United   Kingdom.   The
     Respondent also relied on section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
     (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004. The Appellant had only  claimed
     asylum after he was arrested in April 2017. If  the  Appellant  had  a
     genuine  fear  of  return  to  Bangladesh,  he   would   have   sought
     international  protection  earlier.  The   Respondent   rejected   the
     Appellant's explanation that he, the Appellant, had not claimed asylum
     on arrival because he wanted to continue with his studies and expected
     the BNP to come to power his problems would be solved.  The  Appellant
     could not meet the immigration rules and  there  were  no  exceptional
     circumstances to allow his application outside the rules

The Hearing

 11. At the outset of the  hearing  counsel  made  an  application  for  an
     adjournment on the basis that the Appellant had instructed a  firm  of
     solicitors Mughal Law one week ago. He had revoked his instructions to
     his previous solicitors Cranbrook solicitors who had  represented  the
     Appellant before Judge Frankish and at the error of law hearing before
     me. The Appellant complained  that  he  had  had  to  chase  Cranbrook
     solicitors to act on his instructions. The Appellant wished to dispute
     the  factual  situation  as  presented  by  Judge  Frankish.   Counsel
     indicated she had been unable to take a statement from  the  Appellant
     as no  Bengali  interpreter  had  been  provided  by  her  instructing
     solicitors. I was not provided with written evidence of any  complaint
     that had been made to Cranbrook solicitors.


 12. I considered the application for an adjournment bearing in  mind  that
     the test is one of fairness. The Appellant  had  been  represented  by
     experienced counsel at the  error  of  law  hearing  before  me  on  5
     September 2018 some ten weeks earlier. It was evident at that  hearing
     that counsel then instructed had  been  fully  briefed.  Even  if  the
     Appellant had only instructed new solicitors one week  ago,  they  had
     still had sufficient time to begin their  preparation.  It  was  clear
     that nothing of substance had been done by the new solicitors who  had
     only instructed counsel to attend the substantive rehearing to make an
     application for an adjournment. If solicitors take on a case at  short
     notice it is incumbent upon them to give  such  a  case  significantly
     more attention in the time available than the new solicitors had  done
     in this  case  (for  example  send  an  interpreter  along  to  assist
     counsel). No request was made to me for copies of the court papers. As
     no good reason had been  shown  why  the  Appellant  had  changed  his
     solicitors a week ago and no written evidence of a  complaint  against
     the previous solicitors was presented to me which might  justify  that
     change,  I  did  not  consider  that  the  requirement   of   fairness
     necessitated an adjournment.

 13. The Appellant had had ample time to prepare for the hearing before  me
     since he and his previous solicitors had been notified of the error of
     law. Indeed, the Appellant confirmed to me that he had been present at
     the error of law hearing (when I had  announced  I  found  a  material
     error of law). The Appellant stated that  he  had  paid  his  previous
     solicitors' bill but was not sure why he had not received  his  papers
     from  them.  No  supporting  evidence  of  payment   was   forthcoming
     indicating that his previous solicitors might be exercising some  form
     of lien in which case a further  adjournment  would  serve  no  useful
     purpose.  I indicated that I would put the  matter  back  until  after
     lunch during which counsel could take further  instructions  from  her
     client with the help of her instructing solicitors. When the case  was
     called on after lunch counsel indicated that no further statement  was
     forthcoming, and she did not consider she was professionally  able  to
     continue to represent the Appellant. She withdrew from the hearing.

The Hearing before Me

 14. The Appellant  gave  evidence  through  the  court  appointed  Bengali
     interpreter. As the Appellant was now  unrepresented  I  asked  him  a
     number of questions to assist him with the presentation of his case in
     order to ensure that he had access to justice. In particular I invited
     the Appellant to tell me more about  the  documents,  the  absence  of
     which at first instance had led to  the  decision  of  Judge  Frankish
     being set aside. The Appellant said he knew what was in the documents.
     They confirmed that he was a leader of the students wing of  the  BNP.
     The affidavits were from his mother and his  sister.  The  allegations
     made against him in the FIR were false. He knew about the  warrant  of
     arrest that had been issued against him. As far as he was aware  there
     were no other documents he wished to rely on. He could not say exactly
     when he had received the documents, but he thought it was  about  four
     to five months ago.


 15. He had  obtained  them  because  he  had  been  advised  by  Cranbrook
     solicitors to obtain some documents in support of his claims otherwise
     he was told his case would be in trouble. The solicitors said he  must
     have these documents if he wanted to prove he was  active  within  the
     BNP. He had emailed his mother  who  had  travelled  to  Saudi  Arabia
     asking for assistance. He was not  sure  who  was  looking  after  her
     political activities while she was out of the country. He did not know
     when his mother had given up politics she had done it  gradually.  She
     was able to protect herself from the  Awami  League  because  she  was
     active in politics but  he  had  had  problems  because  he  was  only
     involved in the student wing of the  BNP.  His  mother  had  tried  to
     protect him unsuccessfully. He did not know why he had been blamed for
     the incident in March 2009 when he had not even been there. If he  did
     not have any problems in Bangladesh, he would be willing to go home.

 16. In cross examination from the Presenting Officer he was asked  why  he
     had claimed in his screening interview that his mother  was  the  vice
     president of the organisation when  she  was  not.  According  to  the
     certificate issued by the BNP his mother was a woman secretary in  the
     Chinispur union. His said he thought it was a mistake in the screening
     interview. His mother was said to be in Saudi Arabia on 14  June  2017
     the same day that she had apparently made an affidavit  in  Bangladesh
     in support of the Appellant's claim. Asked to explain this discrepancy
     he said she had returned to Bangladesh to make the affidavit,  but  he
     did not know exactly when she had signed it. She came and went between
     Saudi Arabia and Bangladesh.

 17. He thought the police had come  to  his  house  in  2009.  The  arrest
     warrant he produced was dated 14 March 2009 just a few days after  the
     FIR. He found out that the police had come looking for  him  from  his
     mother who told him to go and stay with an aunt. He  had  stayed  with
     the aunt about seven months before  leaving  Bangladesh.  He  accepted
     that he had not claimed asylum until he had been detained and  removal
     directions were served. He had no  interest  to  stay  in  the  United
     Kingdom he thought that if conditions in Bangladesh improved after  he
     had finished his studies he would go back. He had not  claimed  asylum
     in 2009 when he first arrived in the United  Kingdom  even  though  he
     knew at that time about the FIR and  the  arrest  warrant  because  he
     thought the situation in Bangladesh would improve.

Closing Submissions

 18. In closing for the Respondent  reliance  was  placed  on  the  refusal
     letter which had comprehensively dealt with  all  matters.  No  weight
     should be placed on the  further  documentation  which  had  not  been
     before Judge  Frankish.  The  documents  were  riddled  with  mistakes
     including spelling mistakes. The certificate given to  the  Respondent
     by the Appellant's solicitors had referred to the  Appellant's  mother
     being an emigrant. The Appellant's explanation that  this  meant  that
     she was in Saudi Arabia was inconsistent with the claim that  she  had
     been in Bangladesh making an affidavit at the same time. There was  no
     case issued against the Appellant's mother even though she was said to
     be a more senior  figure  in  the  BNP  then  the  Appellant.  It  was
     inconsistent for the Appellant to suggest that a case would have  been
     issued against him.


 19. It was not credible that the Appellant could  stay  for  seven  months
     with his aunt without any problems when both  an  FLR  and  an  arrest
     warrant had been issued against him. The affidavits had been  made  in
     June 2017. At that time the Appellant was in detention in  the  United
     Kingdom facing removal to Bangladesh. It was not  a  coincidence  that
     his family had produced such documents at that time. It was  also  not
     credible that the Awami league would chase after  the  Appellant  some
     nine years after the claimed incident in March 2008.

 20. In closing the Appellant responded to the comments of  the  Presenting
     Officer saying that it was not difficult for him to have stayed  seven
     months at his aunt's house. He remained inside although  on  occasions
     he did go home but most of the time he stayed there.  It  was  like  a
     prison for him. He had nothing from his aunt to confirm but  he  could
     obtain something if it was needed. He was the only son of his  parents
     and if his problems in Bangladesh were over he would  be  prepared  to
     return.

Conclusions Relating to the Claim Under the Refugee Convention

 21. The core issue in this case is the credibility of the Appellant. I set
     aside the previous determination because Judge Frankish  had  not  had
     the opportunity of  perusing  further  documents  that  the  Appellant
     sought to rely on.  The  problem  for  the  Appellant  is  that  those
     documents rather than bolster his case have further undermined it. The
     Appellant has not been able to explain how  his  mother  was  able  to
     swear an affidavit in Bangladesh in June 2017 when she  was  in  Saudi
     Arabia at the time. It is not a coincidence  that  at  that  time  the
     Appellant was  in  detention  awaiting  removal.  The  timing  of  the
     documents undermines the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  obtained  them
     because he was advised to do so by his previous solicitors. Rather the
     timing indicates that the  Appellant  prevailed  upon  his  family  to
     assist him  with  documents  in  order  to  ensure  his  release  from
     detention. As with the claim that  his  previous  solicitors  had  not
     acted on his instructions, the  Appellant  has  again  sought  without
     justification to  blame  his  previous  representatives  for  his  own
     actions.


 22.  His  evidence  has  been  inconsistent  throughout.  The  Appellant's
     description of his mother's activities has varied during the course of
     these proceedings. The Appellant now seeks to resile from his  earlier
     comment in his screening interview with the Respondent that his mother
     was the vice president of the BNP. When interviewed substantively four
     months later he gave a very different description of what  his  mother
     was said to have done for the BNP. A simpler explanation for what  has
     happened is that the Appellant was attempting to  embroider  his  case
     when first questioned by the Respondent stating that  his  mother  was
     the vice president of the organisation. However, when he  came  to  be
     interviewed  substantively  by  the  Respondent   he   indicated   his
     incomplete grasp of his own account by referring to her as the women's
     secretary. This confusion is not perhaps  surprising  given  that  his
     mother in her own affidavit does not explain what her role for the BNP
     was said to be.

 23. When questioned by the Respondent the Appellant showed a very  limited
     knowledge of the  BNP  which  if  he  was  a  student  leader  it  was
     reasonable to have supposed that he would  know  the  answers  to  the
     questions that were  put  to  him.  The  Appellant's  claim,  in  oral
     testimony, that he spent seven months  in  hiding  with  his  aunt  is
     undermined by his claim that at the same time he also used  to  return
     home. His explanation that he returned home to  complete  documents  I
     find implausible since if it was necessary to fill out documents these
     could have been forwarded to his aunt's address for  him  to  complete
     there. The Appellant's claim to have spent seven months at his  aunt's
     house is further undermined by the inconsistency with questions 80 and
     81 of the substantive asylum interview in which the  Appellant  stated
     he had spent four to five months at the aunt's house. Once again,  the
     Appellant demonstrated a poor grasp of his own account.

 24. The main issue the Appellant points to in  justifying  his  claim  for
     asylum is that the FIR was issued against him following an incident in
     March 2009 which in fact he had not attended. It simply makes no sense
     for the opposition  Awami  league  to  target  the  Appellant  for  an
     incident which had nothing to do with the Appellant when there were  a
     large number of people who were present at the incident who could have
     been the target for revenge attacks or legal proceedings instituted by
     the Awami league.

 25. The Appellant was noticeably vague when questioned why he had been the
     target of the Awami league but his mother had not. His  mother's  role
     (in his amended account) was not so senior that she would be  able  to
     have political protection that would otherwise not be available to the
     Appellant. Her affidavit raises more questions than  it  answers.  She
     refers to going to court for her son  but  no  evidence  of  that  was
     produced such as copies of court records. She made clear that she  had
     sent the Appellant abroad for him to  complete  his  studies.  She  is
     noticeably vague in her  statement  about  what  if  anything  adverse
     happened to the Appellant in Bangladesh. If anyone was in  a  position
     to be able to confirm the Appellant's account it would be her but  she
     does not do this. She refers vaguely to threats being made against the
     Appellant after he had left but of the incident in 2009 which is  said
     to have caused the Appellant to fly  to  the  United  Kingdom  she  is
     noticeably silent.

 26. A further certificate, which refers to the Appellant's mother being an
     activist for the BNP, states  that  she  has  been  harassed  but  her
     affidavit only refers to being told of threats  against  her  son  not
     against her. The English translation of the  arrest  warrant  is  very
     poor  English  indicating  either  that  it  has  been   incompetently
     translated or the  original  document  was  written  in  poor  Bengali
     indicating it was not a genuine document. Either  way  I  find  I  can
     place no weight on any of the further documents  which  the  Appellant
     has produced.

 27. I also consider it relevant that the  Appellant  only  claimed  asylum
     after removal directions had been made against him. He had been in the
     United Kingdom for eight years before  making  his  claim  for  asylum
     during which time he had made other applications to the Respondent. He
     was therefore very familiar with the  immigration  system  and  it  is
     difficult to resist the conclusion that the Appellant  only  made  his
     very late claim for asylum in order to frustrate removal  not  because
     he had any genuine fear of persecution if returned. I do not find that
     the Appellant can make out to the lower standard that he would  be  at
     risk upon return to Bangladesh and I therefore dismiss the  appeal  on
     asylum grounds.

Conclusions Relating to the Claim for Humanitarian Protection

 28. As I do not find the Appellant has a valid claim for protection  as  a
     refugee it is necessary for me  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
     Appellant has a claim for humanitarian protection.   For  the  reasons
     set out above in relation to asylum and below in relation to Article 3
     of the Human Rights Convention, I do not find the  Appellant  has  any
     valid claim to such protection.  There is no substantive difference in
     this case between the Appellant's claim under the Refugee  Convention,
     the Human Rights Convention (Articles 2 and  3)  and  under  paragraph
     339C of the Immigration Rules. I do not find the  Appellant  can  show
     substantial grounds for belief that he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
     suffering serious harm if returned to Bangladesh, I therefore  dismiss
     the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

Conclusions Relating to the Claim Under the Human Rights Convention

 29. Certain of the conclusions which I set out above apply  equally  here.
     For the same reasons that I do not accept that  the  Appellant  has  a
     valid claim under the Refugee Convention, I do  not  accept  that  the
     Appellant can demonstrate to the lower standard that he is at risk  of
     treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.
     His claim under this part of the Human  Rights  Convention  stands  or
     falls with his claim under the Refugee Convention.

 30. The Appellant did not advance  a  claim  under  Article  8  before  me
     although he had mentioned it in his initial appeal. As Judge  Frankish
     pointed out at [25] of his determination the claim under Article 8 was
     not pursued in submissions before him. The grounds  of  onward  appeal
     indicated that the Judge had  not  fully  considered  the  Appellant's
     Article 8 rights but that is not surprising since they were not argued
     before him. Judge Andrew who granted permission to appeal  noted  that
     Article 8 was not pursued in submissions at first  instance  and  thus
     Judge Frankish could not be criticised for dealing with this issue  in
     the way he had done. Permission to appeal on  Article  8  grounds  was
     thus not given.

 31. That must be correct.  The Article 8 claim has no merit. The Appellant
     has lived in this country for 9 years  and  cannot  therefore  succeed
     under paragraph 276 ADE (1) of the immigration rules  as  he  has  not
     lived here for 20 years. There would not be very significant obstacles
     to his integration into Bangladesh as he speaks the language  and  has
     close family members still living  there.  As  I  have  dismissed  his
     appeal on both asylum and Article 3 grounds it  is  difficult  to  see
     what insurmountable obstacles would be presented  to  the  Appellant's
     relocation to Bangladesh. I have seen nothing to indicate  that  there
     were any compelling or  compassionate  circumstances  identified  such
     that the Appellant should succeed outside the rules. The Appellant has
     lived in this country and built up a private life of sorts during  the
     time he has been here but his status was never better than  precarious
     and at times he has  been  here  unlawfully.  In  those  circumstances
     little or no weight can be attached to any private life he might  have
     built up and any weight that does attach is more  than  outweighed  by
     the public interest in removing him  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  I
     therefore dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection
    grounds and Human Rights grounds.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 3 December 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal and no fee was payable there can  be  no  fee
award in this case.

Signed this 3 December 2018
.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 5 September 2018                    |                              |
|Prepared on 6 September 2018                 |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MR SHAMEEM AHMED
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Cisneros of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                 REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

The Proceedings

   5. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 February 1999.  He
      appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Frankish sitting at Taylor House on 24 April 2018 in which  the  Judge
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
      dated 10 March 2018. That  decision  was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
      application for international protection.


   6. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  or  about  29  or  30
      December 2009 and was granted a series of student visas until 14 March
      2015. He claimed asylum on 24 May 2017 arguing that  he  was  at  risk
      upon return because of his involvement with  the  Bangladesh  National
      Party (BNP) which caused him to  be  persecuted  by  the  rival  Awami
      league. A case had been filed against him at a police station and  the
      police had come to his house with  a  warrant  looking  for  him.  The
      police were dominated by the Awami league  and  were  still  enquiring
      about him even though he was now in the United Kingdom.

The Hearing at First Instance

   7. The Judge indicated in his determination that he did not consider  the
      Appellant was a credible witness for reasons which  were  said  to  be
      both extensive and disparate. He dismissed the appeal.

   8.  The  difficulty  in  the  case  arose  during  the  Appellant's  oral
      testimony when he indicated that he  had  provided  documents  to  his
      solicitor which were not before the court. The  Judge  agreed  to  the
      suggestion of the Appellant's representative that the Appellant should
      be given until 4:30 PM on the day of the hearing to file  the  further
      evidence to which the Appellant  had  referred  with  the  opportunity
      being given to the Respondent to make further submissions  thereon  if
      so advised. At [9] of  the  determination  the  Judge  noted  that  no
      documents had been brought to his  attention  by  4:30  PM  after  the
      hearing and he proceeded to deal with the case dismissing  the  appeal
      largely on credibility grounds.

The Onward Appeal

   9. The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing that he had  sent
      certain documents to the Tribunal and the Respondent  by  4:30  PM  by
      email. He enclosed with his  grounds  of  onward  appeal  evidence  to
      demonstrate that service. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Andrew on 28 June 2018. She noted that the fax
      receipt exhibited to the grounds showed that the documents were  faxed
      at 4:09 in the afternoon and that in the circumstances such  documents
      should have been brought to the Judge's attention.

  10. She added: "it is an arguable error of law that [the  Judge]  did  not
      receive such documents, however whether it is material to the appeal I
      do not know as I do not know what the  documents  are".  I  take  that
      reference to mean that as at 28 June the documents which the Appellant
      said he had forwarded to the Tribunal  had  not  been  placed  on  the
      Tribunal file.

  11. At the error of law hearing before  me  I  was  shown  copies  of  the
      documents in question. They consisted of: an affidavit of Sheuly Akter
      who is the Appellant's mother; a  certificate  from  Mr  A  Kamal  the
      president of the local branch  of  the  BNP;  an  affidavit  from  the
      Appellant's sister; a first information report (FIR)  dated  11  March
      2009; a statement from the  person  lodging  the  FIR;  a  warrant  of
      arrest; a further certificate and what appears to be a translation  of
      an arrest warrant.

  12. The Presenting Officer confirmed that the documents had been  received
      by the Respondent although they were not on  his  file  in  court.  He
      accepted that  the  documents  were  material  as  they  went  to  the
      credibility of the  Appellant's  account  Counsel  for  the  Appellant
      argued that the key issue in the case was whether the Appellant was  a
      local political figure in Bangladesh. Had the  documents  been  before
      the Judge when he made his determination his findings  on  credibility
      might have been different.

Findings

  13. At the conclusion of submissions I indicated that as it  was  accepted
      by the Judge granting permission to appeal that the documents had been
      sent to the Tribunal although not apparently received (they are  still
      not on the Tribunal  file),  and  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
      documents were relevant to the case, there was a material error of law
      in proceeding to issue a determination. This was  notwithstanding  the
      difficult position the Judge was placed in because the documents  were
      not given to him by the relevant time.


  14. I indicated that I would set the determination aside  and  order  that
      the appeal be reheard with no  findings  of  fact  preserved.  As  the
      Appellant had already given a considerable amount of evidence  in  the
      case, recorded by Judge Frankish, I did not consider it  necessary  to
      remit the matter back to the  First-tier  to  be  reheard.  Instead  I
      indicated that the appeal would be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal at a
      date to be notified and the appeal reserved to me. It is a matter  for
      the Appellant, but it may  be  helpful  for  him  to  make  a  further
      statement in this case to be filed with the Tribunal and served on the
      Respondent at least 14 days before the hearing. This further statement
      should explain in more detail the further documents he  has  submitted
      (to which I refer above), how he  obtained  them  and  what  is  their
      relevance to his appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
    error of law and I have set it aside.

The appeal will be reheard at Field House before me on the  first  available
    date with a time estimate of two hours.

Leave to the Appellant to file and serve further evidence if so  advised  at
    least 14 days before the final hearing.
I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 6 September 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
