
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03583/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2018                 |On 28th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   mr SH-S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  21st  March  1978.   The
    Appellant's  immigration  history  is  extensive  and  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 4 of the Notice of Refusal.  The Appellant claimed asylum and
    his claim is based upon a fear that if returned to Iran he  would  face
    mistreatment due to his religion in that he had converted from Islam to
    Christianity.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal  dated
    27th March 2017.  The Appellant appealed and  the  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brewer  at  Taylor  House  on  15th
    September 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  9th  October
    2017 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 2. On 23rd October 2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-
      i) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed  to  correctly  apply
         the decision of the Court of Appeal in HJ (Iran) v the Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1024 in finding  that
         the Appellant could  return  to  Iran  and  practise  his  religion
         discreetly;
     ii) failed to properly take into account a psychological report on  the
         Appellant when assessing the Appellant's evidence and  credibility;
         and
    iii) the First-tier Tribunal Judge's overall assessment  of  credibility
         failed to apply the correct standard of proof and approach  and  is
         based on at least one material error of fact.

 3. On 22nd November 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge  Brunnen  considered  that  the  purported
    failure to apply the principles expounded in HJ (Iran) was arguable but
    is only material if the judge also fell into  error  in  rejecting  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity.  He further found  that
    in making his  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  it  was
    arguable that the judge had failed adequately to take into account  the
    effect of his intellectual  impairment.   On  those  grounds  therefore
    permission to appeal was granted.  Judge Brunnen did not consider  that
    the judge had failed to apply the correct standard of proof.

 4. On 18th December 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Bonavero.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Bonavero starts by raising the preliminary point of a further Ground
    of Appeal lodged by the Appellant on 31st October  2017.   That  ground
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  materially  erred  in
    finding that the Appellant lacked knowledge of Christianity due to  his
    inability to answer questions on "the Trinity".  It is accepted  by  Mr
    Bramble that the administration fails to have addressed the putting  of
    this further Ground of Appeal to the Secretary  of  State  and  further
    that it is made only seven days after the  original  grounds  had  been
    submitted.  Mr Bonavero points out that at paragraph 51 of the  judge's
    decision the judge has made adverse findings of credibility based on an
    apparent lack of knowledge  of  Christianity  by  the  Appellant.   The
    decision reads:-
         "Contrary to the evidence of Reverend S, I  found  the  Appellant's
         lack of knowledge about  Christianity  surprising  given  he  is  a
         recent convert.  Knowledge of the Bible may be justifiably limited,
         but to not understand the Trinity seems to me to be very surprising
         indeed.".

 7. Mr Bramble acknowledges that there is no evidence before  the  Tribunal
    as to what actually transpired in translation between  the  interpreter
    and the Appellant.  However he does concede that at  paragraph  259  of
    the Appellant's Home Office interview the Appellant  responded  to  the
    following:-
         Question.  Do you know what the three pillars of Christianity  are?


         Answer.  Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

    He consequently accepts that  there  is  a  contradiction  between  the
    finding of the judge and the evidence previously given to the Secretary
    of State by the Respondent.

 8. Mr Bonavero points out that there was clear evidence that the Appellant
    suffered from severe cognitive difficulties and refers me to the report
    of Dr McN and the conclusion that the Appellant's cognitive ability  is
    within the lowest 0.1% of the population.  He points out that the judge
    whilst accepting the report did not take any account of the evidence of
    Dr McN and the Appellant's level of reasoning having been found  by  Dr
    McN to be that of a 7 to 8 year old and submits that this  is  a  clear
    error of law.

 9. As to the issue of the Appellant's ability to return to Iran he submits
    this is only relevant if  there  is  an  error  of  law  regarding  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim and he submits  that  there  is  a
    lacuna to be found at paragraph 50 of the judge's decision  as  to  how
    the judge has come up  with  the  finding  that  he  doubted  that  the
    Appellant had attended a house church as he has suggested.

10. Further he takes me to paragraph 54 of the  judge's  decision  and  the
    wording therein where the judge says "even if I accept the  Appellant's
    conversion in the UK".  He points out this is  ambiguous  and  that  he
    does not make a clear finding particularly as  to  what  the  Appellant
    would be expected to do on return.  He submits that there are errors of
    omission and that the question can be asked as to whether the judge has
    properly applied the decision in HJ submitting that he  has  failed  to
    make conclusions.  In such circumstances he asks me to find that  there
    are material errors of law, to set aside the decision and to remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

11. In response Mr Bramble having accepted that the judge may have erred in
    his assessment of the Appellant's understanding of the Trinity, that it
    then has to be looked at in the context of the  expert  report  of  the
    psychologist Dr McN.  He acknowledges that the judge has failed to take
    into account the Appellant's  understanding  of  the  Trinity  but  the
    question then arises  as  to  the  only  issue  being  the  Appellant's
    purported conversion in the  UK  and  whilst  there  is  an  error  the
    question is whether or not it is material.  He submits it  is  not  and
    that it does not affect the whole determination.  He  submits  that  it
    comes back to the weight to be given to the consideration of  Dr  McN's
    report and he refers me to paragraphs 9.1.4 and 9.1.5.  He submits that
    this is relevant because at paragraph 50 the judge  has  addressed  the
    Appellant's evidence with regard to accurately recalling precise dates,
    times and sequence of events and  that  this  is  taken  verbatim  from
    paragraph 9.1.5 of Dr McN's report.  Mr Bramble submits that  therefore
    the judge has taken into account the expert's evidence report and he is
    aware of the Appellant's problems.  Consequently he does  not  consider
    that  the  judge  has  fallen  into  error  regarding  the  Appellant's
    activities in Iran and that the points raised by the judge at paragraph
    51 are well made.  He considers the judge's findings are ones  that  he
    was entitled to make and that  whilst  accepting  that  the  judge  has
    failed to address the issue of the Appellant's conversion in the UK and
    that therefore this is an error he does not consider it overall infects
    the findings of the judge.

12. Mr Bonavero in response points out that the key point  in  this  matter
    has actually been conceded by the Secretary of State and that this goes
    to the heart of the case and in such circumstances  he  submits  it  is
    hard to see how any findings can be preserved.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. There are concessions made by the Secretary of  State  in  this  matter
    that there are errors of law.  The question is whether or not they  are
    material.   I  find  that  they  are.   I turn  to  the  findings  on
    credibility.   A  proper  approach  to  credibility  would  require  an
    assessment of the evidence and of the general claim and in  cases  like
    this relevant factors would be the internal consistency of  the  claim,
    the inherent plausibility of the claim and the consistency of the claim
    with external factors of the sort typically found in country  guidance.
    It is theoretically correct that a claimant need do no more than  state
    his claim but that claim still needs to be examined for consistency and
    inherent plausibility.  The judge has here materially  erred.   Bearing
    in mind Dr McN's report  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  had  to  give
    considerable attention to the evidence of the Appellant bearing in mind
    his psychological difficulties and the  expert's  conclusions.   Merely
    paying lip service by reciting a  paragraph  of  his  decision  is  not
    sufficient.  The judge needs to have made clear findings.  The  finding
    he made with regard to the Trinity is accepted as an error and  it  may
    well have tainted, when looked at in the round, the whole of the report
    despite the submissions made by Mr Bramble.

16. Further the basic principles as set out in HJ (Iran) still need  to  be
    applied and the question arises as to whether  or  not  the  judge  has
    dealt with this sufficiently.  When looked at in the  round  the  judge
    has sidestepped the key issues in this matter by  advocating  that  the
    Appellant could practise Christianity discreetly and has also failed to
    give proper and appropriate  weight  to  documentary  evidence  in  the
    report of Dr McN when assessing the credibility of a  vulnerable  adult
    and that when looked at together  had  the  judge  considered  all  the
    factors and made clear findings then he may have come  to  a  different
    decision with regard to the credibility of the Appellant's testimony.

17. In such circumstances I find that there are material errors of law that
    taint the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  correct
    decision is to set aside the decision and to remit the matter  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with none of the findings of fact
    to stand.  That is not to say that on a rehearing of this matter it  is
    not possible that the judge rehearing  the  matter  will  not  come  to
    exactly the same conclusion as that reached by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Directions for the rehearing of this matter  are  set
out hereafter
      1. On finding that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         contains material errors of law the decision is set aside with none
         of the findings of fact to stand.
      2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
         House on the first available date 28 days  hence  with  an  ELH  of
         three hours.
      3. The remitted hearing is to be before any Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Brewer.
      4. That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  up-to-date
         objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
         at least seven days prior to the restored hearing date.
      5. That a Farsi interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


Signed                              Date 27 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris






The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 27 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris










