
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03149/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 October 2016                         |On 07 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                   Between

                                BISRAT HAILU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Ethiopia.   He  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    November 2003 and claimed asylum.  This  claim  was  rejected  and  his
    appeal against that refusal  was  unsuccessful.   He  was  subsequently
    arrested and convicted of possessing  a  false  passport,  receiving  a
    sentence  of  nine  months'  imprisonment  with  a  recommendation  for
    deportation. Following refusal of further representations he was issued
    with a deportation order in June 2006. In December 2011 the  respondent
    decided,  having  reconsidered   his   application   for   humanitarian
    protection/discretionary leave, to refuse  to  revoke  her  deportation
    order.

2.   The appellant's appeal was allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law through failure to consider
    whether the claimant had established a right of residence on the  basis
    of EU law on the basis of a relationship with an EEA national.  However
    when the case was sent back to the respondent, she decided, in light of
    the accepted breakdown of his relationship with the  EEA  national,  to
    maintain her decision not to revoke the deportation order. However, the
    appellant's appeal against that new decision was also allowed on appeal
    - to the limited extent that the new decision was found to  be  not  in
    accordance with the law for failure to consider whether  the  appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his children.

3.   In the course of further exchanges the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant had made a fresh asylum claim based on a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Eritrea as a converted Pentecostalist Christian.  On  17
    November  2015  the  respondent  refused  this  claim.   The  appellant
    appealed on two grounds: (1) that he would be persecuted on  return  to
    Ethiopia as that country would forcibly deport him to Eritrea; and  (2)
    the respondent, having accepted that he had family life in the UK  with
    his three dependant children all under 18, should not deport him.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cory.   At
    the hearing the appellant's Counsel confirmed  that  the  appellant  no
    longer relied on ground 1, but submitted that in relation to  ground  2
    the appellant was entitled to succeed under para 398 of the Immigration
    Rules. On 8 August 2016 the judge decided to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge first  examined  whether  the  respondent
    was correct in classifying the appellant as a foreign criminal, who was
    appealing against revocation of a deportation  order.   Having  decided
    she was, the judge proceeded to examine  whether  the  appellant  could
    benefit from para 399 and 399A and if not, then para 398: see paras 29-
    41.

6.   The grounds of appeal were twofold.  It  was  first  of  all  contended
    that the judge had erred in considering  that  the  appellant  met  the
    criteria set out in para 398 because his offending had  caused  serious
    harm, as that was not the basis on which the respondent had decided  to
    deport him and, applying the guidance given in Chege ("is a  persistent
    offender") [2015] UKUT 00187 (IAC) (Chege 2), it was not  open  to  the
    Tribunal to substitute its own view of the matter.  The  second  ground
    advanced the argument that the judge's  reasoning  did  not  support  a
    finding that the appellant's offending had caused  serious  harm,  only
    that it had the potential to damage the integrity  of  the  immigration
    system. Certainly, it was submitted, the judge  could  not  justifiably
    base his assessment on the appellant's single conviction in 2006 or the
    fact that the appellant had an immediate term of imprisonment imposed.

7.   After Miss Revill had amplified these grounds, Mr Tarlow said that  the
    respondent continued to  rely  on  her  Rule  24  response  which  made
    reference to Home  Office  IDIs  identifying  that  the  damage  caused
    because of a false passport  undermined the good order of  society  and
    in that  way  caused  serious  harm.  It  was  not  necessary  for  the
    respondent in her refusal letter to have  stated  explicitly  that  the
    appellant's offence caused serious harm; that was clearly implicit.

8.   In response, Ms Revill said that the IDIs were not  to  be  treated  as
    offering authoritative interpretation, which was  a  judicial  function
    based on construing the natural and ordinary meaning of the  rules.  In
    any event, the IDIs had not been placed before the judge.

9.   I raised with the parties whether the recent judgment of the  Court  of
    Appeal in RJG v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 1042 had a bearing on the appellant's case.  In that case the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had mistakenly thought the appellant was  appealing
    a deportation order engaging the automatic  deportation  provisions  of
    s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  whereas  the  case  was  one  of
    discretionary deportation under Section 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act.  At
    paras 20-21 Lloyd-Jones LJ stated:

         "20.  In any event, if the First-tier Tribunal made such an  error,
             I do not consider that it had any material consequences.   The
             First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the tests contained in
             Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002 and in  paragraphs  398-399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             These provisions apply whether deportation is automatic  under
             Section 32 of the 2007 Act   or  discretionary  under  Section
             35(a) of the 1971 Act. I can see no basis for  the  submission
             that a Tribunal is likely to have attached more weight to  the
             public interest  in  removing  an  offender  pursuant  to  the
             provisions governing automatic deportation  than  pursuant  to
             those governing discretionary deportation. Moreover, there  is
             nothing in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
             this  case  to  support   the   view   that   this   occurred.
             Furthermore, I note that Section  33(7)(b)  of  the  2007  Act
             provides that the application of an exception  results  in  it
             being assumed neither that deportation  order  of  the  person
             concerned is conducive to the public good nor that it  is  not
             conducive to the  public  good.   The  reality  is  that  both
             automatic and discretionary deportation fall to be  considered
             under the same provisions in Section 117C  which  incorporates
             the view of Parliament as to the weight which should be  given
             to the  public  interest  in  this  context.   The  First-tier
             Tribunal directed itself correctly  as  to  the  tests  to  be
             applied."

10.  Ms Revill submitted that the reasoning in RSG  had  no  application  in
    the appellant's case because not being a foreign criminal, he  did  not
    fall within s.117C.

11.  Having reserved my decision and  considered  the  arguments  further  I
    have concluded that the judge did not materially err in law.

12.  It is important to note,  before  setting  out  my  reasons,  that  the
    grounds raise no challenge to the judge's substantive assessment of the
    appellant's  position  under  paras  399,  399A  and  398.   They   are
    exclusively confined to what I will refer to as the  preliminary  issue
    of personal scope under paragraph 398(c).

13.  I do not consider there was any error in  the  judge  considering  that
    the claimant came within the personal scope of para 398(c) which reads:

         "The deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law."

14.  It is not in dispute that the appellant did not fall into the  category
    of persistent offender.  The only issue concerned whether he fell  into
    the alternative category of someone whose offending had caused  serious
    harm.

15.  Ms Revill is right that there is a distinction between  offending  that
    has caused serious harm and offending that has the potential  to  cause
    serious harm.  A classic example is the  offence  of  reckless  driving
    which does not necessarily require the  driver  to  have  caused  harm.
    However, although the judge did refer at one point to  the  appellant's
    offending having the  "potential to damage integrity of the immigration
    system", it is  clear  from  the  passage  read  as  a  whole  that  he
    understood this feature of the appellant's offence to amount to serious
    harm that had been caused. Indeed the passages in which  he  refers  to
    such potential is prefaced by the word  "[i]n  my  view  his  offending
    caused serious harm ..." What the judge intended to convey was that the
    acquisition of a false passport  was of itself damaging because of  its
    impact  on  the  integrity  of  the  immigration  system;  it  had   an
    undermining effect.

16.  Even if I am wrong about that, the judge's  first  reason  for  finding
    that the appellant's offence had caused serious harm is  sufficient  in
    my view, to justify it.  That reason was that the  there  had  been  an
    imposition of an immediate custodial sentence. Again, Ms Revill may  be
    right that in the abstract the imposition  of  an  immediate  custodial
    sentence may not always entail that the offence at issue caused serious
    harm.  In the appellant's case, however, it was  plainly  open  to  the
    judge to find that his offence did.

17.  Despite  being  unpersuaded  that  the  judge  erred  in  treating  the
    appellant as falling within the personal scope of  para  398(i),  I  am
    persuaded that he erred in failing to adhere to the guidance  given  in
    Chege 2  - whether however that amounted  to  a  material  error  is  a
    matter I shall come to later.

18.  In Chege 2 at para 31 the Upper Tribunal stated: that:

         "31.  Where the foreign offender does not fall within  subparagraph
             (a) or (b) of paragraph 398, it is a necessary precondition of
             the matter being considered by the Tribunal under s.117C  that
             the Secretary of State has formed a view that he falls  within
             subparagraph (c), as in this case she  did.   We  endorse  the
             view expressed by the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal  in
             the unreported decision of Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department   v  Bennett  (DA/01409/20124)  promulgated  on   2
             September 2012, that if the Secretary of State had not  formed
             that view, it is not open to the Tribunal  to  substitute  its
             own view on the matter,  and  the  restrictive  provisions  of
             paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules would not apply in such a
             case."


19.  I agree that there was a failure to adhere to Chege 2 guidance for  the
    following reason. As  regards  the  application  of  para  398  in  the
    appellant's case the only reason given by the respondent in her refusal
    letter for considering that the appellant's deportation  was  conducive
    to the public good and in the public interest, was  stated in  para  72
    as being:

         "because you have been convicted of an offence for which  you  were
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of nine months and  you  were
         .... recommended for deportation.   Therefore  in  accordance  with
         para 398 of the Immigration Rules,  the  public  interest  requires
         your deportation, unless an exception to deportation applies".

         In this statement there is no reference to  the  respondent  having
    decided that his offence had caused serious  harm.  Nor  is  there  any
    other passage in this  letter  from  which  it  is  possible  to  infer
    consideration of the serious harm matter That was an error of law.

20.  However, it remains to consider whether the error on the  part  of  the
    judge was a material one.  I have concluded it  was  not.  First,  even
    though in RJG there was no  issue  of  whether  or  not  paragraph  398
    applied, whereas in this case that issue  was  central,  the  reasoning
    applied by the Court of Appeal in RJG does  has  analogous  bearing  to
    this case.

21.  Second, from what I have stated so far it  will  be  clear  that  as  a
    matter of application of the relevant rules,  the  appellant's  offence
    had caused and did cause serious harm.  Although it did not  attract  a
    twelve month sentence, which would have brought it automatically within
    the ambit of paragraph 398 otherwise,  the  nature  of  the  offence  -
    acquisition of a false passport in the circumstances identified by  the
    sentencing judge - sufficed to show that  his  offence  caused  serious
    harm.  These circumstances included that he had acquired it with a view
    to travelling to Canada.

22.  It has been  submitted by the appellant on the basis of  Chege  2  that
    it cannot be open to a tribunal  to  make  a  decision  regarding  para
    398(c) and the serious harm requirement  because the respondent has not
    yet formed a view that his offence caused serious harm. However,  I  do
    not think that this  submission  identifies  any  material  error.  The
    respondent's decision under challenge in this case was made in November
    2015. Hence it cannot be challenged on the grounds that it was "..  not
    in accordance with the law" as s.84 of the  NIAA  2002  as  amended  no
    longer includes that ground.  By s.86, the FtT Judge had  to  determine
    any matter raised as a ground  of  appeal.  The  only  relevant  matter
    raised as a ground of  appeal  in  this  application  was  whether  the
    appellant fall within the personal scope of 398(c). For  reasons  given
    earlier I consider that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant did.

23.  As noted elsewhere, the grounds do not otherwise mention any  challenge
    to the judge's findings as regards whether the appellant had shown very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paras  399
    and 399A.  In any event, I have examined this reasoning  in  paragraphs
    28-41 of the judge's decision and I consider them entirely  within  the
    range of reasonable responses.

24.  For the above reasons the FtT Judge did not materially err in  law  and
    his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is upheld.


No anonymity direction is made.


                 [pic]
Signed                                  Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                  07 December 2016
