
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03863/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2018                         |On 16th November 2018         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                   MR DMO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Divaris, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity whose  date  of
    birth is recorded as 26th April 1992.  On  5th  October  2016  he  made
    application for international protection as a refugee.   On  5th  April
    2017 a decision was made to  refuse  the  application.   The  Appellant
    appealed.  His appeal was heard on 23rd April  2018  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal AA Wilson sitting at Hatton Cross.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. In summary it was the Appellant's case that he had abandoned the  faith
    of his birth and had engaged with Ra?lism.  Judge Wilson dismissed  the
    appeal.  Not content with that decision by Notice dated 18th  May  2018
    the Appellant made application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 31st May 2018 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Farrelly
    refused the application for permission  to  appeal  but  on  a  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal Upper Tribunal, Judge King,  on  27th
    September 2018, granted permission.

 3. The substance of the grounds was that there were inadequate findings on
    the part of the judge and that there was  a  fundamental  flaw  in  the
    reasoning because having accepted that the Appellant  had  "fallen  out
    with Salafi Islam" he did not consider what  the  effect  of  that  was
    without more but rather  considered  that  as  the  Appellant  had  not
    adopted any new faith he would not be at risk. That  was  fundamentally
    flawed and was in my view a material error of law.

 4. As it is Mr Avery quite rightly conceded that the Decision and  Reasons
    could not stand.  It is fundamental to any party  to  proceedings  that
    they should understand why they have not succeeded or why they have got
    the decision that they have. This decision is so full of  typographical
    errors that in parts it is impossible to understand what the  judge  is
    talking about.  It may be that he has used some kind  of  transcription
    software such as Dragon Dictate or the like but has not then  proofread
    the decision, as an example at paragraph 13 he says:

         "He then described how he travels to his mother's  house  by  taxi.
         Question 202 of the interview which is a long open-ended replied by
         the appellant gives a dated - 20 January 2015 - he sets out that he
         was then at his mother's house the sun four months.  He then stated
         his brother crying his uncles were aware that he  was  living  with
         his mother were threatening to kill him as at  that  point  between
         him and his brother may arrangements for him to escape  firstly  to
         Irbil and then from Iraq." (sic)

    There are other like sentences.

 5. In the event it was agreed by the parties that if I were to find, as  I
    have, that there was an error of law, the proper course  was  for  this
    case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again  by  a
    judge other than Judge Wilson.  Accordingly, I direct as  follows:  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside to be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross with a Kurdish Sorani  interpreter.
    The time estimate for the remitted appeal would  be  for  the  Resident
    Judge at Hatton Cross though the default is four hours for  a  remitted
    asylum claim.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside to be remade in the First-tier.

Signed                              Date: 9 November 2018







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

