
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03149/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th August 2016                       |On 17th August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal Deputy judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    [m g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a  citizen  of  Turkey  (born  [  ]  1996)  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal, against the decision of a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Parker) in which it dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse his protection claim  as  a
    refugee, on account of his political opinion and ethnicity.

Background

 2. The Appellant left Turkey some time between  16th  and  20th  September
    2015 and travelled to Morocco.  He remained there until 30th  September
    2015 before travelling to  the  UK.   He  was  encountered  at  Gatwick
    Airport, with a Turkish ID card and promptly claimed asylum.

 3. He was interviewed on 20th January 2016 about his asylum claim.  On 8th
    March  2016  the  Respondent  refused  it.   The  Appellant  instructed
    representatives to appeal the refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. On 22nd April 2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  decision  on  a
    preliminary  issue  and  decided  that  the  Appellant  had  lodged  an
    incomplete Notice of Appeal because sections D, E and F of  the  Notice
    of Appeal were not completed.  This constituted  a  failure  to  comply
    with the 2014 Procedure Rule  and  it  entitled  the  FtT  to  consider
    whether to determine the appeal without a hearing.

 5. Having decided that it would make the decision without a  hearing,  the
    FtT then went on to consider the merits of  the  Appellant's  case  and
    decided that the appeal must fail.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision.  Permission to
    appeal was initially refused by the FtT; but on a  renewed  application
    before the Upper Tribunal  permission  was  granted  in  the  following
    terms:
         "1.  It is arguable that if the solicitors  successfully  sent  the
             grounds of appeal on 22 March 2016 and the completed  form  by
             30 March 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) had all  requisite
             information and the summary of the  information  available  at
             [2] of the  FTT  decision  is  incorrect  and  the  procedural
             history in this case is such  that  it  is  arguable  that  no
             rational Tribunal could be satisfied that it  was  appropriate
             to determine the appeal without  a  hearing.   It  is  however
             difficult to ascertain what was available to the Tribunal from
             the file at the relevant time when the decision  under  appeal
             was made on 22 April 2016.  It appears that only 18 pages were
             received and these did not include the grounds of appeal.
         2.   The appellant's solicitors shall provide a  witness  statement
             explaining what  was  sent  to  the  Tribunal,  when,  with  a
             paginated bundle of exhibits confirming the same, including  a
             chronology, by 21 July 2016.
         3.   It is noted that the application has  been  received  one  day
             late.  This is said to relate to difficulties with  the  e-fax
             system.  This  system  clearly  has  flaws,  which  should  be
             attended to urgently.  However as  the  matter  relates  to  a
             protection claim and there has been  an  explanation  for  the
             delay I am prepared to extend time and admit the application."

 7. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the FtT's decision to
    dismiss the appeal on a preliminary issue  contains  an  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside and the decision remade.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Mr Tarlow appeared on behalf of  the  Respondent,  no-one  attended  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  However prior to the hearing, there had  been
    served on the Tribunal a bundle of  documents  under  cover  of  Duncan
    Lewis  Solicitors  letter  dated  15th  July  2016.   Those   documents
    contained a witness statement of Emel Bostanci.  In that  statement  Ms
    Bostanci indicates that she  is  the  caseworker  with  charge  of  the
    Appellant's case.  She outlines that the Appellant's  protection  claim
    was refused on 8th March  2016  and  on  22nd  March  2016  within  the
    permitted timescale, she completed the  Appellant's  Notice  of  Appeal
    using the online PDF fillable form downloaded from  the  justice.gov.uk
    website.  She then submitted the form  together  with  the  Appellant's
    Grounds of Appeal  and  the  SSHD  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   She
    received notification that the fax (35  pages)  had  been  successfully
    transmitted at 1.29am.

 9. She accepts that on 24th March 2016 she  received  a  letter  from  the
    Tribunal advising that the appeal papers were received  on  22nd  March
    2016 but that the appeal form was blank, was not signed and  dated  and
    did not include a fee.  Accordingly she  responded  to  the  Tribunal's
    letter and it is correct to say that  she  was  satisfied  that  proper
    Grounds of Appeal had been submitted on the Appellant's behalf.

10. Mr Tarlow having only just received sight of  those  documents  at  the
    hearing, fairly accepted that the Appellant's representatives had taken
    the appropriate steps to serve the Grounds of Appeal.  He accepted that
    this was a matter which should be returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis that the Appellant had been deprived of the opportunity of
    having a fair hearing.

Consideration

11. I agree with the course outlined by Mr Tarlow.  I am satisfied that the
    Appellant has always wished to exercise and pursue his right to have an
    oral hearing.  I am satisfied that the Appellant  has  made  a  genuine
    effort to substantiate his claim and to follow his claim through  to  a
    full hearing.

12. Accordingly I set aside the FtT's decision in its entirety  and  direct
    that the matter be remitted to that Tribunal (not Judge Parker)  for  a
    full and substantive hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 22nd April 2016 is hereby  set
aside for legal error.  The matter will now be remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Parker) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
