
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03174/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th February 2018                   |On 15th March 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR ZION AGYEKUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  6th  August  1977.   The
    Appellant has extensive immigration history being served with  IS96  as
    an overstayer in June 2016 and thereafter in  September  2016  claiming
    asylum.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon a fear that if
    returned to Ghana he would face death due  to  his  medical  condition.
    The medical condition centres on the Appellant's requirement of needing
    a lung transplant.  The Appellant's application was refused  by  Notice
    of Refusal dated 16th March 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Somal sitting at Stoke on 5th May 2017.   In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 10th May 2017  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 23rd  May  2017.
    On 12th September 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted
    permission to appeal setting out that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had erred in failing to  consider  the  potential  application  of  the
    judgment in Paposhvili  v  Belgium  (41738/10)  which  application  was
    clearly argued before the  judge  but  was  not  referred  to  by  her.
    Further, Judge Hodgkinson considered it was arguable that the judge had
    erred in her consideration of proportionality  with  reference  to  the
    Appellant's ability to continue his  family  life  in  Ghana  with  his
    partner and that his medical condition had also  not  been  taken  into
    account with reference to the judge's assessment of proportionality.

 4. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24
    on 13th October.  Quite often Rule 24  responses  lack  detail  and  an
    analysis but this Rule 24 sets out in detail the case law.  I have read
    the Rule 24 in detail.  It is on that basis the appeal comes before  me
    to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  in
    person.   His  instructed  solicitors  have  written  to  the  Tribunal
    advising they are unable to send a representative to  the  hearing  and
    that  they  had  requested  a  postponement  but  that  this  had  been
    previously rejected.  With respect to the Appellant's solicitors  their
    reason for non-attendance, namely that they were "double booked", would
    be unlikely to persuade any judge that a case should be adjourned.   On
    that basis the Appellant appears in person.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. I started by explaining to  the  Appellant  the  procedure  before  the
    Tribunal.  Whilst acknowledging that it was his appeal he  agreed  that
    it would be appropriate for Mr Bates to make his submissions first  and
    I then indicated to the Appellant that I would listen  to  him  without
    interruption.  Mr Bates starts by taking me to the  Rule  24  response,
    pointing out that  the  Tribunal  is  bound  by  the  long  established
    principles set out by the House of Lords in N v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2005] UKHL and reaffirmed by the Court  of  Appeal
    in GS (India) and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 whereby the Court of Appeal confirmed  that  foreign
    nationals may be removed from the UK even where  their  lives  will  be
    drastically shortened due to a lack of healthcare in their home  states
    and that removal in those circumstances does not breach Articles 3 or 8
    ECHR except in the most exceptional cases.  Mr Bates  reminds  me  that
    those authorities are binding upon the Tribunal and remain good law and
    that the Tribunal is obliged to follow them.

 6. Mr Bates submits that the judgment of the European Court in  Paposhvili
    v Belgium is not binding upon the UK courts and takes me  to  the  most
    recent authorities  of  EA  and  Others  (Article  3  medical  cases  -
    Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT  00445  (IAC)  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that the test in Paposhvili is not a test that is open to
    the Tribunal to apply by  reason  of  it  being  contrary  to  judicial
    precedent.  He further takes me to the  most  recent  authority  of  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    64 and submits that that authority endorses the view to be found in EA.



 7. He points out that whilst Article 3 if reached  is  an  absolute  right
    family life is a qualified right and  it  is  appropriate  to  consider
    proportionality and the public interest has to be  considered  in  such
    applications.  He  reminds  me  that  we  are  dealing  with  purported
    treatment to a non-British national and that that is why Article  3  is
    very rarely met.  He submits that these issues have been  addressed  by
    the judge at paragraphs 23 onwards and that  at  paragraph  26  it  was
    conceded by the Appellant's representative that he could not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules,  and  thereafter  at   paragraph   27   the   judge
    appropriately dealt with the Appellant's family relationship stating at
    paragraphs 30 and 34 that family life is a qualified right and that the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  Ms  Jones  was,  in  legal  terms,   a
    precarious relationship and that if the Appellant were removed then  it
    would be open to Ms Jones to return to the position  that  she  was  in
    prior to that relationship.

 8. Consequently, Mr Bates  concludes  by  stating  that  whilst  there  is
    significant medical evidence there has been no material  error  of  law
    and the case law shows that the Appellant cannot  succeed,  along  with
    the fact that the issue of proportionality reflects the fact  that  the
    public interest in the circumstances of  this  case  would  favour  the
    removal of the Appellant.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Evidence of the Appellant

 9. The Appellant became extremely distressed during the  hearing,  as  did
    his partner.  He indicated he was not in a position to debate the legal
    issues but that he had been told to rely on the Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, all of which I have read and  considered.   He
    points out that in 2013 he was  diagnosed  with  lung  disease  and  he
    requires a lung transplant.  He has been receiving care and  unless  he
    has a lung transplant his life will be limited and that his  consultant
    in the UK is extremely concerned that he will die  if  he  is  referred
    back to Ghana because of the lack  of  hospital  facilities  there  for
    people requiring lung transplants and having medical care.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. This is clearly a very distressing case.  The medical condition of  the
    Appellant is not one that is challenged by the Secretary of State.  The
    medical evidence appears to show he requires a lung transplant.  He  is
    receiving treatment at present in the UK and he has a relationship with
    Ms Jones with whom he had been living for some eight months at the date
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  I do,  however,  have  to
    remind myself that this is a court of law and not a court  of  sympathy
    and the issue that is before me is to determine whether or not there is
    a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

13. That purported error of law is based on the proposition that Paposhvili
    v Belgium is applicable to the Appellant's medical circumstances.  I am
    afraid that the law just does not support such  a  proposition,  indeed
    the matter has recently received consideration not only  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in EA but in the decision of  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  That case points out
    that the decision of the House of Lords in N v Secretary  of  State  is
    binding authority so far as the court is concerned regarding  the  test
    to be applied in domestic law in this type of case and that:

         "It is common ground that this is so even though  it  appears  that
         the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  has  more   recently,   in
         Paposhvili, decided to clarify or qualify to some degree  the  test
         previously laid down in N v United Kingdom, which corresponds  with
         that set out by the House of Lords in N v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department".


14. The Court of Appeal found that paragraph 183 of  Paposhvili  lacks  the
    test of violation of Article 3 in the case  of  removal  of  a  foreign
    national with a medical condition and that it did so  only  to  a  very
    modest extent.

15. I am merely dealing with the issue as  to  whether  there  has  been  a
    material error of law in the analysis by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     I am satisfied that the judge has quite properly considered  the  case
    and has followed the law.  To that extent the judge has  not  erred  at
    all and certainly not materially.  However, it is appropriate to recite
    and bear in mind a paragraph from AM - this of course being a  decision
    that was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge - it seems to me that
    paragraphs 32 and 33 of AM cover the circumstances  of  this  case  and
    indeed Mr Bates does not seek to challenge me on this point.   For  the
    benefit of the Appellant and his  legal  representatives  (albeit  that
    they were not present) it is appropriate within this decision to recite
    those paragraphs:

         "32. There is also a significant number of  other  cases  involving
             claims by foreign nationals to resist removal from the  UK  by
             invoking Article 3 on medical grounds which are already in the
             system, in which again reliance is  sought  to  be  placed  on
             Paposhvili even though  the  claims  have  been  dismissed  by
             application of N v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             and N v United Kingdom. In those cases, orders have been  made
             in a similar way to prevent the removal of the appellants from
             the UK until final determination of their cases, which are  on
             hold until the position in relation to  the  adoption  of  the
             guidance in Paposhvili into domestic law has been clarified.


         33.  In addition,  similar  new  claims  based  on  application  of
             Article 3 on medical grounds may be  brought  forward  at  any
             time. In relation  to  those  claims,  all  courts  below  the
             Supreme Court will be bound by the decision in N  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department, but  claimants  may  contend
             that they have grounds for saying that their cases are covered
             by the new guidance in  Paposhvili  (in  particular  at  para.
             [183]) and that any question of  their  removal  from  the  UK
             should be stayed until the Supreme Court has decided to modify
             domestic law  (potentially  decisively  in  their  favour)  by
             reference to that guidance. "


16. However, the Appellant should be aware that the Court of Appeal  in  AM
    considered that those  particular  cases  fell  a  long  way  short  of
    satisfying the test in paragraph 183 of  Paposhvili  and  so  that  the
    Appellant should be well aware that there is  absolutely  no  certainty
    that even if clarification is given by the Supreme Court that his  case
    would be covered by it.

17.  It  is  further  briefly  appropriate  to  consider  the   aspect   of
    proportionality because that was raised as  a  Ground  of  Appeal.   Mr
    Bates has dealt with that extensively in his submissions to me but more
    importantly this has been dealt with by the judge at paragraphs  23  to
    34.  The judge's analysis is thorough and detailed and  the  judge  has
    come to findings which she was perfectly entitled to.

18. For all the above reasons, whilst I acknowledge it  will  be  of  great
    disappointment to the Appellant, as a matter of law I am satisfied that
    there are no material errors disclosed in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge whose decision, albeit that it  predates  the  most
    recent case law, addresses all the relevant case law quite properly and
    discloses no material error.  In  such  circumstances  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris








