
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03768/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2017                       |On 20 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                          GRACIA BISELELE TSHINGUTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Farhat, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  who
    appealed the respondent's decision  to  refuse  her  asylum  and  human
    rights claims.  The appellant withdrew her appeal on asylum grounds  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing; her appeal on human rights grounds was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wright ("the FTTJ") in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 June 2017.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    request was made for  such  a  direction  in  this  tribunal.  None  is
    required.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in bare terms by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin on 20 September 2017.

 4. Thus the matter has come before me.

Submissions

 5. Mr Farhat, for the appellant, adopted the grounds of appeal  which  can
    be summarised thus.  The only issue in dispute in the  appeal  was  the
    validity of the marriage certificate of the appellant and sponsor,  her
    husband, who was a DRC refugee; he could not  return  to  the  DRC  and
    there were therefore  insurmountable  obstacles  pursuant  to  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM. He submitted the FTTJ's reasoning on the validity  of  the
    marriage certificate was inadequate; the FTTJ's reference  to  reliance
    on Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) [2002] UKIAT 00439 had been misplaced  in  a
    human rights appeal.  The FTTJ had erroneously followed the country  of
    origin guidance (Landinfo and Danish Immigration Service FFM of January
    2007), as if it were black letter law without taking into  account  the
    appellant's explanations for the divergence  from  that  guidance.  The
    original certificate had been produced and was sufficient  evidence  of
    the marriage having been issued by the appropriate authority. The  FTTJ
    had failed to take  into  account  the  witness,  documentary  and  DVD
    evidence when assessing the validity of  the  marriage.  The  FTTJ  had
    misapplied the guidance, treating it as prescriptive.

 6. Mr Clarke did not agree that the sole issue before  the  FTTJ  was  the
    validity of the marriage certificate; he submitted there  was  also  an
    issue as to the appellant's suitability  pursuant  to  the  suitability
    criteria in Appendix FM: she had used a false passport to enter the UK.
    That said both he and Mr Farhat agreed that the FTTJ had failed to make
    any finding on the issue of suitability pursuant to Appendix FM.   That
    was not a material issue given  the  appeal  had  been  dismissed.   Mr
    Clarke submitted the FTTJ had  properly  adhered  to  the  guidance  in
    Tanveer Ahmed. As regards the country of origin guidance to  which  the
    FTTJ had referred  in  considering  the  reliability  of  the  marriage
    certificate, this was guidance which the  appellant  had  adduced.  The
    FTTJ had identified discrepancies  as  between  the  guidance  and  the
    witness evidence such as to undermine the weight to  be  given  to  the
    marriage certificate. He was entitled to find at [39] the marriage  had
    not taken place in accordance with DRC law, the burden of  proof  being
    on the appellant. There was no legislation  or  objective  material  to
    rebut the guidance.

 7. In reply, Mr Farhat submitted that Tanveer Ahmed was guidance  for  the
    proposition that the authenticity of documents generally fell  in  line
    with general credibility findings. This case  needed  assessment  in  a
    wider context. The appellant  had  not  given  evidence  on  which  her
    credibility could be assessed, having withdrawn her asylum appeal;  she
    had merely  given  evidence  about  the  marriage  procedure.   It  was
    accepted that the appellant's late withdrawal of her appeal  on  asylum
    grounds was a relevant factor in the  assessment  of  her  credibility.
    However, the marriage had occurred before the asylum  claim.  This  was
    also the case with regard to her use of  a  false  passport  (a  matter
    which was only taken into  account  in  the  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules).  The Country  of  Origin  guidance  had  only  been
    produced by the appellant to rebut the statement in the refusal  letter
    that the respondent did not recognise proxy marriages.  (In the  event,
    the respondent's representative had conceded as  much  at  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ).



Discussion

 8. The Immigration Appeal Tribunal (as it then was) set out  at  paragraph
    38 the principles in Tanveer Ahmed. This includes the following:

         "1. In asylum and human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
         claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely  can  be
         relied on.

         2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
         which reliance should properly be placed after looking at  all  the
         evidence in the round.

         3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation of
         forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it.   The  allegation
         should not be made without such evidence. Failure to establish  the
         allegation on the balance of probabilities to the  higher  standard
         does not show that a document  is  reliable.   The  decision  maker
         still need to apply principles 1 and 2."

 9. The Court stated at [31] that some documents

         "are "genuine" to the  extent  that  they  emanate  from  a  proper
         source, in the proper form, on the proper paper,  with  the  proper
         seals, but the information they  contain  is  wholly  or  partially
         untrue. Examples are birth, death and  marriage  certificates  from
         certain countries, which can be obtained from the proper source for
         a "fee", but which contain information which is wholly or partially
         untrue.  The  permutations  of   truth,   untruth,   validity   and
         "genuineness"  are  enormous.   At  its   simplest   we   need   to
         differentiate between form and content; that is whether a  document
         is properly issued by the purported author and whether the contents
         are  true.  They  are  separate  questions.  It  is   a   dangerous
         oversimplification merely to ask whether a document is "forged"  or
         even "not genuine". It is necessary to shake off any  preconception
         that official looking documents are genuine, based on experience of
         documents in the United Kingdom, and to approach them with an  open
         mind".

10. Further, at [33]:

         "it is for the individual claimant  to  show  that  a  document  is
         reliable in the same way as any other piece of  evidence  which  he
         puts forward and on which he seeks to rely".

11. The FTTJ cites the appropriate burden and standard of proof at [32]  of
    the decision. He refers at [38] to having considered the reliability of
    the evidence in the round pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed.  While the  appeal
    was no longer being pursued on asylum grounds, this was  an  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds.   The  principles  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  for  the
    assessment of documentary evidence applied. It was submitted before  me
    that the appellant had not given evidence on which a full assessment of
    her credibility could be made. That was not  the  case:  she  knew  the
    validity of her marriage certificate was a crucial issue in the  appeal
    and she had the opportunity to give evidence on how  it  was  acquired.
    Indeed she gave such evidence seeking to explain the  discrepancies  as
    between the background material regarding proxy marriages  in  the  DRC
    and her own claimed circumstances.

12. The FTTJ was referred to  the  guidance  in  Cudjoe  (Proxy  marriages:
    burden of proof) [2016]  UKUT  00180  (IAC)  and  had  regard  to  that
    guidance. In particular he took into account, in his assessment of  the
    evidence, the second part of the headnote to the effect that

         "the  means  of  proving  that  a  proxy  marriage  was  contracted
         according to the laws of the country in which it took place is  not
         limited  to  the  production  of  a  marriage  certificate,  as  it
         recognised in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  00024
         (IAC)"

    I do not accept the submission for the appellant that the  FTTJ  should
    have accepted the original marriage  certificate,  at  face  value,  as
    being evidence of a valid marriage.  It would have been an error of law
    for the FTTJ to have done so. He appropriately considered  the  content
    of the marriage certificate in the context of the  background  material
    (adduced by the appellant herself, namely the Country of Origin   (COI)
    report), the witness evidence and the documentary evidence.  I  do  not
    accept the FTTJ should have taken the COI Report into account  only  to
    the limited extent for which it was adduced at the hearing. It  was  of
    relevance to the FTTJ's assessment of the reliability of  the  marriage
    certificate and the FTTJ was entitled to have regard to it, there being
    no challenge to its  content.   He  did  not  treat  that  guidance  as
    prescriptive: for example, he took into account the background material
    was  dated.  He   identified   various   internal   discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies in the  appellant's  own  evidence  which  called  into
    question her credibility [36]. He identified various  discrepancies  as
    between the evidence of the appellant,  the  content  of  the  marriage
    certificate and the guidance. In the absence of alternative  background
    material to explain the discrepancies as between the guidance  and  the
    content of the marriage  certificate,  given  his  concerns  about  the
    credibility of the witness evidence, the FTTJ was entitled to find  the
    evidence was insufficient to demonstrate the marriage certificate was a
    valid one. His findings cannot be faulted. They are sustainable on  the
    evidence before him.

13. For these reasons, there is no error of law in the FTTJ's decision. The
    grounds of appeal to this tribunal disclose no more than a disagreement
    with the outcome.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed           A M Black                   Dated 15 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

