
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03030/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2016                        |On 07 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                    M H S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Mellon, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Dineen) ("FTT") promulgated on 26  September  2016
    in which he dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant was an unaccompanied minor  from  Albania  who  was  just
    over 17 years old at the date of  hearing.   It  was  conceded  by  the
    respondent that he was the victim of domestic abuse and  violence  from
    his father.  The respondent had been provided an expert  report  by  Dr
    Juliet Cohen which found the appellant's account of abuse as credible.

3.   In grounds of application for permission, Ms  Mellon  who  appeared  at
    the First-tier Tribunal and appears before me today,  argued  that  the
    FTT materially erred in its consideration of the appeal issues entirely
    and which resulted in a flawed determination.

4.   I have taken into account the submissions made  by  Mr  Tufan  and  the
    Rule 24 response. However, I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  material
    errors of law as argued in the grounds for permission. The FTT did  not
    properly engage with the relevant issues to the required  standard,  in
    particular there  was  no  proper  consideration  of  membership  of  a
    particular social group [32], risk on return and  internal  relocation.
    The FTT failed to apply the appropriate test, namely "unduly harsh"  at
    [40] for relocation. In respect of Article 8 there is no  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE at all and a fairly cursory consideration of Article 8
    outside of the Rules.

5.   I am further satisfied that the ground arguing that the FTT  failed  to
    consider the unchallenged expert  report  of  Dr  Young  is  made  out.
    Although reference to the report was made in bullet points at [40]  the
    FTT  failed  to  engage  in  or  to  demonstrate  that  any  meaningful
    consideration was given to the expert report.

6.   As a consequence none of the findings made can be  preserved  save  for
    the fact that the appellant, as was conceded, was a victim of  domestic
    violence. His case was put on the basis that from the age  of  9  years
    until the age of 15 years he was seriously assaulted by his father  and
    in 2015 subject to two further assaults from people  connected  to  his
    father. The matter should be remitted for a  hearing  de  novo  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal

Notice of Decision

7.   I find material error in law and the decision and reasons shall be  set
    aside.  The matter is remitted to the FTT at  Hatton  Cross  (excluding
    Judge Dineen).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 5th December 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed                                  Date 5th December 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

