
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/03115/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2016                  |On 22 November 2016                  |
|Prepared on 21 November 2016         |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    R. S.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McCormick, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who
       entered the UK illegally. She made an application for  protection  in
       December 2015. This was not made on  the  basis  that  she  would  be
       perceived as a deserter or draft evader, because her  case  was  that
       she had  undertaken  a  period  of  military  service  but  was  then
       discharged because  she  became  exempt  from  further  service  upon
       marriage. Instead her case was that she was a  Pentecostal  Christian
       who faced a real risk of persecution as such  from  the  authorities,
       and had left Eritrea illegally as  a  result.  That  application  was
       refused on 15 March 2016.

    2. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  on  8  August
       2016, and it was dismissed on all grounds, in a decision  promulgated
       on 16 August 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Fox.

    3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  5
       September 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on the  basis  it
       was arguable the Judge's approach to the hearing had meant that there
       had not been a fair hearing of the appeal.

    4. Thus the matter comes before me.

  Error of Law?

    5. Both parties were agreed before me that the decision contains  errors
       as to the hearing with which the Judge was  engaged.  Thus,  although
       there was no attendance at the hearing on behalf of  the  Respondent,
       and thus no cross-examination of the Appellant, the decision suggests
       that the Respondent was present and made  oral  submissions  opposing
       the appeal [9]. Moreover the decision  under  appeal  is  incorrectly
       identified by date [9]. If  they  stood  alone,  those  errors  could
       perhaps be taken  as  being  without  substance,  or  as  immaterial.
       However the decision also records that Mr McCormick made  submissions
       in support of the Appellant's case [3], when he did not. Mr McCormick
       made no submissions in support of the Appellant's case  because  once
       it was identified that the Respondent would  be  un-represented,  and
       that there would be no cross-examination, the Judge informed him that
       his assistance was "not needed". The Judge himself asked no questions
       of the Appellant.

    6. Thus Mr McCormick was faced with a situation in  which  his  client's
       evidence was not tested by any cross-examination  on  behalf  of  the
       Respondent, or, by  any  questions  from  the  Tribunal.  Whilst  the
       failure to attend the  hearing  did  not  of  course  mean  that  the
       Respondent had formally conceded  that  the  Appellant's  account  of
       events was truthful, in the face of such a comment from the Tribunal,
       the Respondent accepts before me that Counsel is  entitled  to  infer
       that the appeal is to be allowed. That would be the only circumstance
       in which the Tribunal could decline to hear anything from the party's
       representative. I agree. Whilst the  decision  was  reserved  in  the
       usual way so that it might be written up, Mr McCormick  was  entitled
       to interpret that comment from the Judge as a formal indication  that
       the appeal was to be allowed.

    7. It follows that both parties are agreed that the  Appellant  did  not
       receive a fair hearing of her appeal, and that the decision is unsafe
       and cannot be maintained. I have in  these  circumstances  considered
       whether or not to remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for  it
       to be reheard, as requested by both parties. In the circumstances  of
       the appeal I am satisfied that  this  is  the  correct  approach.  In
       circumstances where it would appear that the  relevant  evidence  has
       not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal,  the  effect
       of that error of law  has  been  to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  the
       opportunity for his case to be properly considered by the First  Tier
       Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 25  September
       2012. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact  finding  exercise  is
       such  that  having  regard  to  the  over-riding  objective,  it   is
       appropriate that the appeal should be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 25  September
       2012. Having reached that  conclusion,  with  the  agreement  of  the
       parties I make the following directions;

        i) The decision upon  the  appeal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved. The appeal is not  to  be  listed  before
           Judge Fox.

       ii) A Tigrinyan interpreter is  required  for  the  hearing  of  the
           appeal.

      iii) There are anticipated to be  only  one  witness,  and  the  time
           estimate is as a result, 3 hours.

       iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available  date  at  the
           North Shields hearing centre after 30  November  2016  for  full
           hearing. No further Directions hearing is presently  anticipated
           to be necessary. Should the Appellant anticipate  this  position
           will change, she must inform the Tribunal immediately, providing
           full details of what (if any) further evidence she seeks to rely
           upon.

        v) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.

Decision

    8. The decision promulgated on 16 August 2016 did involve the making  of
       an error of law sufficient to require it to  be  set  aside  and  the
       appeal to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is set
       aside and the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal with  the
       following directions;

        i) The decision upon  the  appeal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved. The appeal is not  to  be  listed  before
           Judge Fox.

       ii) A Tigrinyan interpreter is  required  for  the  hearing  of  the
           appeal.

      iii) There are anticipated to be  only  one  witness,  and  the  time
           estimate is as a result, 3 hours.

       iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available  date  at  the
           North Shields hearing centre after 30  November  2016  for  full
           hearing. No further Directions hearing is presently  anticipated
           to be necessary. Should the Appellant anticipate  this  position
           will change, she must inform the Tribunal immediately, providing
           full details of what (if any) further evidence she seeks to rely
           upon.

        v) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes
Dated 21 November 2016
