
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03138/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 September 2017                  |On 22 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Cranbrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is a national of India born  on  [  ]  1986.
    The Appellant first entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  25
    December 2009, having been issued with a Tier 4 Student visa valid  for
    a year from 14 October 2009.  He made subsequent applications for leave
    to remain as a student but his leave expired following  the  exhaustion
    of appeal rights after 17  November  2011.   The  Appellant  thereafter
    overstayed.  On 6 August 2014 he was encountered during an  immigration
    enforcement visit and was served with notice as an immigration offender
    and granted temporary release.

 2. On 7 July 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to remain under the  ten
    year route, viz. Article 8 private and family life.   That  application
    was refused on 17 November 2015.  No appeal appears to have been lodged
    against that decision and on 19 January 2017 the Appellant was detained
    when he reported.

 3. Representations were received on his behalf on 2 February 2017.   These
    were rejected on 10 February 2017.  On 12 February 2017  the  Appellant
    was served with removal directions scheduled for 18 February  2017  and
    two days after that on 14 February 2017 the Appellant  claimed  asylum.
    He received a screening interview on 28 February 2017.  On 9 March 2017
    the Appellant was due to be interviewed substantively in respect of his
    asylum claim but he declined to take part in the interview,  which  was
    then rebooked for 14 March 2017.  On  13  March  2017  the  Appellant's
    solicitor requested that the interview be cancelled and  the  Appellant
    be released  from  detention.   The  following  day,  the  day  of  the
    interview, the Respondent wrote to the Appellant's solicitor  informing
    them that the interview would proceed.  However, the Appellant  refused
    to be interviewed and his solicitor did not attend.

 4. A decision was made to refuse asylum on 24 March 2017.   The  Appellant
    appealed against that decision and his appeal was listed for hearing at
    Harmondsworth on 24 April 2017.  Two weeks prior to the appeal  hearing
    on 10 April 2017 the Appellant's solicitors made an application for  an
    adjournment.  The basis of that application provides as follows:

         "Our client is  currently  awaiting  a  full  medical  report  from
         medical expert witness Alliance [part of the sentence  is  missing]
         confirm it will take up to four to five weeks to obtain a  complete
         medical report on the medical psychiatric condition of  our  client
         if he is to return to India."

       Reference is then made to paragraph 8.36 or  8.38A  of  the  Tribunal
       Guidance  Note  on  Case  Management  Review  Hearings  relating   to
       adjournment requests.  The letter then continues:

         "An expert report in the case would help determine how removing the
         client from the United Kingdom would effect his health be it mental
         or physical."

       The adjournment request was refused on 19 April 2017 "because  it  is
       not clear how a medical report will  assist  the  Appellant.   It  is
       noted that he said at his screening interview that  he  was  fit  and
       well and not taking medication."

 5. The adjournment request was  renewed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at the hearing on 24 April 2017.  The judge deals  with  this  as
    follows:

         "21. The second was a renewed application  for  an  adjournment  to
         obtain a psychiatric report.  I enquired what it was that was  said
         to need for a report.  It was atrocities witnessed as  a  child  in
         the 1980s which could go to credibility,  and  there  had  been  no
         asylum interview as yet.  The Secretary  of  State  said  that  the
         Appellant was obstructive, but the Appellant was happy to  give  an
         interview, though not while in detention.  I enquired as to whether
         that was a legitimate position for an illegal  immigrant  to  take.
         Counsel observed that it might be that mental health  reasons  were
         the cause of this: but the main reason for the application was that
         there was only a full refusal letter on the morning of the hearing.

         ...

         25. I declined to adjourn the appeal on the basis of the seeking of
         a medical report.  It was too late, and  not  raised  before.   The
         objections given by the judge refusing the application were  sound,
         as were those of the Home Office Presenting Officer",

       who had opposed the adjournment request, bearing in mind:

         "22. The Appellant had made applications since 2009 on the basis of
         being a student in the UK ...  There  had  been  no  mention  of  a
         medical report before the recent request, it was not  said  in  the
         screening interview and there was no mention of  medical  treatment
         being sought, ever."

 6. The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal on the basis:

         "63. This is a fabricated claim.  The Appellant has  made  multiple
         applications and  lodged  two  appeals.   Even  when  arrested  and
         detained he still made no application for asylum and  did  so  only
         after removal directions were  made,  and  with  the  intention  of
         frustrating them, as he admitted.   The  perusal  of  the  evidence
         given in the hearing shows that wherever the Appellant's  claim  is
         examined in any detail the contradictions were revealed.   When  he
         dealt with one issue examination of the claim in the light of  that
         response opened up even bigger chasms of credibility."

 7. It is apparent from the papers and from the judge's decision  that  the
    basis of the Appellant's claim is that although he is a Hindu he was  a
    supporter of the Khalistan movement as was his father and  his  family,
    who had been treated as traitors by the wider family because this is  a
    Sikh organisation.  This is set out at [30] of  the  judge's  decision.
    The Appellant asserted that his father had been  arrested  in  1984  by
    police and beaten and detained, that during his childhood "he witnessed
    violence and harassment from the police  his  wider  family  and  local
    Hindus". He stated that in  2008  he  was  detained  with  friends  and
    tortured until they accepted they were  connected  with  the  Khalistan
    movement and  the  Pakistani  Intelligence  Agency.   They  denied  the
    allegations and were released after one week.   As  a  consequence,  in
    2009 his father arranged through an agent for the  Appellant  to  leave
    India to come to the UK to study and start a fresh life.

 8. It is further recorded the Appellant stated:

         "30.4.   ...  He was scared  that  if  he  told  of  his  political
                affiliation with the KM to the authorities or anyone in  the
                UK he might find himself in difficulty.

         30.5.    After living his life peacefully in the UK  for  the  last
                eight years he forgot about his horrible  past  and  started
                believing that his life in the UK would  continue.   He  did
                not approach the Home Office about this before,  as  he  was
                scared that if the Home Office sent him  back  to  India  he
                would have to face persecution.

         30.6.    He refused  to  be  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office  in
                detention as it brought back the memories  of  the  violence
                that he had seen all his life in India."

 9. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge had erred materially in law in failing  to  adjourn  the  appeal.
    The grounds of appeal assert at [6] that the decision falls foul of the
    overriding objective and the Presidential Guidance set out  in  Nwaigwe
    [2014] UKUT 00418, which sets out that the test to be applied  is  that
    of fairness rather than whether the Tribunal acted reasonably.

10. The grounds assert at [7]:

         "7. It is submitted that the expert report was intended  to  go  to
         the Appellant's credibility and that this is not a  case  in  which
         there has been a delay on behalf  of  the  Appellant  or  those  he
         instructed; the decision under challenge being dated 24 March  2017
         and the hearing taking place on 24 April 2017.   The  report  would
         have gone to the crux of the Appellant's credibility in  this  case
         and the failure to grant an adjournment amounts to a material error
         given that the First-tier Tribunal Judge then goes  on  to  make  a
         number of adverse credibility findings and to  ultimately  conclude
         that the claim was fabricated."

11. A challenge was also brought to the judge's  finding  at  66  where  he
    stated:

         "66. I have considered and rejected the  implicit  suggestion  that
         the Appellant has something akin to posttraumatic  stress  disorder
         so that he suppresses consideration of these trauma.  He is  simply
         untruthful to seek to remain in the UK."

12. [12] of the grounds asserts that the  finding  at  [66]  amplifies  the
    error in failing to adjourn the appeal because, in  the  absence  of  a
    medical report commenting on his mental health and without any  medical
    knowledge or jurisdiction, the judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he suffers from PTSD.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum  on  17
    July 2017 on the following basis:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in
         not granting an adjournment  to  enable  a  medical  report  to  be
         obtained in  circumstances  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         rejected the 'implicit suggestion' at [66] that the  Appellant  was
         suffering PTSD which he sought to advance by way of explanation for
         the lack of candidness in his previous applications."







  Hearing

14. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Sharma  on  behalf
    of the Appellant and Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Respondent.  Mr  Sharma
    sought to rely on the fact there  was  a  very  short  period  of  time
    between the Respondent's decision and the appeal hearing  during  which
    time the Appellant was in detention  and  had  been  in  detention  for
    several months.  There was insufficient  time  to  prepare  his  appeal
    fully and the Appellant needed medical support.   Mr  Sharma  submitted
    that the medical evidence was material to the issue of delay as it  was
    clear from [34] of the judge's decision that  the  Appellant  had  been
    frightened in India and he was scared as to what would happen to him if
    he made his claim known in the United Kingdom.

15. Mr Sharma submitted that the crux of the credibility  finding  was  the
    lateness of the making of the asylum claim and the  report  could  have
    dealt with this.  He also sought to rely on the fact that at  [66]  the
    judge's finding was made without any medical evidence being before  him
    and he relied on the Presidential  Guidance  decision  of  Nwaigwe  (op
    cit).

16. In his response, Mr Tarlow sought to rely  on  the  Rule  24  response.
    This is dated 27 July 2017 and asserts that the judge was  entitled  to
    refuse an adjournment request  in  order  to  obtain  medical  evidence
    because it appeared at [22] that this was only raised  at  the  hearing
    and had not been raised previously.  However,  that  is  not  factually
    correct in light  of  the  fact  that  a  written  application  for  an
    adjournment was made on 10 April 2017 and rejected.  Therefore the Rule
    24 response does not take the Respondent's case any further.

17. Mr Tarlow also sought to rely upon the Appellant's answers as given  in
    the screening interview at section 2,  part  2,  health/special  needs,
    where it is recorded that the Appellant stated  that  he  was  fit  and
    well, he was not on medication, and at paragraph  2.3  when  asked  "is
    there anything else you would like to tell me about  your  physical  or
    mental health?" it appears to be recorded that the Appellant said  that
    he was "mentally okay".  Mr Tarlow  pointed  out  the  fact  that  this
    interview took place on 28 February and the hearing  before  the  judge
    was on 24 April, therefore approximately only eight weeks later.

18. Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge's findings at [25] and  [26]  as  to
    his reasons for declining to adjourn  the  appeal  were  open  to  him.
    Those reasons were adequate.   There  was  no  material  error  in  the
    decision.

19. In his response Mr Sharma pointed out that the basis of the application
    for permission to appeal was a substantive, not  a  reasons  challenge,
    i.e. that the judge erred  substantively  in  failing  to  adjourn  the
    appeal.

20. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.




  Decision

21. I have given careful consideration to the evidence in  support  of  the
    appeal, the appeal decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego,  the
    grounds of appeal, the grant of permission, the screening interview and
    the previous adjournment request of 10  April  2017  and  the  decision
    refusing to grant that adjournment request.  I have also considered the
    decision in Nwaigwe (op cit).

22. In light of the evidence before me, I have concluded that there  is  no
    material error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego.  The Appellant has resided in the United Kingdom  since  2009.
    At no stage prior to 10 April 2017 was  there  any  indication  of  any
    issues relating to his mental or physical  health.   In  his  screening
    interview of 28 February 2017 he expressly disavowed  any  issues  with
    his physical or mental health and he declined to undergo a  substantive
    interview and thus missed the opportunity to put any issues forward  at
    that stage.  That was his own choice.

23. The terms of the adjournment request of 10 April  2017,  this  make  no
    reference to how it is that any medical report could assist in  respect
    of the overriding objective and a proper determination of  the  appeal.
    It simply asserts that an expert medical report would help  determining
    how removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom would  affect  his
    health.  It does not assert that such a report  would  be  material  in
    assessing the delay in making an asylum claim  or  the  credibility  of
    that claim, both of which were clearly very much in issue in  light  of
    the terms of the Secretary of State's  refusal  decision  of  24  March
    2017.

24. Whilst submissions were made before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and
    additional reasons given as to why such a report would be  material,  I
    consider that the reasons provided by the judge, in particular at  [25]
    of his decision, were adequate to justify his  refusal  to  adjourn  on
    that basis.  There was no indication  either  in  the  Appellant's  own
    words at the screening interview, nor in the adjournment request of  10
    April 2017, nor before the judge that the Appellant was suffering  from
    a mental health condition. In those circumstances I find the submission
    from Counsel recorded at [21] that it related to  atrocities  witnessed
    as a child in the 1980s which could  go  to  credibility  was  far  too
    speculative a basis upon which, absent any evidential support for  that
    submission, the judge was obliged to adjourn the appeal.

25. Similarly, in respect of the judge's  impugned  finding  at  [66],  the
    judge there rejected the implicit suggestion  that  the  Appellant  has
    something akin to posttraumatic stress disorder which has  impacted  on
    his ability to put his case forward, I find the judge was  entitled  to
    reach that conclusion on the basis of an absence of any evidence before
    him or any indication by the Appellant that  this  was,  in  fact,  the
    position.

26. I do not consider that the decision in Nwaigwe means that in order  for
    an appeal to be fair it  is  necessary  to  accede  to  an  adjournment
    request in each and every situation.  Whilst  the  turnaround  in  this
    case between the Respondent's decision and the  appeal  may  have  been
    relatively short, this is not a  case  where  the  Appellant  had  just
    arrived in the United Kingdom and I therefore do not accept the analogy
    at [8] of the grounds of appeal  that  this  can  be  compared  to  the
    Detained Fast Track scheme, bearing in  mind  that  the  Appellant  had
    resided continuously in the United Kingdom since 2009.

27. For the reasons set out above I find no material error of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego  and  that  decision  is
    therefore upheld.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 21 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

