
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03349/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Meikle, instructed by Bond Adams LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania who was born on 20  March  1988.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 August 2017 with  a  six  month
    business visa.

 3. On 15 December 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.  The  basis  of  her
    claim was that she came from a Muslim family and her father was an Imam
    in the mosque.  She had begun a secret relationship with a man, who was
    a Christian, and as a  result  of  that  relationship  she  had  become
    pregnant.   Her parents discovered her pregnancy and, as a consequence,
    her father considered that she had brought dishonour and  shame  on  to
    the family and mistreated her.  She claimed that, whilst  out  walking,
    she was approached by three men and held by them for two or three  days
    when she was  raped.   She  believed  that  her  father  was  involved.
    Following her release, she was able, through contact with an  old  man,
    to contact her mother who arranged through an agent for  her  to  leave
    Tanzania.  The appellant feared that on return she would be at risk  as
    a lone woman returning fearing an honour killing.

 4. On 23 February 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Her appeal was heard
    by Judge Suffield-Thompson on 24 April 2018.   The  appellant  was  not
    legally represented and was assisted at the hearing by an interpreter.

 6. In her determination, Judge Suffield-Thompson rejected the  appellant's
    account and that, therefore, she was at risk on return to Tanzania.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal.   Permission  was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 18 September 2018  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Plimmer) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. The sole ground upon which permission to appeal was sought and  granted
    was set out in para 2 of UTJ Plimmer's decision as follows:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's adverse  credibility
         finding was at least partly based upon an  arguably  misplaced  and
         irrelevant impression of the appellant's English ability - see [33]
         of the decision".

 9. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

The Submissions

10. Mr Meikle, who represented the appellant relied upon a  short  skeleton
    argument which he developed in his  oral  submissions.    He  submitted
    that the judge had materially erred in  law  in  reaching  her  adverse
    credibility finding by taking into account her impression,  based  upon
    the appellant  at  the  hearing,  that  "her  English  was  of  a  good
    standard".  In reaching that conclusion in para 33, Mr Meikle submitted
    that the judge had  no  expertise  in  assessing  English  and  it  was
    improper for her to reach such a finding.  Further,  that  finding  had
    been material to the judge's assessment of the evidence  in  particular
    in paras 36 and 39.  In para 36, Mr  Meikle  submitted  the  judge  had
    rejected the appellant's account of being brought up in a strict Muslim
    household and had concluded:

         "I find it far more likely that the appellant is an educated  woman
         from an educated family who allowed her to study and work, which is
         why her English is so good and that they paid for her  to  come  to
         the UK".

11. Mr Meikle submitted that the judge had used her view of the appellant's
    facility in English to support her rejection of the appellant's account
    and to make a positive finding that she was "an educated woman from  an
    educated family who allowed her to study and work".

12. As regard para 39, Mr Meikle submitted that the judge had rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that her visa, as a  business  visitor,  had  been
    obtained by an agent found by her mother.    It  was  not  the  genuine
    basis for her visit.  He submitted that the judge's view in respect  of
    this was tainted by her  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  a  good
    standard of English.

13. Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State  accepted  that  the
    judge should not in para 33 have found that the appellant spoke a "good
    standard" of English.  He accepted that the  judge  did  not  have  the
    expertise to reach such a view.  However, he submitted that that  error
    was not material, he submitted that the judge had only referred to  the
    appellant's English being "good" in para  36.    The  judge  had  given
    other reasons for disbelieving the appellant and, in para 39,  had  not
    accepted the genuineness of her business visa on  the  basis  that  her
    application would have been checked by an ECO and would have been found
    to be false.

Discussion

14. The judge dealt with the appellant's facility in the  English  language
    at para 33 as follows:

         "I turn first to the oral evidence of the Appellant, not only  what
         she said but also how she gave her  evidence.   The  Appellant  had
         asked for the assistance of the Tribunal  interpreter  but  it  was
         clear that she understood much of what was said in English although
         when asked how good her English was she said it was not  very  good
         and she could make basic conversation.  I find her English was of a
         good standard as it was clear she understood most of the  questions
         put to her before the interpreter translated them".

15. It was common ground  between  the  parties  that  the  judge  was  not
    entitled to reach this finding.  I agree.  The judge had  no  expertise
    in assessing the appellant's facility in English.   The appellant  gave
    her evidence and conducted the proceedings on  her  behalf  through  an
    interpreter.   Her  outward  demeanour,  apparently  in   understanding
    questions put to her before the interpreter translated them, was not  a
    proper basis upon  which  to  find  that  the  appellant  had  a  "good
    standard" of English.  It was not a proper basis on which to reject her
    evidence, presumably given through the interpreter,  that  her  English
    was "not very good" and that she could make "basic conversation".

16. That error was,  in  my  judgment,  material  to  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding. Although the judge gave a number  of  reasons  for
    disbelieving the appellant, I am unable to conclude  that  her  adverse
    credibility finding would necessarily have been the same  had  she  not
    taken into account her conclusion that  the  appellant  spoke  a  "good
    standard" of English.

17. First, at para 36 the judge  was  influenced  in  reaching  a  positive
    finding contrary to the appellant's account,  in  part,  self-evidently
    because of her conclusion as to the appellant's  facility  in  English.
    At para 36 the judge said this:

         "The Appellant  was  asked  about  her  education.   She  told  the
         Tribunal that she had been to senior school  leaving  in  2012  and
         that in 2014 she went to college to study hospitality.   When asked
         why there had been a gap she said that her father had been  against
         her studying and then her mother persuaded him to  let  her  go  to
         college.  I do not find this plausible.  The Appellant comes  from,
         she claims, a very strict Muslim household where her  mother  makes
         cakes and her father is an Imam so I do not accept that her  father
         would have allowed her to have gone to college if she  really  were
         brought up in the strict household that she claims.  I also do  not
         accept that, in a family such as the one she describes, her  father
         would have given in to the mother's request and allowed her  to  go
         to college.  I find it far more likely that  the  Appellant  is  an
         educated woman from an educated family who allowed her to study and
         work, which is why her English is so good and that  they  paid  for
         her to come to the UK".

18. Leaving aside whether  the  judge  was  entitled,  in  the  absence  of
    supporting background evidence to conclude that in coming from a strict
    Muslim household her father would have allowed her to  go  to  college,
    she made a positive finding that is contrary to the appellant's claimed
    background in part influenced by the  fact  that  "her  English  is  so
    good".

19. Secondly, in para 39, the judge rejected the appellant's  account  that
    her business visa was not one genuinely obtained but was, at the behest
    of her mother, obtained by an agent in order to facilitate her entry to
    the UK.  The judge's reasoning was as follows:

         "Secondly, on 23 June 2017 the Appellant applied for a  visit  visa
         to come to the UK and the application form is in  the  Respondent's
         bundle (page D7-D15).  She applied to come to the UK  to  attend  a
         conference for business for a firm  called  Katutura  Oil  and  Gas
         company.  She had a passport at that time or  she  could  have  not
         have applied for the visa.  She stated that the agent had  invented
         these details and yet wage slips were provided and  a  letter  from
         her employer and all of these would have been checked by the  Entry
         Clearance Officer and there is nothing before the Tribunal  to  say
         that on checking these details were found to be false".

20. Whilst the judge does not make specific reference to her  finding  that
    the appellant had a "good standard of English" in para 39, I accept  Mr
    Miekle's submission that the rejection of  her  account  that  she  had
    falsely come as a business visitor, was influenced by the fact that the
    judge considered she was a "educated woman from an educated family"  in
    part based upon the judge's view as to her facility in English.

21. Finally, I accept Mr Miekle's submission that in reaching  her  finding
    in respect of the appellant's facility in English in para 33, the judge
    necessarily  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  her  claimed
    standard of English.  That was, of course, to make an  adverse  finding
    as to her veracity.  There was, as was  common  ground  before  me,  no
    proper basis for making that adverse finding and therefore calling into
    question the appellant's veracity on the issue of her ability to  speak
    English.  That was, likewise, inevitably a factor which counted against
    the appellant in the judge's overall assessment of her credibility.

22. It was, in my judgment, unfortunate that  the  judge  engaged  upon  an
    assessment of the appellant's ability in the  English  language.   That
    'false start' to her assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility  upon
    which, the judge accepted, the appeal  "stands  and  falls"  materially
    contributed to  her  adverse  credibility  finding  despite  her  other
    reasons which are not challenged.  It may well be that the judge  could
    have reached her adverse finding without any  reference  to  the  issue
    concerning the appellant's ability  in  English.   However,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the outcome was inevitable and  that,  therefore,  I  am
    satisfied that the error was material.

23. As a consequence, the judge's adverse credibility finding and  decision
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal cannot stand.

Decision

24. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

25. Given the nature and extent of fact finding required and having  regard
    to para 7.2 of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  as  was
    accepted by both representatives before me, the proper disposal of this
    appeal in the light of the material error of law is that it is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other
    than Judge Suffield-Thompson.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                24 June 2019
