
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03917/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MNA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Imamovic, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (MNA).  A failure to comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 22 June 2001.
     He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  17  June  2016.   The  appellant
    claimed that he had been targeted by the Taliban for recruitment  while
    living in Laghman province and that subsequently, when his family moved
    to Jalalabad and Kabul, he had been propositioned by men.   He  claimed
    that he had no close family in Afghanistan.  His father had been killed
    when he was young and his mother and one brother had, he believed, been
    killed in a bomb blast near Kabul.  His other brother lived in the  UK.



 4. On 6 April 2017, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Asjad
    accepted the appellant's evidence as credible, including that he had no
    close family in Afghanistan to provide support to him, and  that  as  a
    returning child he belonged to a particular social  group  and  was  at
    risk on return applying AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG  [2012]
    UKUT 0016 (IAC) and  LQ  (Age:  immutable  characteristic)  Afghanistan
    [2008] UKAIT 0005.  The judge allowed the appellant's claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on essentially two grounds.  First, the judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reasoning why the appellant  had  no  family  support  in
    Afghanistan if he were returned there.  In particular, in reaching  her
    adverse finding, the judge had failed to resolve a discrepancy  in  the
    evidence between the appellant and his brother as to whether the family
    had any land in Afghanistan which, the appellant claimed, had been sold
    to allow him to travel to the UK.  Secondly, the judge had  been  wrong
    to apply the decision in LQ which had subsequently been "clarified"  in
    a number of Court of Appeal cases.

 7. On 20 September 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Martins)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 8. On 15 October 2017, the appellant filed a rule  24  notice  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Hibbs at the  outset  indicated
    that he had nothing to add or wished to say additional to the  grounds.



10. Ms Imamovic, who represented the  appellant,  relied  upon  a  skeleton
    argument (prepared by previous Counsel) and her rule 24 notice.

11. Ms Imamovic submitted that the judge had been entitled to find that the
    appellant had no family in Afghanistan and was, as a  returning  child,
    as a consequence at risk applying LQ.  She submitted that the judge had
    made a clear positive credibility  finding  accepting  the  appellant's
    account, first, that the Taliban attempted to recruit him when he lived
    in Lakhman province and that he had been propositioned by men following
    a move to Jalalabad and Kabul and was, in effect, a  victim  of  sexual
    abuse.

12. Ms Imamovic submitted that the judge was entitled also  to  accept  the
    appellant's account that he had no family in  Afghanistan  and  only  a
    brother in the UK.  The judge was entitled to reach that  finding  even
    though there was a discrepancy between the appellant's account  (namely
    that with the help of his landlord he had sold land in  Afghanistan  to
    pay an agent) and that of his brother (at his brother's interview) that
    the family had no land.  Ms Imamovic pointed out that  the  appellant's
    brother had come to the UK eight years  before  the  appellant  and  he
    might, therefore, be unaware  of  land  subsequently  acquired  by  the
    family.  Ms Imamovic submitted there  was  no  material  error  by  the
    judge.

13. In his brief reply, Mr Hibbs acknowledged that the judge  had  believed
    the appellant.  In relation to the land, he submitted that it might  be
    that either the appellant or his brother was not telling the truth.  In
    any event, Mr Hibbs did not seek to expand upon the grounds of  appeal.
    He acknowledged that, if the appellant's account was accepted, then  he
    would be  returning  as  an  unaccompanied  minor  with  a  history  of
    attempted recruitment and a potential victim of sexual abuse.  Mr Hibbs
    did not seek to argue that, in those circumstances, the judge  was  not
    entitled to find that the  appellant  was  at  risk  for  a  Convention
    reason.

14. The judge's determination is relatively short.  It will be helpful if I
    set out the central parts of her determination and her reasoning.

15. At para 4, the judge set out the appellant's claim as follows:

         "4.  The Appellant was born and raised in a village in the  Lakhman
             province of Afghanistan.  His father died when  he  was  young
             and he lived  in  Afghanistan  with  his  mother  and  younger
             brother.  He attended school from the age of 7 to 4 years  and
             then worked for about 18 months.  He was approached  at  least
             twice by the Taliban who asked him to join.  His  family  were
             threatened and so his family moved to the Ninghahar  province.
             He  worked  for  a  while  and  was  approached  by  men   who
             propositioned him and so the family left that  area  as  well.
             They moved to Kabul and one day his mother and brother did not
             return from work and the Appellant  believes  that  they  were
             killed in a bomb blast near Kabul.  He continued to  work  and
             was again propositioned by men.  His landlord  helped  him  to
             sell his land in Afghanistan and he used an  agent  to  leave.
             He fears that he will be forced to  join  the  Taliban  if  he
             returns to Afghanistan and he has no one to  live  with.   His
             brother is in the UK and has applied for British citizenship".

16. Then at para 6, the judge turned to consider the appellant's claim  and
    some aspects of the Secretary of State's reasoning that had led her not
    to believe the appellant:

         "6.  The Appellant's account begins  with  events  in  the  Laghman
             province where  he  states  that  on  two  occasions,  he  was
             approached by the Taliban and asked to join them.  It is clear
             from the reasons for refusal letter at paragraphs  19-21  that
             it is accepted that the Taliban did have  a  presence  in  the
             Laghman province at the time  and  were  targeting  young  and
             vulnerable people for  recruitment.   The  Appellant  and  his
             family moved to another area because of this and this does not
             appear to have been disputed  by  the  Respondent.   The  next
             aspect of the Appellant's  claim  is  based  on  the  untoward
             attention he received in both the Ninghahar province and Kabul
             where he was propositioned  by  men.   The  Respondent  simply
             notes that the Appellant was able to run away and so concludes
             that he  has  failed  to  establish  that  he  was  personally
             targeted  by  men  in  Jalabad  and  Kabul.    However,   that
             conclusion does not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant was credible about  the  reasons  why  he  left  the
             Laghman province and the reasoning does not  explain  why  the
             mere fact that the Appellant ran away leads to the  conclusion
             that he was not approached in the way that he  claims.   Since
             coming to the UK, the Appellant has been  receiving  treatment
             and therapy for abuse that he suffered in Afghanistan  and  in
             assessing the credibility of this aspect  his  claim,  I  have
             considered letters and reports from a number of  professionals
             involved in the Appellant's claim".

17. Then, having set out the guidance in dealing with medical reports in JL
    (medical report - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC),  the  judge
    continued at paras 8-11 to consider the expert evidence concerning  the
    appellant's mental health as follows:

         "8.  There is a report  from  Dr  Lucy  Arnsby-Wilson  a  Chartered
             Clinical Psychologist to whom the Appellant was  referred  for
             psychotherapy and counselling  assessment  for  stress,  sleep
             problems, grief counselling and PTSD.  This referral was  made
             on the 20th of October 2016.  At the time that the  assessment
             was made, the Appellant was noted to be at  moderate  risk  of
             self-harm.  Her assessment began with a consultation with  the
             Appellant's foster carers who believed that the Appellant  had
             been sexually abused in Kabul.  Dr Arnsby-Wilson then met  the
             Appellant with the assistance from a Pashto  interpreter  whom
             he specifically requested as he  had  disclosed  events  on  a
             different occasion before this interpreter and did not was  to
             repeat this to others.  I  note  from  the  account  that  the
             Appellant gave to Dr Arnsby-Wilson, that he was consistent  in
             the events that led  him  to  leave  their  village  and  then
             eventually end up in Kabul.  He recounted learning that  there
             had been a bomb  blast  and  believing  that  his  mother  and
             brother had been killed as they did not return.  He  indicated
             that he lived on his own but became increasingly vulnerable to
             men.  He went onto describe vivid nightmares  of  men  holding
             him down.  In a later session with the Appellant, he  admitted
             that he had been sexually abused and mentioned 'they also made
             their friends come too' but Dr Arnsby-Wilson was unable to ask
             further questions as it  was  'clearly  very  distressing  for
             him'.

         9.   During  some  of  the  relaxation  session,  Dr  Arnsby-Wilson
             observed that the Appellant was visibly tired due to a lack of
             sleep  and  had  fallen  asleep  during   the   session   with
             'considerable spasms/twitching which she noted  was  'commonly
             seen in young people experiencing the effects  of  a  trauma'.
             Dr Arnsby-Wilson opined that the Appellant was suffering  with
             severe post-traumatic stress which was in accordance with  his
             presentation,  reports  from  his  foster  family  and   other
             information  and  symptoms  that  he  presented   during   the
             assessment.

         10.  The observations that  were  noted  by  Dr  Arnby-Wilson  were
             echoed in letters from the Appellant's Social Worker, as  well
             Rebecca Francis from the 'Gloucestershire Action for  Refugees
             and Asylum Seekers' and his foster  carers.   There  was  also
             corroborative evidence from the Appellant's  head  teacher  in
             which it was noted that the Appellant fell asleep  in  lessons
             and suffered  headaches  requiring  medication.   Again,  this
             supported what Dr Arnsby-Wilson has said in her report.

         11.  Taking account of Dr Arnsby-Wilson's  report  along  with  the
             letters and testimony from the other professionals involved in
             the Appellant's care I find that they are compatible with  his
             account of having been propositioned and potentially  sexually
             abused by men whilst  living  in  Afghanistan.   I  take  into
             account that the Respondent relies heavily on  the  fact  that
             the Appellant's brother is in the UK  and  the  suggestion  is
             that the Appellant has simply migrated to the UK to  join  him
             which is why his brother did not attend to give evidence.  But
             I find that the evidence given by his foster carers  explained
             his brother's absence at court.  Sheena Raxster explained that
             the Appellant refused to  tell  his  brother  about  what  had
             happened to him in Afghanistan and at one point asked  her  to
             intervene and stop him from doing so.  The explanation for his
             brother's absence was once again  consistent  with  events  in
             Afghanistan.  The fact that the Appellant's brother is in  the
             UK - does not on its own  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  his
             account is not credible".

18. Then, at paras 12-13, the judge made her findings in  relation  to  the
    appellant's risk on return to Afghanistan as follows:

         12.  "The lower standard of proof applies and  in  the  Appellant's
             case, taking account of his age, his mental illness as well as
             physical difficulties which were  clearly  identified  in  the
             evidence of all the  professionals  -  he  has  established  a
             consistent and credible account of events in Afghanistan which
             as noted earlier were to a degree  consistent  with  objective
             information.  Indeed even the cases of AA and LQ identify  the
             risk that vulnerable children who have no familial support  in
             Afghanistan are exposed to.  The headnote in AA  (Afghanistan)
             and the case of LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan
             [2008] UKAIT states that

             [2]  ... the background evidence demonstrates that  unattached
                  children returned to  Afghanistan,  depending  upon  their
                  individual circumstances and the location  to  which  they
                  are returned, may be exposed  to  risk  of  serious  harm,
                  inter   alia   from   indiscriminate   violence,    forced
                  recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and  a  lack  of
                  adequate arrangements for child  protection.   Such  risks
                  will have to be taken into  account  when  addressing  the
                  question of whether  a  return  is  in  the  child's  best
                  interests, a  primary  consideration  when  determining  a
                  claim to humanitarian protection.

         13.  Having found that the Appellant did receive propositions  from
             men and was potentially (on the lower  standard  of  proof)  a
             victim of sexual abuse, I accept his evidence that he  had  no
             family support  in  Afghanistan  when  this  took  place.   LQ
             (Afghanistan) found that age is an immutable characteristic so
             that Afghan minors can form a  particular  social  group  when
             considering whether a minor is entitled to refugee status.   I
             take into account that questions were  raised  about  how  the
             Appellant was able to leave Afghanistan by selling land  which
             according to his brother's interview they did not have  -  but
             that is one inconsistency that I am  unable  to  resolve.   As
             noted the Appellant has established  his  case  on  the  lower
             standard of proof and accordingly he is  entitled  to  refugee
             protection and so his appeal against the refusal of asylum  is
             allowed".

19. The Secretary of State does not challenge the judge's acceptance of the
    appellant's account apart from the one aspect of it, namely that he has
    no family in Afghanistan.  There is, in my judgment,  no  proper  basis
    upon which the judge's acceptance of the appellant's account in general
    can be challenged.  In particular, the judge  fully  and  appropriately
    took into account the expert evidence from  Dr  Arnsby-Wilson  and  her
    conclusion that the appellant was suffering from  severe  PTSD.   There
    were letters of support from the appellant's social worker  and  others
    which supported the appellant's case and the veracity of his account.

20.  The  circumstances  which  the  appellant   relied   upon   were   not
    inconsistent, and  it  is  not  suggested  that  they  were,  with  the
    background evidence concerning the activities of the Taliban.

21. The only  matter  which  did  not  sit  wholly  consistently  with  the
    appellant being a truthful witness was the discrepancy in his  evidence
    and that of his brother when he claimed asylum some years before.   The
    appellant claimed that he had sold family land to pay an agent but  the
    appellant's brother  said  there  was  no  family  land.   It  was  not
    incumbent upon the judge to resolve every issue raised by the evidence.
     As is clear from her reasoning in para 13, the judge did  not  resolve
    this apparent conflict  and  did  not  consider  that  it  was  of  any
    significance in reaching her positive credibility finding.  That was  a
    view which, in my judgment, the judge was entitled to take.  It did not
    relate to the core of the appellant's claim.  As  both  representatives
    acknowledged before me,  there  could  be  a  number  of  explanations,
    including a change of circumstances, for the difference in the evidence
    bearing in mind that the appellant's brother came to  the  UK  and  was
    interviewed eight years before the appellant.  In any event, the  judge
    gave full and adequate reasons for accepting that the appellant  was  a
    witness of truth.  She  did  so  in  full  knowledge  of  the  apparent
    inconsistency on the single issue of  whether  the  appellant's  family
    owned land in Afghanistan.

22. As Mr Hibbs frankly acknowledged,  despite  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal, the judge  accepted  the  appellant  as  a  credible
    witness.  That finding is  not,  in  substance,  challenged.   It  was,
    therefore, open to the judge to accept the appellant's account that  he
    had no family left in Afghanistan.

23. For these reasons, the judge did not materially err in law in  reaching
    her factual findings.

24. As I have already indicated, Mr Hibbs did not seek to press a  case  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that if the appellant's  account  were
    accepted, nevertheless it was not properly open to  the  judge  on  the
    basis of cases such as AA and LQ to find that he would be  at  risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason as a returning child with no family
    and with his accepted history of attempted recruitment by  the  Taliban
    and  a  target  of  sexual  abuse  by  men.   Given   the   appellant's
    vulnerability, that he is a child and would have no family  support  on
    return to Afghanistan, the judge's finding that he would be at risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason is, in my  judgment,  unassailable.



25. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not materially err in law in allowing  the
    appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   That  decision,  therefore,
    stands.

26. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              23, March 2018

