
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03920/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2020                           |On 3 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     TLP
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bashow, instructed by Legal Justice solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 2000 and is a female citizen of Vietnam.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 12 April 2019 refusing her application for international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, decision promulgated on 1  October
    2019, dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  but  allowed  it  on
    humanitarian  protection  grounds.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal in respect of the asylum appeal.

 2. The judge found that the appellant was a  victim  of  trafficking  from
    Vietnam for the purposes of sexual  exploitation.  He  dealt  with  the
    appeal on asylum grounds at [13-14]. Directing  himself  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg  6)  [2008]
    UKAIT 00002, he observed that that case stressed the need to  determine
    whether former victims of  trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation  were
    entitled to asylum protection by reference to the facts of the case and
    prevailing and specific country conditions. He noted that the issue had
    not been  addressed  in  submissions  before  him  and  concluded  that
    trafficking victims in Vietnam 'are not recognised in law as forming  a
    particular social group  within  the  Convention's  ambit'.  The  judge
    concluded that, 'in view of the Regulations' criteria  and  case  law',
    the appellant does not fall within the definition of a 1951  Convention
    particular social group in Vietnam. He found that  'whilst  trafficking
    victims  do  share  the  immutable  o  characteristic  of  having  been
    trafficked, they are not perceived as different or  having  a  distinct
    identity in Vietnamese society. They are also regarded as equal  before
    the law and state protection is generally available to them.'

 3. Ms Bashow, who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, submitted that the judge had, having rejected the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, proceeded to make findings on the  background  material
    relating to Vietnam which should have led him to  reverse  his  initial
    finding and to conclude that the appellant was a member of a particular
    social group. The judge  had  observed  [18]  that  victims  of  sexual
    trafficking on  return  to  Vietnam  faced  'tremendous  difficulty  in
    reintegrating  into  their  communities.  Stigmatised  by  society  and
    traumatised by  their  experience,  they  generally  do  not  have  the
    education skills necessary for gainful employment. These women  are  at
    high risk of being re-trafficked.' At  [19],  the  judge  considered  a
    report of the Asia Foundation (cited in the  CPIN)  and  indicated  his
    agreement with the findings of that report that victims of  trafficking
    faced  'punishment  from  government  authorities  for  illegal  border
    crossing or stigma from being  labelled  a  prostitute.'  At  [22],  he
    considered a USSD report of 2018  noted  that  'endemic  social  stigma
    associated with victimhood and concerns over retribution in their local
    communities are likely discourage many victims [of sexual  trafficking]
    from seeking or benefiting from protection  services.'  These  findings
    and observations led the judge to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds, an outcome with which the Secretary  of  State  has
    not sought to disagree.

 4. I agree with the submissions of Ms Bashow. I consider  that  the  judge
    was incorrect at [13] to characterise the instant appeal as  lacking  a
    factual basis for a claim on the Convention ground of membership  of  a
    social group. That factual basis did indeed exist in this appeal as the
    judge himself acknowledges in his subsequent analysis. I agree that the
    frequent reference to the stigma of being a victim of  trafficking  for
    sexual  exploitation  lends  significant  weight  to  the   appellant's
    submission that the judge should have concluded that she is a member of
    a particular social group. The main  reason  given  for  rejecting  the
    asylum claim at [14], namely that victims were regarded as equal before
    the law and able to access state  protection  is  contradicted  by  the
    judge himself in his comments regarding the strength  and  ubiquity  of
    the social stigma suffered by victims which prevents them from  seeking
    or benefiting from  protection  services  provided  by  the  Vietnamese
    state. At [25], the judge also quoted with approval the conclusions  of
    the appellant's own expert report to the effect that the  police  force
    in Vietnam 'remains the most corrupt institution in the world' and that
    officers are very likely to collude with traffickers  to  pass  victims
    back into  their  clutches.  Whilst  I  do  not  consider  the  judge's
    conclusions to be  perverse,  I  do  find  that  his  analysis  of  the
    background material and the expert report and the findings  he  reached
    should properly have led him to reconsider his earlier rejection of the
    asylum appeal. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 12 April 2019 is allowed on asylum and  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.


         Signed                              Date 14 February 2020

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


