
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03219/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 September 2018                     |On 4 October 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    [H H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, Counsel, Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 17 March 2017 to refuse  him  asylum
    in the United Kingdom.
2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Egypt  born  on  18  August  2002.   He
    applied for asylum in the UK on 16 September 2016, but this was refused
    and as he was a minor at that  time,  it  was  considered  that  as  an
    unaccompanied minor there were inadequate  reception  arrangements  for
    him in his own country.  As a  result,  he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain.

3.   Permission was granted to the appellant on the  basis  that  it  is  an
    arguable error of law that if the appellant has not been able to  fully
    converse with the court then this may have made a  material  difference
    to the outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings.  The grounds  are
    further strengthened by the detailed statement made by  an  independent
    interpreter who was in attendance on the day of the hearing  and  which
    was attached to the grounds for permission to appeal.

4.    The  judge  stated  that  the  appellant  gave  evidence   through   a
    professional  interpreter.   The  appellant  confirmed  that  both  his
    witness statements in support of his appeal were true and  correct  and
    he relied upon them.  The first witness statement is dated  13  October
    2016 and this was made in support of his asylum claim.  In that witness
    statement he gave his date of birth as 18 February 2000.  He was  asked
    why there was a discrepancy between  that  witness  statement  and  his
    claim was that he was in fact born on 18 August 2002 as stated  by  the
    Home Office on their official documents.  He confirmed that his date of
    birth was in fact 18 August 2002 but when he was in Italy, he was  told
    that if he could show that he was older then he would get  a  room  for
    himself  at  the  camp  where  he  was  staying  with  other  refugees.
    Accordingly, he said he was born on 18 February 2000  whereas  in  fact
    his date of birth was 18 August 2002.  The date of birth of  18  August
    2002 has been accepted by the respondent as being his  actual  date  of
    birth.  Consequently, at the hearing before the judge the appellant was
    15 years old.

5.   The appellant claimed that if he returned to Egypt he would  be  killed
    by the men that his late father owed money to.   His  father  told  him
    that he had to pay 1,000,000 Egyptian pounds to the people he  borrowed
    the money from.  He said he comes from Kafr  El-Shaikh  in  Egypt.   He
    lived there with his mother, brother and two sisters.  His father  died
    about two years prior to his coming to the United Kingdom.  When he was
    alive he was a driver and did removal work.  Before he died he borrowed
    money to set up his own business and this  was  before  the  revolution
    that took place in Egypt in 2011.  After the revolution his father lost
    all he had.

6.   The appellant claimed that on 23 November 2015,  five  men  armed  with
    weapons came to his house at night and demanded that he repay them  the
    money his father had borrowed, or they would kill him and every  member
    of his family.  The next day the appellant fearing for his life as  the
    elder male member of  his  family,  used  his  father's  good  name  to
    persuade a people smuggler to take him out of Egypt  and  he  left  the
    following day from  Alexandria.   The  people  smuggler  contacted  the
    appellant's mother from Alexandria to tell her that the  appellant  was
    leaving Egypt.  That was the last time the appellant  had  any  contact
    with his mother as his mobile phone fell into the sea  on  the  way  to
    Italy.

7.   He claimed he left Egypt on 25 November 2015 and travelled by  boat  to
    Italy, 21 days later and remained there for five months.  He then  made
    his way to Calais, France where he remained  for  four  months  in  the
    jungle before coming to the UK in the back of a lorry.  He  claimed  he
    arrived in the UK on 15 September 2016 and claimed asylum on that date.

8.   It was argued before the  judge  that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness and that his account should be accepted.  Insofar  as  risk  on
    return,  sufficiency  of  protection  and   internal   relocation   was
    concerned, it was argued before the judge that the  relevant  date  for
    the assessment of risk was the date of the hearing, that the  appellant
    would be returned to Egypt as a 15-year old  unaccompanied  minor.   It
    was also argued  that  Egypt  is  a  poor  country  with  few  economic
    opportunities.  The family is the main economic and social support  for
    most people.  Without family support the appellant would  be  extremely
    vulnerable and could well end up destitute, trafficked, prostituted  or
    otherwise abused.

9.   The appellant said in evidence that when he came to the UK  he  created
    a feasible account and then tried to find his family in Egypt but could
    not do so.  He had not attended the Red Cross to find out and  did  not
    know anything about the Red Cross.  He said in any event he  would  not
    want his family to be traced by the Red Cross because  they  would  ask
    questions about his family  and  this  may  bring  his  family  to  the
    attention of the authorities that he is missing, and  it  may  cause  a
    problem to his family.

10.  The judge said at paragraph 33 that the  appellant  told  him  at  this
    stage that he wanted a break as the cross-examination was coming to  an
    end.  The judge rose at 11.20 and returned to the Tribunal hearing room
    at 11.55.  When he returned, Counsel for the appellant  said  that  her
    solicitor's interpreter had given her  some  notes  which  showed  that
    there were certain things that were  not  properly  translated  by  the
    court interpreter for the  appellant.   The  judge  expressed  surprise
    because he  said  that  if  there  was  anything  that  was  a  serious
    misinterpretation as to what the appellant had said, then he would have
    expected his instructing solicitor's interpreter to let him know  there
    and then and not near the end of  cross-examination  and  when  he  had
    risen to give the appellant a break.  There was an adjournment request,
    because it was said - the court interpreter did not properly  interpret
    the appellant's reply when the  appellant  was  asked  as  to  why  the
    appellant would not wish a charity like the Red Cross to make enquiries
    as to the whereabouts of his  family  in  Egypt,  since  the  appellant
    contended  that  he  could  not  find  his  family.   The   solicitor's
    interpreter said that what the court interpreter had said was  that  he
    would be at risk, whereas in fact this is not the case as the appellant
    had said his family would be at risk and not himself.  The  judge  said
    the note he had was that the court interpreter had properly interpreted
    that the family would be at risk.  He had not  written  down  that  the
    appellant would be at risk.  In fact he  had  asked  the  appellant  to
    clarify this issue and the appellant  had  confirmed  that  his  family
    would be at risk.  The judge said that further  and  in  addition,  the
    Presenting Officer asked some further questions  of  the  appellant  to
    clarify the discrepancy and the appellant  has  said  that  the  family
    would be at risk if a charity from  the  UK  contacted  his  family  in
    Egypt.

11.  The judge said at paragraph 34 that secondly it was  alleged  that  the
    Presenting Officer had asked why the appellant could not  ask  some  of
    his father's business colleagues to assist in paying back the  debt  to
    the five men, and the appellant had told the judge that the interpreter
    had interpreted that no-one would help and "you are left  on  your  own
    unless you do something for someone".  The solicitor's interpreter  had
    said that what the court interpreter should have interpreted  was  that
    in Egypt nobody will do anything for you for nothing.  The  judge  said
    that again he did not see any  discrepancy  there.   The  question  was
    again asked later by the Presenting Officer and the appellant said that
    in Egypt nobody will do anything to help for  nothing.   The  appellant
    added that since the debt that his father had taken out was before  the
    revolution, he did not think that his father's friends would help.  The
    judge said this was the essence of what the appellant had said  through
    the court interpreter and he saw no discrepancy here either.

12.  The judge said at paragraph 35 that thirdly, insofar as the date of  25
    November 2015 was concerned, the appellant had said that he was told to
    give a date that he left Egypt.  This is  what  the  court  interpreter
    interpreted, but the solicitor's interpreter said that what  the  court
    interpreter should have said is that the appellant  was  told  to  give
    some dates he left Egypt.  The judge said again he saw  no  discrepancy
    here either.

13.  The appellant's first ground of appeal argued that the judge's  refusal
    to adjourn to enable proper consideration of  the  alleged  defects  in
    interpretation led to unfairness in the proceedings.

14.  Ms Moffatt submitted that the problems with the  court  interpreter  as
    set out in  the  statement  of  the  solicitor's  interpreter  were  in
    reference to the judge's findings at paragraphs 33  to  35  that  there
    were no discrepancies in  the  interpretations  of  the  three  matters
    raised by the  solicitor's  interpreter.   Ms  Moffatt  submitted  that
    between the hearing and the  promulgation  of  the  determination,  the
    statement by Mr Karwan Hussain, the solicitor's interpreter was sent to
    the Tribunal by the appellant's solicitor with a  letter  of  complaint
    dated 12 February 2018.  Mr Hussain's statement  is  dated  4  February
    2018.  Ms Moffatt said that part of the appellant's responses  was  not
    interpreted according to Mr Hussain, in particular, what was said about
    the business friends of the appellant's father was not recorded by  the
    judge at paragraph 34.  Mr Hussain said at paragraph 4 of his statement
    that [HH] was asked "have you tried others  for  help?"  (his  father's
    contacts, links etc?  He replied at first: "we did; they told us it  is
    your family business and the problem that you have to  deal  with  it."
    At one point the interpreter just simply interpreted his reply as "no".
     Then, when I intervened, and the barrister asked that question  to  be
    repeated, his answer changed, and he said  "in  Egypt  people  only  do
    favours for you if you do one for them first, so no-one help  us".   He
    also did mention that his father had links,  and  he  personally  don't
    know them and did not pay much attention to them.   Again,  this  point
    was not put  across  fairly."   Ms  Moffatt  said  that  this  response
    differed from that of the court interpreter.

15.  With regard to the judge's finding at  paragraph  35  Mr  Hussain  said
    that the appellant was asked about  the  date  in  November  etc.   His
    replies were "I was told and advised by my solicitors that  there  must
    be some dates in the statement".  (The interpreter said "I was  advised
    to put that date and in one more incident  she  said  a  date",  in  so
    doing, she failed to distinguish between dates and date.  The appellant
    said he could not recall the exact date and where  it  came  about  but
    this was not put across.

16.  In respect of the judge's finding at paragraph 33, Mr  Hussain  in  his
    statement said the appellant was asked if he had tried to  contact  his
    family via Facebook and his answer was that he had tried  but  everyone
    he tried came back with nothing.  Mr Hussain said the court interpreter
    said "yes I am in contact with my family  via  Facebook".   Mr  Hussain
    said he had to send a note to the barrister and then get  her  involved
    to repeat the question.  The appellant was then asked "have  you  tried
    the Red Cross or why not trusting them?"  And his  reply  was  "if  Red
    Cross goes to my village they will ask about my family, will they not?"
      Mr Hussain said the interpreter failed to interpret  the  appellant's
    reply as  a  question.   From  his  understanding  of  the  appellant's
    answers, [HH] said he then tried to express his  fears  of  the  people
    finding out that he, the appellant is abroad if the Red Cross goes  and
    asks around about his family.  The Red Cross is a foreign  organisation
    and the word would be spread about so that people  who  are  after  him
    "will now know."  Mr Hussain said this point was not put across fairly.



17.  Ms Moffatt said that there was  confusion  about  how  the  appellant's
    phone was lost.  Mr Hussain spoke to the appellant  after  the  hearing
    and the appellant told him that he was  struggling  to  understand  the
    interpreter.  After the appellant had asked for  a  break,  Mr  Hussain
    said in his statement that he had informed her of  these  problems  and
    that during the hearing he had sent her  a  couple  of  notes  but  was
    unable to intervene every time.  He gave her some of the notes  he  had
    made but was unable to put the problems across comprehensively  without
    being able to sit down and reassemble his notes  and  go  through  each
    question chronologically as he has done in his statement.

18.  Ms Moffatt submitted that in the light of the statement by  Mr  Hussain
    of the problems with the  court  interpreter,  the  judge  should  have
    allowed a short adjournment for these matters to be sorted out when she
    raised them with the judge after the short break.

19.  I accept the submissions made by Mr Jarvis on this issue.  I find  that
    the statement of Mr Hussain veered into his own  personal  opinion.   I
    find that when the matters were brought to the  judge's  attention,  he
    properly considered the complaints and did not err in  law  in  finding
    that there were no discrepancies in what the appellant said through the
    court interpreter.  I find that the complaints raised by Mr Hussain  in
    his statement in regard to the three matters which were dealt  with  by
    the judge in paragraphs 33  to  35  do  not  reveal  any  discrepancies
    between the court interpreter's  interpretation  and  what  Mr  Hussain
    claimed  were  the  interpretation  of  the  responses  given  by   the
    appellant.  I  reject  Mr  Hussain's  claim  that  about  50%  of   the
    appellant's answers were not interpreted correctly.  The  three  issues
    raised by Mr. Hussain do not form 50% of the appellant's claim.

20.. Mr Hussain said the appellant  told  him  that  he  was  struggling  to
    understand the court interpreter and  yet  we  have  nothing  from  the
    appellant after the hearing to confirm this.

 21. Consequently, I find that the appellant's first  ground  of  appeal  is
    not made out.  It does not disclose an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 33 to 35.

22.  The judge's conclusions are set out at paragraphs 38 to 51.  The  judge
    found that even with the abundance of caution because the appellant  is
    a minor, he was very concerned with the evidence in this  appeal.   The
    appellant was claiming that were he to return to Egypt, he would suffer
    breaches of Article 2 and/or 3 of the ECHR.  However,  on  reading  the
    skeleton argument and also in hearing the appellant's Counsel's closing
    submissions, that no weight was actually placed on Article 2  and  that
    more weight was placed on Article 3.  The judge said Article 3 requires
    the appellant to show that were he to return to Egypt he  would  suffer
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

23.  The judge considered the  appellant's  evidence  that  his  father  had
    taken a loan from certain individuals before the Egyptian Revolution in
    2011.  His father died in 2013.  The judge said  he  did  not  find  it
    credible that the five men whom the appellant  feared  would  take  two
    years or so after the death of his father  to  attend  the  appellant's
    home and to demand their money.  He said it was not credible  that  the
    13 year old, as the appellant was at that time, a mere schoolboy, could
    persuade an agent whose job it is to transport people  for  a  handsome
    fee, to take this appellant out of Egypt to Italy with no  fee  on  the
    promise that the appellant would pay him when he  got  to  Italy.   The
    judge said it was not credible that the agent would take this  13  year
    old schoolboy from Egypt to Italy thinking that the appellant's  family
    were rich when the appellant's father had lost all his money after  the
    revolution as the appellant claimed, and was unable to repay a loan.

24.  The judge further found that the appellant knew nothing about the  five
    men, his family knew nothing about them and there was no basis for  the
    appellant therefore to say that the five men had links with the  police
    and the authorities and would be able to  trace  him  if  he  moved  to
    another part of Egypt.

25.  The judge said whilst he was prepared to accept that  the  date  of  25
    November 2015 was an approximate date for a 14 year old to give when he
    had come to the UK in September 2016, taking into account that  he  was
    fingerprinted in or about 6 November 2015 in Italy, and whilst  he  did
    not take issue as to the fact of why he came to the UK to claim  asylum
    and no issues taken with respect to the fact that he could have claimed
    asylum earlier in a safe third country, the judge was not  prepared  to
    accept the appellant's evidence as regards his case to stay in the UK.

26.  Neither was the judge prepared to accept  that  the  appellant  has  no
    family to return to in Egypt.  He was an unaccompanied minor at a  time
    when he was granted discretionary leave to remain, because at that time
    and indeed  at  the  present,  for  a  minor  there  are  no  reception
    facilities there, however the judge found that it was not credible that
    the appellant's family would have simply accepted  that  the  appellant
    has left Egypt without any further trace and  have  lost  all  contact.
    The judge did not find it credible that the appellant  would  not  have
    contacted his mother and family or that he does  not  know  where  they
    are.  The judge said the appellant had not given credible  evidence  as
    to why he would not wish a charity in this country to locate his family
    in Egypt.  The appellant said he did not want to do that because he was
    afraid it would put his family at risk.   He  had  not  even  made  any
    attempt to locate a charity here such as the Red Cross to see the steps
    that they would take to obtain information.  The judge said  these  are
    professional organisations that are very sensitive in dealing with fact-
    finding issues and it is reasonable to conclude that  they  would  have
    all these factors in mind about the appellant's family  being  at  risk
    following the investigation if that was the case.

27.  The judge said the appellant did not give any credible evidence  as  to
    why he did not want the Home Office  to  trace  his  mother  and  other
    family members in Egypt.  The judge  said  it  was  not  credible  that
    someone owed 1,000,000 Egyptian pounds would not immediately lay  claim
    to it after they knew that the debtor had died and would wait two years
    for the debtor's family to get over the death  before  they  approached
    them.

28.  The judge said he had read the expert  report  from  Hugh  Miles.   The
    expert did not meet the appellant and did not therefore interview  him.
    Based on the documents the expert had  seen,  his  view  was  that  the
    appellant would not necessarily be  at  any  immediate  risk  upon  his
    return to Egypt from the Egyptian authorities and  that  failed  asylum
    seekers are not subject of much interest to the authorities  even  when
    they left their country illegally, and the kind  of  people  who  could
    have problems on return at the border are those thought to be connected
    with the Muslim Brotherhood, or another opposition  group  as  well  as
    suspected or wanted criminals and draft dodgers.  The judge found  that
    the appellant does not fit into the above categories of individuals.

29.   The  judge  noted  the  expert's  assertion  that  if  the   appellant
    encounters the police then he would expect the appellant would not be a
    person of any specific  interest  to  them,  the  police  and  security
    services focus on the military insurgency campaign which the  appellant
    is luckily not involved in.

30.  The judge did not accept that the money  lenders  the  appellant  fears
    have influence over the police.  Furthermore, they  are  not  from  his
    local area.  Since the judge did not accept the  appellant's  evidence,
    he did not accept that the money lenders the  appellant  fears  are  so
    powerful that they have  at  their  disposal  all  the  organs  of  the
    Egyptian Security Services.  The judge found that there was no evidence
    whatsoever before him that the appellant would be destitute were he  to
    return to Egypt and there was no evidence that he does not have  family
    there.  The judge held that he was not prepared to  accept  that  there
    are any credible grounds for not allowing the Home Office or some other
    charity to look into his family situation in Egypt.

31.  For the reasons given by the judge he dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on Articles 3 and 2 of the  ECHR.   As  the  judge  believed  that  the
    appellant has family in Egypt, he did not believe that  there  was  any
    claim as to private life under paragraph 276ADE  nor  did  he  consider
    that it would be disproportionate for the appellant to leave the UK and
    return to Egypt.

32.  Ms Moffatt submitted that the judge  held  against  the  appellant  his
    failure to engage with the Red  Cross.   She  said  the  appellant  was
    scared about repercussions for his family.  The respondent had accepted
    that the appellant was a minor and had granted him discretionary  leave
    to remain.  Ms Moffatt said in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the
    respondent said at paragraph  40  that  the  appellant  does  not  have
    adequate reception arrangements in Iran and not Egypt.  In  any  event,
    she submitted that the respondent in not tracing the appellant's family
    and granting him discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor accepted
    that there were no reception arrangements available to the appellant.

33.  She submitted that the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  is  that  where
    tracing is relevant a child's consent  is  immaterial.   She  said  the
    Secretary of State had all the information to  allow  tracing  to  take
    place.  She submitted that in holding against the appellant his failure
    to go to the Red Cross, the judge failed to properly take into  account
    the  respondent's  concession  that  there  are  currently   inadequate
    reception conditions to return the appellant  to  Egypt  and  that  the
    judge failed to consider objective information about the  risks  facing
    unaccompanied minors including abuse and destitution.   The  fact  that
    the respondent found that there was an absence  of  adequate  reception
    facilities should have led the judge to find that the appellant has  no
    family available in Egypt.

34.  Ms Moffatt relied on paragraph 47 of DS  Afghanistan  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    305.  The Court of Appeal held that the Secretary of  State  sought  to
    defeat the claim by reason of the appellant's alleged  failure  to  co-
    operate with the Red Cross.  Tracing work  by  the  ICRC  would  almost
    certainly have been assisted by a contribution from  the  Secretary  of
    State, based on information available to her.  The lack of  cooperation
    does not relieve the Secretary of State of her  duties.   It  would  be
    relevant to a decision as to what the Secretary of State  was  required
    to do in a particular case and also the eventual decision as to whether
    the right to claim asylum had been established in that case.  That duty
    cannot be ignored.  Accordingly, Ms Moffatt submitted that the  absence
    of adequate facilities should have led  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant has no family available in Egypt.

35.  Ms Moffatt submitted that the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings,
    which are at paragraphs 38 to 45 relate  to  the  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's account and his failure to contact his  family.   She  said
    the judge made plausibility findings  without  taking  account  of  the
    expert evidence and external objective evidence.

36.  Ms Moffatt submitted that the judge's finding  at  paragraph  43  about
    the appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum  in  a  safe  third  country
    indicated that Section 8 was not fatal to the appellant's claim.

37.  Mr Jarvis accepted that on the question  of  tracing  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter referred to  reception  arrangements  in  Iran  and  not
    Egypt.  He said  this  error  was  not  material.   In  any  event  the
    Secretary of  State's  case  is  that  the  appellant's  complaint  was
    rejected by the Court of Appeal in DS (Afghanistan)  at  paragraph  69.
    The Court of Appeal held that although the grant of discretionary leave
    to remain to the appellant was on the basis that the respondent was not
    satisfied as  to  the  reception  arrangements  in  place  if  he  were
    returned, this does not show that the respondent was satisfied that  no
    suitable reception arrangements were or could be  put  in  place.   The
    Court of Appeal accepted that discretionary leave policy is applied  in
    a precautionary way.  The fact that, at a given moment,  the  Secretary
    of  State  is  not  satisfied  as  to  the  suitability  of   reception
    arrangements does not show that no  suitable  arrangements  do  or  can
    exist.  That will depend on what enquiries have been made and with what
    results.  Unless the respondent has enquired thoroughly and has come to
    the conclusion that no such arrangements can be made, a failure  to  be
    satisfied at a given time does not give rise to any wider inference  as
    to the  position.   The  appellant's  submission  wrongly  equated  the
    proposition that the Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  in  the
    relevant respect, with the different proposition  that  she  had  found
    that she could not be so satisfied.

38.  Mr Jarvis referred to paragraph 37 of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    in which it was said the appellant expressed a wish that the  Secretary
    of State should not contact his family.  The Secretary of State took  a
    view on the appellant's best interest for contact not to be  made.   Mr
    Jarvis submitted that the grant of leave was not a concession  that  no
    suitable reception arrangements existed for the appellant.

39.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge rejected the  appellant's  claim  as
    to why he fled Egypt.  This meant that there was no reason for  him  to
    leave Egypt and no reason why he cannot contact his family again.   The
    conclusion that can be drawn is that the appellant has family in Egypt,
    he knows where they live.  At  paragraph  44  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that he had no contact with his family.

40.  Mr Jarvis submitted that Ms Moffatt's  submission  almost  amounted  to
    saying that a child's evidence cannot be considered as implausible.  He
    relied on the decision in Y [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 where it was  held  by
    the Court of Appeal that "an Adjudicator is not  required  to  take  at
    face value an account of facts proffered by an appellant, no matter how
    contrary to common sense an experience of human behaviour  the  account
    may be.  The  decision  maker  is  not  expected  to  suspend  his  own
    judgment.  In appropriate cases, an Adjudicator  is  entitled  to  find
    that an account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to  reason  as
    to be incapable of belief."

41.  Mr Jarvis relied on this finding to  submit  that  the  judge  set  the
    appellant's claim in the context of his own internal history  and  made
    appropriate findings.  There  was  nothing  erroneous  in  the  judge's
    approach to the plausibility of the claim.

Findings

42.  I find that the judge did not err in law in his decision.

43.   I  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  reference   to   reception
    arrangements in Iran and not Egypt in the Reasons for Refusal Letter is
    not a material error.  This is because it can be ascertained throughout
    the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and  the  decision  notice  that  the
    Secretary of State was aware that  the  appellant  was  a  national  of
    Egypt.

44.  In any event with regard to tracing  the  appellant's  family,  I  note
    that at paragraph 37  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  the
    appellant expressed a wish that he did not want the Home Office to  try
    to trace his family because he believed that it would put his  mother's
    and sibling's lives in danger.  It would appear that I the light of the
    appellant's expressed wish, the Home Office did not  attempt  to  trace
    his family even though they had all the information available  to  them
    to do so.  This does not  mean  however  that  the  judge  should  have
    accepted that because of the Home Office's concession that  there  were
    no reception facilities  available  to  the  appellant  in  Egypt,  and
    therefore he qualified for discretionary  leave  to  remain,  that  the
    appellant  qualified  for  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection.    The
    appellant's complaint that the judge failed to allow his appeal on this
    issue was  rejected  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  DS  (Afghanistan),
    paragraph 69.

45.  Further, I find that the judge was not also  required  to  accept  that
    the appellant has no family to return to in Egypt.  It was  held  in  Y
    (paragraph 26) that an Adjudicator is not  required  to  take  at  face
    value an account of facts proffered  by  an  appellant  no  matter  how
    contrary to common sense and experience of human behaviour the  account
    may be.  I find that the judge made a valid  finding  at  paragraph  44
    that the appellant has not even made any attempt to  locate  a  charity
    here such as the Red Cross, to see the steps that they  would  take  to
    obtain information.  These are  professional  organisations,  that  are
    very sensitive in dealing with fact-finding issues and it is reasonable
    to conclude that they would have all these factors in  mind  about  the
    appellant's family being at risk following the investigation,  if  that
    was the case.  The judge went on to make a sustainable finding that  no
    credible evidence was given that his mother and family's lives would be
    in danger by the Home Office doing so.

46.  I find no error of law in the judge's approach to the  plausibility  of
    the appellant's account.  The judge set the appellant's  claim  in  the
    context of his own internal history.  As held in  Y  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal a decision maker is not expected to suspend  his  own  judgment.
    In appropriate cases he is entitled to find that an account  of  events
    is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to be incapable of  belief.
    I find that this is exactly the case here.   We  are  dealing  with  an
    appellant who claims to have  left  Egypt  at  the  age  of  13,  being
    required to pay a debt owed by  his  father  who  had  died  two  years
    before, claiming to have persuaded a people smuggler to take him out of
    the country a day after he claimed five armed men came to the  family's
    home on the promise that he would repay the fee of the people  smuggler
    once he reached Europe.  In the context of the appellant's claim I find
    that the judge made findings that were open to him.

47.  Indeed, the expert evidence which the judge relied  on  indicated  that
    the appellant would not be at any immediate risk  upon  his  return  to
    Egypt from the Egyptian authorities and that failed asylum seekers  are
    not subject to much interest to the authorities  even  when  they  have
    left the country illegally.  The kind of people who could have problems
    on return at the border the  expert  said  were  those  thought  to  be
    connected with the Muslim Brotherhood or another  opposition  group  as
    well as those suspected or wanted criminals and draft dodgers.  On  the
    evidence the judge was entitled to find that the appellant does not fit
    into any of these categories.

Notice of Decision

48.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  an  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

49.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  28 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

