
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03404/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th September 2018             |On 24th October 2018               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   Ms A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms Cleghorne, Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is an Albanian national who claimed protection  on  the
       basis she had been forced into prostitution and would be at  risk  if
       returned from traffickers in her home country and because she  is  an
       unmarried mother. She also claimed to fear her family.

    2. Her account is that she is from a strict Muslim family and her father
       required her to leave school at the age of 14.  She  lived  with  her
       parents, an older brother and a younger sister outside Tirana.

    3. At a wedding she became friendly with a man called Altin  They  would
       occasionally meet in secret and talk on the telephone. He said he had
       a building company in France and would travel back and forward.

    4. In 2011 her parents told her they were  arranging  her  marriage.  To
       avoid this in December 2011  she  went  with  Altin  to  France.  She
       telephoned her  mother  and  told  her  where  she  was.  Her  father
       threatened her over the phone.

    5. Shortly after this  Altin  told  her  that  she  was  to  work  as  a
       prostitute which she did. She was not allowed to leave the house.  In
       December 2012 they returned to Tirana where again  she  was  made  to
       work as a prostitute.

    6. She became pregnant and in June 2014 Altin took her to a  clinic  for
       an abortion. She went to the toilet and escaped through a window  and
       hide in a hospital van parked with the door  open  which  then  drove
       off. She made her way to her cousin's house in  Tirana  who  arranged
       her travel with an agent to the United Kingdom.

    7. She gave birth here on 21 September 2014. At the time of  the  First-
       tier hearing she was again  pregnant,  stating  that  she  had  begun
       another relationship with an Albanian national in the United  Kingdom
       but he disowned her when he learnt of her work as a prostitute.

    8. The respondent referred the matter to  the  Competent  Authority  who
       made a negative trafficking decision.  A  claim  for  protection  was
       refused.

The First tier Tribunal

    9. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope on 23 November
       2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 18 January 2018.  The
       judge identified the principal issue was the appellant's credibility.
       The  judge  found  consistency  in  some  aspects   of   her   claim,
       particularly relating to account of her fear of Altin and her family.
       This was also consistent with the country information on the position
       of women and domestic violence in Albania. The judge  considered  her
       potential vulnerability as a witness.

   10. The judge had been provided with  various  reports  relating  to  the
       appellant's mental health. He had a letter from a Mr Davies, a  nurse
       with the mental health team; letters from a Ms Walters, a  counsellor
       as well as a letter from the appellant's  GP  and  a  care  plan  and
       patient summary. The judge made an assessment of these  reports  from
       paragraph 53 to 66.

   11. At paragraph 68 onwards the judge comments on the appellant's account
       including her claimed travel. The judge had  been  provided  with  an
       expert report in relation to Albania. The report  deals  specifically
       with documentation and cross-border monitoring. The  judge  also  had
       the benefit of enquiries made by the  respondent  with  the  Albanian
       authorities on this issue. At paragraph 81  the  judge  records  that
       enquiries made by the British Embassy revealed that passport  control
       revealed the appellant had travelled by airline in September 2013  to
       Istanbul and there was no record of a return journey to  Albania.  At
       paragraph 94 the  judge  commented  that  it  was  not  credible  the
       appellant could have travelled into a Schengen travel area and on  to
       France using an Albanian identity card rather than a passport.

   12. The judge then set out details about inconsistencies in  the  account
       given by the appellant. The conclusion was that the appellant was not
       credible the judge rejected her claim relationship with Altin and her
       account of being trafficked. The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider
       whether there would be any risk for her simply by being returned as a
       failed asylum seeker and concluded there was not.

   13. Regarding article 8 the judge referred to the best interests  of  her
       child and concluded they lay was being with the appellant. The  judge
       concluded it would not breach article 8 to return the  appellant  and
       her child to Albania with  the  judge  pointing  out  that  a  family
       certificate produced suggested her younger sister was also a  single-
       parent. The inference drawn was that the appellant  fact  would  have
       family support on return.

The Upper Tribunal

   14. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable the  judge  erred
       in law in the evaluation  of  the  appellant's  credibility  and  the
       treatment of the medical evidence supplied.

   15. The grounds firstly seek to fault the judge for suggesting  that  the
       medical  evidence  was  dependent  upon  the  account  given  by  the
       appellant. The 2nd round was that the reasoning in the  decision  was
       flawed particularly in the comment that the appellant's evidence  was
       vague. The 3rd ground relates to  an  argument  the  judge  conflated
       credibility with plausibility particularly in relation to her account
       of escaping from the abortion clinic. It was also  argued  the  judge
       erred  in  the  treatment  of  the  travel  documentation  with   the
       suggestion being that she  travelled  on  documentation  supplied  by
       Altin.

   16. At hearing, Ms  Cleghorne  relied  upon  the  grounds  advanced.  She
       referred to the judge's comments that the medical evidence about  the
       mental health of the appellant was reliant upon  what  she  told  the
       clinicians. However she  had  seen  Ms  Walters  for  17  counselling
       sessions. She submitted that the judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
       this evidence was flawed. She also argued irrespective of the  cause,
       the judge failed to factor in  the  opinions  about  the  appellant's
       mental state when considering her credibility. She said this  applied
       to the overall assessment of the appellant's credibility  and  sought
       to criticise the judge's comments that her account was vague.

   17. Mr Duffy in response to be  different  approach,  focusing  upon  the
       negative decision of the Competent Authority. I was referred  to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal decision  of  AUJ  (Trafficking  -  no
       conclusive grounds decision) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00200 (IAC) which
       post-dated the decision. In submissions in that  case  reference  was
       made to the Court of Appeal decision in in SSHD  v  MS  (Afghanistan)
       [2018] EWCA Civ 594 as authority for the  proposition  that  where  a
       negative trafficking decision by the Competent Authority had not been
       challenged by way of judicial review the First-tier Tribunal may only
       entertain an indirect challenge to such a decision if the trafficking
       decision is demonstrated to be perverse or irrational  or  one  which
       was not open to the Competent Authority.

   18. At paragraph 53 of AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive grounds decision)
       Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00200 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal said:

           "It is clear from both AS  (Afghanistan)  and  MS  (Afghanistan)
           that, if (and only if) the Competent  Authority  has  reached  a
           negative "Conclusive Grounds" decision that  was  irrational  or
           perverse or not open to it and the trafficking or modern slavery
           claim is relevant to the  decision  to  remove,  the  First-tier
           Tribunal must make findings on the trafficking / modern  slavery
           claim to the extent that such findings are relevant on  deciding
           the appeal ..."

   19. At para 62:

           "In my view, applying AS  (Afghanistan)  and  MS  (Afghanistan),
           cases in which the Competent Authority has reached a "Conclusive
           Grounds decision" should be approached as follows:

           (i)    n/a

           (ii)   In cases in which the Competent Authority has  reached  a
                negative "Conclusive Grounds  decision"  but  the  appellant
                continues to rely (in his statutory  appeal)  upon  evidence
                that he has been a victim of trafficking or modern  slavery,
                the judge should decide, at the start  of  the  hearing  and
                before oral evidence is given, whether the decision  of  the
                Competent  Authority  was  perverse  or  irrational  or  not
                reasonably open to it. At this stage, evidence subsequent to
                the decision of the Competent Authority must  not  be  taken
                into account. If (and only if) the judge concludes that  the
                Competent Authority's decision was perverse or irrational or
                one that was not reasonably open to it, that the  judge  can
                then re-determine the relevant facts  and  take  account  of
                subsequent evidence."

   20. Both representatives suggested that if an error of law were found the
       matter could be remitted to the first-tier Tribunal for the two-stage
       approach advocated.



Consideration

   21. I begin with how the decision of the competent  authority  was  dealt
       with. Firstly, a decision had been made by the Competent Authority to
       the higher standard that the appellant had not  been  trafficked.  No
       issue was  taken  at  the  hearing  about  the  rationality  of  that
       decision. I appreciate that AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive  grounds
       decision) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00200 (IAC)  post-dated  the  appeal
       hearing. Nevertheless there was existing jurisprudence on this point.

   22. It is also clear from the decision that  the  judge  did  not  simply
       adopt the negative decision of the Competent  Authority.  Rather  the
       judge dealt in depth with the claim being made and did not  find  the
       appellant to be credible. At paragraph 42 onwards the  judge  appears
       to have taken it upon  himself  to  evaluate  the  interplay  of  the
       Competent Authority's decision with the decision  on  the  protection
       claim. At paragraph 47 the judge concludes that  notwithstanding  the
       negative decision he must make his own decision.

   23. Consequently, I find no material error of law established in relation
       to this issue.

   24. The principal issue raised in the grounds of  appeal  relate  to  the
       judge's treatment of the evidence about the appellant's mental state.
       Much has been made by Ms Cleghorne of the fact the appellant attended
       a counsellor, Ms Walters, on 17 occasions. I turn to what  the  judge
       said. At paragraph 54 the judge  refers  to  Ms  Walters  applying  3
       questionnaires  used  in  her  assessment.  These  are  described  as
       clinical measuring questionnaires and refers to the  score  as  being
       fairly consistent and it was clear  that  much  of  her  anxiety  was
       caused by her asylum claim being rejected. There is also reference to
       difficulties in relationships with other women at  the  hostel  where
       she was staying. She was described as someone who did not deal easily
       with confrontation.

   25. The judge referred to this paragraph 55. The judge acknowledges  that
       the counsellor has had the advantage of seeing the appellant over  an
       extended period. The judge makes the point that his task is different
       and that he is involved in a fact-finding  process.  The  judge  also
       points out  that  he  has  not  received  details  about  Ms  Walters
       expertise. Whilst  Ms  Walters  concluded  by  saying  the  appellant
       disclosed symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and suggests she
       has experienced severe trauma the judge comments that  she  does  not
       refer to the diagnostic criteria used.

   26. It was for the judge to evaluate this evidence. I can find  no  fault
       with the comments made by the judge. There was also a report from  Mr
       Davies, a nurse with the mental health team. The letter is  dated  12
       June 2015 and states that the appellant  was  recently  assessed.  He
       said that her  symptoms  were  highly  suggestive  of  complex  post-
       traumatic stress disorder. He  writes  that  the  appellant  was  the
       victim of human trafficking.  In  this  regard  he  is  relaying  the
       account given. It is for the judge to decide if that account is true.
       I find no fault with the judge's comments and 53.

   27. At paragraph 61 the judge then comments on the GP letter. The GP  had
       met the appellant on 5 occasions over a 10 month  period.  The  judge
       makes the legitimate point  that  the  role  of  the  GP  is  not  to
       challenge the  underlying  account  but  to  perform  a  professional
       opinion as to the presentation and best treatment. The  judge  refers
       to the medical records and finds nothing of any great relevance.  The
       judge also referred to the  absence  of  any  psychiatric  report  or
       incident from the consultant psychiatrist.

   28. There does appear to have been an  assumption  that  the  appellant's
       account is true in the reports. There is  nothing  to  indicate  that
       when  the  reports  from  the  healthcare  professionals  were  being
       obtained they were  made  aware  of  the  respondent's  view  of  the
       underlying claim. JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013]  UKUT
       00145 (IAC) points out that the more  a  diagnosis  is  dependent  on
       assuming that the account given by the appellant was to be  believed,
       the less likely it is that significant weight will be attached to it

   29. At the outset at paragraph 49 the judge acknowledges  the  nature  of
       the appellant's claim and that she potentially could be regarded as a
       vulnerable witness. The judge indicates the medical evidence is being
       taken into account in assessing credibility. Regarding  the  symptoms
       displayed the judge makes a legitimate point at paragraph 66 that the
       cause may not be that relayed by the appellant.

   30. In the context of assessing  her  credibility  the  judge  refers  to
       vagueness about aspects  of  her  account.  The  judge  accepts  that
       evidence is not to be regarded as a memory test and there may be good
       reasons why a witness cannot recall events particularly if  they  are
       linked to trauma. Having acknowledged this the judge  then  concluded
       this would not explain the vagueness. The judge then went on to  give
       examples. Again, I find nothing wrong with this approach.

   31. The judge prefaces his opinion on  her  escape  by  pointing  out  at
       paragraph 26 that whilst something may be implausible that this  does
       not necessarily mean it did not happen. He then deals  with  specific
       issues,  such  as  the  documentation  for  travel  as  well  as  the
       appellant's sister possibly being a  single  parent.  The  latter  is
       rightly a peripheral point but nevertheless relevant to  credibility.
       The judge makes other comments about vagueness in relation  to  where
       she was and so on and draws adverse inferences. Again,  I  find  this
       all part of the legitimate evaluation process albeit peripheral.

   32. Ultimately, I find this to be a balanced, carefully prepared decision
       in which I can find no material error of law established.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cope. Consequently, that decision dismissing the  appellant's
appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly     Date 17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

