
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03746/2015
                                                               PA/03827/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 09 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                MIMOZA DEDJA
                       (and one dependent - InI DEDJA)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Saleem, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is an Albanian national, born on 6  February  1970.   She
    came to the UK on 1 April 2014 through a  number  of  other  countries,
    arriving on 4 April 2014.  It seems that her son  Imi  came  here  with
    her. She claimed asylum on the same day.  A decision was made to refuse
    to grant her asylum and human rights protection  under  paragraphs  336
    and 339M/339F of HC 395 as amended.  The respondent set out her reasons
    for refusal in a letter dated 30 November 2015.

2.   On 14 December 2015 the  appellant  appealed  the  decision  to  refuse
    asylum/human rights protection/humanitarian protection  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT).  Her appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Hillis  (the  Immigration  Judge).   The  Immigration   Judge
    concluded that  whilst  the  appellant  was  an  Albanian  national  as
    claimed, and whilst there was a feud affecting the  Dedja  family  from
    the Kola family, nevertheless, the Immigration  Judge  did  not  accept
    that the appellant would be at risk on return and in any event,  having
    reviewed the evidence, concluded that she could safely live  in  Tirana
    or another area away from Burrell where the family feud is centred.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

3.   By a notice  of  appeal  settled  by  Counsel  on  14  July  2016,  the
    appellant  sought  to  appeal  the  decision  of  the  FtT  which   was
    promulgated on 31 August 2016.  In her grounds, she states that:

    (1)  The Immigration Judge had accepted that there was an extant  blood
         feud between the Kola and Dedja families, he misdirected himself by
         concluding that there had been no submission that the appellant was
         a member of a particular social group.  She was, in fact, obviously
         a member of a particular social group.

    (2)  The Immigration Judge had failed to consider a material matter  in
         that the appellant's son, Ini, whose claim  was  dependent  on  the
         appellant's, had received threats via  Facebook.   The  Immigration
         Judge had wrongly concluded that because the  appellant's  son  had
         maintained his Facebook account, which he had used in Albania,  did
         not mean that it could be assumed that it was the same  account  or
         that there had been no subsequent threats.

    (3)  There was a failure to consider a material matter in the extent of
         domestic protection available.  The existence  of  blood  feuds  in
         Albania was well recognised and had been recognised by  the  French
         authorities in relation to a claim by the appellant's stepdaughter,
         Klotilda.  The response of the authorities was inadequate and would
         not deter a future attack here.

    (4)  In assessing internal relocation and the threat to the appellant's
         son, he had not long been an adult at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
         Once he  reached  adulthood  a  threat  of  greater  magnitude  was
         present.  The appellant and  her  son  might  be  traced  to  their
         location wherever they lived. Albania is a small  country  with  an
         aggressive clan network.  In  the  circumstances,  the  Immigration
         Judge had overestimated the availability of domestic protection and
         the availability of internal relocation as well as the  ability  of
         the appellant to safely return to Albania.

4.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell thought these grounds were  at
    least arguable in that other  family  members  appeared  to  have  been
    killed in a continuing blood feud in Tirana.  Immigration Judge Kimnell
    regarded the error with regard to the reference to a "particular social
    group" to be "academic" because the  judge  had  gone  on  to  consider
    whether or not the appellant could safely relocate and  concluded  that
    she could.

5.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives  at  length.
    It was noted that the grant of internal protection in France  had  been
    granted to a family member but paragraph 23  of  the  decision  records
    that the appellant fears  that  she  will  be  "next  in  line"  to  be
    targeted.  The crucial evidence was summarised at paragraphs 23 and  24
    of the decision where it states that the appellant's  stepdaughter  had
    been given international protection.  The same threat would be faced by
    the appellant's son.  The Immigration Judge should have  accepted  this
    evidence, it was argued.  It was contended  that  the  blood  feud  was
    ongoing and it was not accepted that the  Immigration  Judge  had  been
    live to all the evidence.

6.   I was then referred to the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SX
    (Albania) [2008] EWCA Civ 1192.  In  that  case  the  court  held  that
    criminal elements and gangs are well-known about  in  Albania  and  the
    Kola gang were particularly well-known.  The decision  also  refers  to
    the Dedja family, including  Halit  Dedja  who  has  subsequently  been
    murdered.  I was also referred to the case of Fornah.  It was contended
    that the family as a whole were members of a  particular  social  group
    and entitled to protection in international law.  Paragraph 28  of  the
    decision was plainly incorrect when it referred to the appellant's fear
    of persecution as not being based on membership of a particular  social
    group.  That had clearly been the  submission  before  the  Immigration
    Judge, Mr Saleem said.

7.   I was also taken to extensive objective evidence from  2015-2016  which
    suggested  that  there  were  pervasive  human  rights   problems   and
    corruption in all branches of the government including the judicial and
    health care systems.   Domestic  violence  and  discrimination  against
    women was widespread.  The prosecution  and  officials  commit  abuses.
    The police do not always enforce the law equally.  Mr Saleem  commended
    to me the numerous passages which had been highlighted in his bundle of
    objective evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  I would comment  at
    this stage that I have numerous bundles rather than one  paginated  and
    indexed bundle of all the evidence, which would have been a great  deal
    easier to use.  It was contended that these documents had been drawn to
    the attention of the Immigration Judge but that he had failed  to  give
    adequate consideration to them.  It was not accepted that the appellant
    could call on the police to protect her  adequately.   The  Immigration
    Judge  had  not  dealt  adequately  with  Article  3  or   humanitarian
    protection.

8.   Mr McVeety accepted that the Dedja  family  were  a  particular  social
    group but did not accept that the error in suggesting  that  there  had
    been no argument about this was material.  He argued that there was  no
    risk  on  return/internal  relocation  was  an   alternative   to   the
    appellants.  Furthermore, he pointed out that  this  was  in  fact  the
    appellant's claim  and  not  that  of  her  son's.   He  was  merely  a
    dependant.  He could have made a claim of  his  own  and  he  certainly
    could have given evidence before the  FtT  but  no  such  evidence  was
    placed before that Tribunal.  Given that he was now 20 years of age  he
    could perfectly easily have given evidence.  As far as the  appellant's
    situation was concerned,  she  had  received  no  threats  and  had  no
    violence directed  towards  her  by  the  Kola  tribe.   The  documents
    demonstrated that far from turning a blind eye  or  collaborating  with
    the feuding families,  the  police  had  not  in  fact  done  so.   The
    certificate from the prosecutor's office in bundle  AB2  (at  page  48)
    suggests that criminal proceedings had begun in relation to the  murder
    of a member of the Dedja family.  That could  also  be  the  conclusion
    reached in relation to  Adelina  Dedja.   These  documents,  therefore,
    suggested  that  the  prosecuting  authorities  did  take  blood  feuds
    seriously.

9.   As far as the  appellant's  son  was  concerned,  he  had  received  no
    threats since the alleged threat on Facebook.  The appellant apparently
    maintained the same Facebook account that he had at  the  time  of  the
    alleged threats.  But, as far as Mr McVeety was aware, the only way  to
    change that account would be for the  appellant's  son  to  change  his
    name.

10.  The respondent relied on one authority, the case of  EH  (blood  feuds)
    Albania [2012] UKUT 00348.  That case concerned  a  blood  feud  and  a
    claim to international and humanitarian protection arising out  of  it.
    The Upper Tribunal observed that blood feuds have a  number  of  common
    characteristics including a vendetta, and the whole question of  honour
    is important.  Males of a family, however, tend to be the ones who have
    to maintain honour by taking  the  next  life  or  launching  the  next
    attack.  It was contended that the Tribunal should look at the  history
    of the feud.  It was noteworthy that the appellant had not referred  to
    any threat to herself in her witness statement, that she had  lived  in
    Tirana for four years without incident, and that the  police  did  take
    such allegations seriously.  The attitude of the  authorities  was  far
    from complicit.

11.  As far as the decision by the French  authorities  were  concerned,  we
    were not told the circumstances of the stepdaughter's claim.  It  would
    be wrong to conclude that it had any relevance to the outcome  of  this
    case.

12.   Generally,  as  the  appellant  herself  had  stated  in  her  witness
    statement dated 4 August 2016 at paragraphs  15-16,  it  was  the  male
    members of the family who were targeted.  Therefore, it  was  perfectly
    proper of the judge to conclude that there was no material risk to  the
    appellant.  She had four years in Tirana  without  any  incident  other
    than a vague account of an attack on Facebook to her son.  It  was  not
    accepted by the Immigration Judge  (at  paragraph  34)  that  the  Kola
    family knew where she was.

13.  The leading country guidance case  of  CG  [2012]  UKUT  348  was  also
    referred to.  It was suggested that the Tribunal  should  look  at  the
    background to the claim and how  the  police  were  involved.   It  was
    accepted that blood feuds exist but it was not accepted that they would
    not be adequately dealt with by the authorities.

14.  The appellant's representative responded  to  say  that  the  appellant
    accepted that males are more at  risk  than  females  but  it  was  not
    accepted that there was no risk to the appellant.  Her  own  son  Halit
    had been killed.  The Immigration Judge appeared to accept at paragraph
    15 that the appellant's son might attract attention.  It was clear that
    they were as a clan entitled to protection.  There was  a  gap  between
    the last killing in June 2016 and the date of the hearing but this  was
    not a long period of time.

15.  Mr Saleem relied on EH and said that blood feuds  were  widespread  and
    well documented  that  they  were  a  continuing  threat  both  to  the
    appellant and her son.  The suggestion that only men  are  targeted  is
    not correct. However, Mr Saleem appeared to accept  that  Ini  had  not
    been targeted when the first  appellant  and  he  had  been  living  in
    Albania.  Mr Saleem acknowledged that Ini was over 18 by  the  date  of
    the hearing.

16.  The Immigration Judge was criticised for failing  to  find  that  there
    was a need to afford the appellants humanitarian protection by  failing
    to attach adequate weight to the fact that Halit had been  killed.   It
    was submitted that the entire decision needed to be set aside and  that
    the case be remitted to the FtT for a rehearing.

17.  At the end of the hearing I announced that the grounds  have  not  been
    made out.  Having regard to the appellant's case that it  was  her  son
    that was principally at risk on return and the judge's  clear  findings
    on the evidence presented before him, I did not consider that there was
    a material error of law.  I will now summarise my reasons for  reaching
    that decision.

My Reasons for Finding no Material Error of Law

18.  The appellant clearly stated in her witness statement that it  was  her
    that was at risk rather than her son.  Her  son  had  not  advanced  an
    independent claim  (although  he  is  listed  in  the  heading  above).
    Furthermore, the appellant had relocated successfully to Tirana for  as
    long as four years.  It seems that the  Immigration  Judge  fully  took
    account of this internal flight alternative, stating that four years of
    residence at Tirana had not resulted in any  honour-based  killings  or
    attacks.  The fact that her son had not received any  response  to  his
    raising of the blood feud tended to suggest that there was no  evidence
    of continuing threat.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge was  entitled
    to attach little weight to  this  piece  of  evidence  given  that  the
    appellant's son had not given evidence, had  not  produced  the  actual
    wording of the threats by, for example, printing out the Facebook page,
    and had not confirmed any of his evidence in court.  I do  not  believe
    there was any confusion over which Facebook account the appellant's son
    was using.  He still  maintained  that  account  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  There was no evidence that the appellant's  son  changed  his
    Facebook identity to  reflect  the  threats  that  he  claims  to  have
    received, indeed, as the Immigration Judge found at paragraph 35 of his
    decision, no threats had been made to him  since  he  came  to  the  UK
    whether via his Facebook account or otherwise.

19.  I have considered whether the absence of any reference to a  particular
    social group might be a material error of law but  concluded  that  the
    appellant's claim had been fully considered on every basis  put  before
    the FtT.  As a physically fit young man, the appellant's son  would  be
    able to safely return to Tirana and gain employment. In any  event,  as
    Mr McVeety submitted, no claim had been made by the son.

20.  The Immigration Judge  plainly  dealt  adequately  with  the  issue  of
    internal flight and the facts of the case were at the forefront of  his
    mind when he decided that there was nothing to  prevent  the  appellant
    and her son living in another part of Albania other than  Burrell  and,
    for example, Tirana.

21.  Therefore, although the Immigration Judge had found the existence of  a
    blood feud he concluded that the appellant had been able  to  avoid  it
    herself.  The evidence pointed to the  prosecuting  authorities  taking
    blood feuds seriously and therefore, even if the appellant did come  to
    the attention of the feuding family, the Kolas, she could avail herself
    of the protection of the Albanian police before claiming  international
    protection.  In addition, the appellant has a sister and mother  living
    there and the Country of  Origin  Report  suggests  that  there  is  an
    effective police force and judiciary within Albania.

22.  For these reasons the Immigration Judge was entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion he came to.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  FtT  to  dismiss  her
appeal on all grounds argued before it is dismissed.

Anonymity

I lift the anonymity direction as  there  are  frequent  references  to  the
Kolas family and the Dedja family throughout the decision of the FtT.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award in this case as no fee was payable.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

