

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03738/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 6 April 2018                          |    On 11 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     PA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Lewis - Direct Access.
For the Respondent:        Mr E Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Khawar promulgated on 17 May 2017 in which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's protection and human rights claim.




Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Albania, was born on 28  January  1998.
        At the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal he was 19
        years of age.
     3. The appellant claimed to have left Albania on 10 January 2014  with
        the assistance of an agent  and  to  have  arrived  in  the  United
        Kingdom on 17 January 2014. The applicant claimed asylum on arrival
        although his claim was  refused  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  7
        November 2014. The applicant was granted Discretionary Leave as  an
        Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Child from 7 November 2014 to 28  July
        2015. On 24 July 2015 the  appellant  made  a  further  application
        which was refused by the respondent on 22 March 2016, which is  the
        decision under appeal.
     4. The  Judge  considered  the  appellant's  case  together  with  the
        evidence provided in support thereof before setting out findings of
        fact at [27 - 53] of the decision under challenge which can,  inter
        alia, be summarised in the following terms:


             a. The appellant did not appeal against the  original  refusal
                of his asylum claim dated 7 November  2014  complaining  in
                his witness  statement  of  21  July  2015  inadequate/poor
                representation  and  difficulties  in   relation   to   the
                interpreter arose, although no such issues were  raised  in
                the appeal either in the appellants evidence or submissions
                made  by  his  representative  and  there  was  no   formal
                complaint to the Law Society in relation to inadequate/poor
                representation [28 - 29].
             b. The appellant's representative did not address the Judge on
                the substantive  basis  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for
                refusal; in particular the Judge was not addressed  on  the
                principal reasons for refusal of the Asylum/Articles 2  and
                3, humanitarian protection, issues of  adequacy/sufficiency
                protection and reasonable internal relocation available  to
                the appellant on return to Albania and was not addressed in
                relation  to  potential  Article  3  medical  grounds.   No
                challenge was raised in relation to the adequacy of medical
                psychiatric treatment being available in  Albania  and  the
                appellant served no objective  evidence  to  challenge  the
                analysis of the Secretary State in paragraphs [86 - 106] of
                the current reasons for refusal letter  particularly  those
                relating  to  the  risk  of  suicide  and  availability  of
                adequate medical treatment for mental health problems [30].
             c. The Judge was only addressed on article 8 private  life  in
                which the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad was prayed in aid
                to establish the appellant has a genuine subjective fear of
                risk on return from his father and is at  risk  of  suicide
                [31].
             d. The Judge notes the conclusion of the  medical  report  set
                out by the author at paragraph 16.5 [33 - 34].
             e. The Judge noted in the reference in the  report  to  a  Sri
                Lankan appellant and finds the obligation of the doctor was
                to provide a subjective assessment of  the  appellant.  The
                Judge did not know to what extent the sentiments  expressed
                genuinely applied to the appellant rather than  some  other
                individual, warranting only limited evidential weight being
                attached to that evidence [35].
             f. In any event, the Judge notes that at no point  during  the
                proceedings has the  respondent  sought  to  challenge  the
                appellants claim to have been violently and sexually abused
                by his father since approximately age  of  fourteen  for  a
                period of approximately two years before he left Albania in
                January 2014. The Judge notes the appellant  has  not  been
                doubted in relation to his factual claims by other  experts
                including a Child Psychologist who indicated the  appellant
                received ten sessions of counselling or from the appellants
                GP [36].
             g. The Judge notes there  is  no  evidence  to  challenge  the
                respondent's objective evidence set  out  at  [91]  of  the
                refusal letter in relation to adequacy of  the  psychiatric
                care facilities available in Albania; leading to  it  being
                found "therefore although the Appellant has (as detailed in
                Dr  Dhumad's  Report)  a   genuine   subjective   fear   of
                potentially being killed  by  his  father  upon  return  to
                Albania, such fear is not objectively well-founded  due  to
                the  availability  of  adequacy  protection  and/reasonable
                internal  relocation  and  the  availability  of   adequate
                medical treatment" [37].
             h. In considering article 8 ECHR, the Judge finds there was no
                reliable evidence to establish that the  appellant  is  gay
                for the reasons set out at [44 -45].
             i. The Judge finds that the question of whether the  appellant
                is gay is arguably academic as there is  no  evidence  that
                the    appellant    would    suffer    article    3     ill
                treatment/persecution upon return simply by virtue  of  the
                fact that he  may  be  gay.  The  Judge  accepts  there  is
                evidence   to   establish   discrimination   against    gay
                individuals within the community in Albania but no evidence
                to suggest that such discrimination crosses the  article  3
                threshold [46].
             j. The Judge did not find the appellant is in any relationship
                with a partner and has not established family life  in  the
                United Kingdom giving rise to a finding there is no article
                8 protected family life [48].
             k. The Judge accepts the appellant has a private life  in  the
                United Kingdom  and  on  that  basis,  that  article  8  is
                engaged.  The  Judge  accepts  that   the   appellant   has
                undertaken a role within the UK  and  as  such,  and  to  a
                limited  degree  that  the  appellant  has  contributed  to
                society [49-51].
             l. The Judge reminds himself of the five-stage process set out
                by the House of Lords in Razgar  and  in  relation  to  the
                fifth  question,  that  of  the  proportionality   of   the
                decision, finds at [52] "as to the final question, that  of
                proportionality, I rule in favour of the Respondent. I have
                heard no evidence to suggest that the type of private  life
                established by the Appellant in the United  Kingdom,  could
                not reasonably be developed upon return to Albania.  In  my
                judgment there will be nothing  to  prevent  the  Appellant
                from  volunteering  his   services   to   some   charitable
                organisations involving children in Albania upon  return  -
                in the manner that he has undertaken over the past year  or
                so, in his involvement with the above football team in  the
                UK".
             m. The appeal fails under article 8 ECHR [53].


     5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  following
        grounds:


             "It is arguable that the  judge  failed  to  address  fully  a
             ground of appeal namely, Article 3 and the risk of suicide  on
             return to Albania where is accepted  that  the  appellant  had
             been sexually and physically abused by his father.  Article  3
             is clearly pleaded in the skeleton argument [2]  (reliance  on
             previous representative's submissions). It  is  arguable  that
             any assessment under Article 3 should consider the  subjective
             fear of  the  applicant.  Further,  it  is  arguable  relevant
             evidence  was  not  taken  into  account   for   example   the
             psychiatric condition was relevant to assessment under Article
             8. It is arguable the reasoning in respect of the  appellant's
             assertion he is gay is insufficient."



Error of law


     1. In relation to the finding on the appellant's sexually orientation,
        the Judge does not find that  the  appellant  is  not  gay,  as  he
        claims, but finds there was no reliable evidence to establish  this
        claim, even to the  lower  standard.  It  is  a  finding  that  the
        appellant had not discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to  the
        required standard to prove what he was claiming is true. The  Judge
        does not specifically reject the claim and gives reasons for why it
        was found the burden had not been discharged.
     2. It is also important to consider the finding at [46] that not  only
        has the appellant not discharged the burden of proof  to  establish
        he is gay, this is  a  question  that  is  also  somewhat  academic
        because there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  would  suffer
        article 3 ill treatment/persecution on return to Albania solely  by
        virtue of the fact that he may be gay.
     3. The current country guidance relating to this issue is that  of  IM
        (Risk - Objective Evidence - Homosexuals) Albania CG  [2003]  UKIAT
        00067 in  which  the  Tribunal  said  that  homosexuals  caught  in
        flagrante delicto are not at risk in Albania.
     4. The appellant provided no evidence of any legal limitation for  gay
        people in Albania although it is accepted that those who  are  open
        about  their  LGBT  sexual   orientation   may   face   job   loss,
        discrimination, threats and hate speech. It was not made out before
        the Judge that any such experiences are  sufficient  to  cross  the
        threshold of persecution. On this  issue,  therefore,  no  arguable
        legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
        protection grounds is made out.
     5. In relation to article 8 ECHR, there is no challenge to the Judge's
        finding the appellant does not have family life engaged by  Article
        8. I also find that the private life  elements  considered  by  the
        Judge did not disclose arguable legal error in themselves. Although
        it is accepted the appellant has made some contribution to society,
        in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC)  it  was  held
        that the judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and  Others  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 served to
        re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of article  8  of  the
        ECHR and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  that  Article's  limited
        utility in private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed  from  the
        protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity. Earlier
        cases need to be read with that in mind.
     6. Other cases on this issue include Hamat (Article  9  -  freedom  of
        religion) [2016] UKUT 00286 in  which  it  was  held  that  matters
        relied on by way of a positive contribution to  the  community  are
        capable in principle of affecting the weight to  be  given  to  the
        maintenance of effective immigration  control  and  should  not  be
        excluded from consideration altogether but are unlikely in practice
        to carry much weight.  In Lama (video recorded evidence  -weight  -
        Art 8 ECHR) [2017] UKUT 16 (IAC) it was held that a person's  value
        to the community is a factor which may legitimately  be  considered
        in  the  Article  8  proportionality  balancing  exercise.  In   UE
        (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
        [2010] EWCA Civ 975 the Court of Appeal  said  that  the  issue  of
        community value was part of a wider  issue  concerning  the  proper
        legal approach to proportionality under  the  ECHR.  This  was  not
        confined to solely Article 8 issues.  The  courts  had  favoured  a
        broad,  rather  than  restrictive,  approach  to  the  issue   when
        determining whether a fair balance was struck between the  interest
        of the community  and  the  protection  of  an  individual's  human
        rights.  A public interest in the retention in the  UK  of  someone
        who was of considerable value to the community  could  properly  be
        seen as relevant to the exercise of immigration control. The weight
        to be attached to the public interest in removal of the  person  in
        question was not some fixed immutable amount but  might  vary  from
        case to case. This did not  mean  that  the  individual  was  being
        rewarded for good behaviour. It went instead  to  the  strength  of
        public interest in his  removal  and  how  much  weight  should  be
        attached to the need to maintain effective immigration  control  in
        his  particular  case.  Contribution  to  the  community  was   not
        considered 'freestanding'  as  such;  it  was  an  element  in  the
        assessment  in  the  public  interest  of   maintaining   effective
        immigration control. Contribution to the community could affect the
        balance only in so far as it was relevant to the legitimate aim  of
        immigration control or the private life claim of the applicant.  It
        was open to the court to  find  that  the  loss  of  a  significant
        positive contribution to the community could affect  the  issue  of
        public interest in the proportionality test  under  Article  8.  It
        would be unusual, however, for the  loss  of  the  benefit  to  the
        community  to  tip  the  scales  in  a  claimant's   favour.   This
        constituted a specific and targeted exercise and would be based  on
        the detailed facts of the individual case and the extent  to  which
        there was interference with the claimant's  private  and/or  family
        life. Giving the leading judgment, Sir David  Keene  observed  that
        the question of a person's value to the community, a value of which
        the community would be deprived if he were  to  be  removed,  is  a
        different question from asking what would be the  impact  upon  the
        individual of removing him. Sir David Keene also said that although
        the "factor of public value can be relevant ... I would  expect  it
        to make a difference to the outcome of immigration cases only in  a
        relatively few instances where the positive  contribution  to  this
        country is very significant".  Lord  Justice  Richards  was  rather
        more  lukewarm  in  his   concurring   judgment,   accepting   that
        contributions  to  the  community  are  capable  in  principle   of
        affecting the weight to be given to the  maintenance  of  effective
        immigration control, but doubting whether they  would  in  practice
        carry a lot of weight.
     7. No arguable error is made out in the  manner  in  which  the  Judge
        considered the contribution made by the appellant which was clearly
        factored into the proportionality assessment.
     8. The Judge also took into account Section 117B(5) which specifically
        states that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
        established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
        status is precarious. The weight to be given to the evidence was  a
        matter for the Judge who clearly considered the material  with  the
        required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  has  given  adequately
        reasoned findings in relation to  this  issue.  No  arguable  legal
        error is made out.
     9. The main thrust of Mr Lewis' submissions refer to articles 3 and  8
        ECHR in relation to the appellant's  psychiatric  presentation  and
        risk of suicide. It was submitted  the  medical  report  found  the
        appellant to be at risk of suicide due to his subjective fear.  The
        Judge refers to the relevant  section  of  the  psychiatric  report
        where he writes at [34]:


             "Risk assessment:  the  risk  of  suicide  in  my  opinion  is
             currently moderate; the main risk factors in his condition  or
             severe depression, PTSD and  hopelessness  and  shame  due  to
             rape; he also has a history of multiple suicide  attempts.  He
             told me that he has ongoing thoughts of ending his life due to
             fear of removal. He told me that he is frightened; he believes
             that he would be killed if returned to Sri Lanka [???]. Severe
             depression, hopelessness, shame and PTSD symptoms increase the
             risk of suicide in the context of removal to Hopeless  Albania
             has a serious and significant association with  suicide  risk.
             The risk will be greater when  he  feels  the  deportation  is
             close, and any threat of removal, in my opinion will trigger a
             severe deterioration in his mental suffering and  subsequently
             increases the risk of suicide."


    10. In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of  Appeal  set  out  the
        test in Article 3 cases as follows.  (i) the feared  ill  treatment
        must be of a minimum level of severity; (ii) a causal link must  be
        shown between the act of removal and the inhuman  treatment  relied
        on; (iii) in a  foreign  case  the  Article  3  threshold  will  be
        particularly high. (For thresholds see above) (iv) in principle  it
        was possible for an Article 3 case to succeed on  the  basis  of  a
        risk of suicide and (v) in a foreign case of suicide risk it  would
        be relevant to consider whether the fear of ill  treatment  in  the
        receiving state was objectively well founded; if  not,  this  would
        weigh against there being a real risk of there being a breach;  and
        (vi) it would also be relevant to  consider  whether  the  removing
        and/or the receiving state had effective mechanisms to  reduce  the
        risk; if there were, this would also weigh against  there  being  a
        real risk of a breach.  The Court of Appeal went on to say that the
        Tribunal was correct to consider separately the risk  of  treatment
        contrary to Article 3 in the UK, in transit and in Sri  Lanka.   In
        relation to the risk in the UK it  was  open  to  the  Tribunal  to
        conclude that the risk of suicide in the  UK  would  be  adequately
        managed by the UK authorities and  that  in  combination  with  the
        support of the appellant's family they  could  bring  the  risk  of
        suicide to below the Article  3  threshold  when  the  decision  to
        remove was taken.  In relation to the risk of suicide on route  the
        Tribunal was entitled to infer that the Secretary  of  State  would
        take all  reasonable  steps  to  discharge  his  obligations  under
        section 6 of the Human Rights Act and take judicial notice  of  the
        arrangements that the Secretary of State made to escort  vulnerable
        persons on return.  In relation to the risk of suicide in Sri Lanka
        the Tribunal was entitled to take into account  the  evidence  that
        there would be family support on return, that  the  claimant  would
        have access to medical treatment, and that his fears of persecution
        were not objectively justified.
    11. The Judge specifically notes at [37] that there was no challenge to
        the respondent's objective evidence at paragraph 91 of the  Reasons
        for Refusal letter in which the availability of psychiatric  mental
        health facilities in Albania is addressed. At paragraph 92  of  the
        reasons for refusal letter it is said that adequate care facilities
        in Albania are available to support the appellant on return.
    12. Although the appellant has a subjective fear of ill-treatment  from
        his father it is not made out that such fear is  objectively  well-
        founded.
    13. It was not made out  before  the  Judge  that  the  United  Kingdom
        government would not be able to adequately manage  the  psychiatric
        symptoms or presentation whilst the  appellant  is  in  the  United
        Kingdom or in transit to Albania.
    14. Mr Lewis sought to rely upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in
        Y and Z (Sri  Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  submitting  that  the
        circumstances faced by this appellant are akin to those  considered
        in that case in which article 3  was  engaged  notwithstanding  the
        availability of treatment in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  absence  of  an
        objective basis for  the  fear.  The  facts  of  Y  and  Z  are  of
        importance for in that case the Court  of  Appeal  said  that  even
        where there was no objective risk on return, there came a point  at
        which the undisturbed finding that an appellant had  been  tortured
        and raped  in  captivity  had  to  be  conscientiously  related  to
        credible and uncontradicted expert evidence that the likely  effect
        of the psychological trauma, if return was enforced,  was  suicide.
        The appellant's in Y and Z had been tortured by the authorities who
        were precisely  those  they  would  have  to  turn  to,  to  access
        appropriate psychiatric treatment.  It  was  found  the  degree  of
        resulting risk of suicide was sufficient to engage  article  3.  In
        the appeal under consideration the individual the  appellant  fears
        is his father, not the State, and it was not made out the degree or
        impact is comparable to that found in Y and Z.
    15. AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64 concluding  that  whilst  N
        was binding authority up to Supreme Court level, Paposhvili relaxed
        the test only to a very modest extent.   The  boundary  had  simply
        shifted from being defined by imminence of death  in  the  removing
        state even with treatment to the imminence of intense suffering  or
        death in the receiving state  occurring  because  of  the  lack  of
        treatment previously available in the removing state.
    16. On this appeal the appellant had not demonstrated on  the  evidence
        that was threshold reached. Reliance upon  paragraph  [12]  of  the
        ground seeking permission to appeal does not take  account  of  the
        confirmation of the scope of the hearing from the Court  of  Appeal
        which post-dated the filing of the grounds.
    17. It is not made out that appropriate psychiatric  services  are  not
        available  in  Albania  on  the  evidence  before  the   Judge   or
        submissions made.
    18. In Balogun  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  60286/09)  ECtHR
        (Fourth Section) the Nigerian applicant submitted a report  from  a
        specialist psychiatric registrar which stated that he had attempted
        suicide after being notified of the refusal  of  his  human  rights
        claim.  Nonetheless, it was held  that  the  Applicant's  complaint
        under Article 3 against deportation was manifestly ill-founded  and
        therefore inadmissible pursuant to Articles 55(3) and (4) ECHR. The
        UK  Government  had  outlined  appropriate  steps  it  would   take
        throughout the deportation process to protect  the  Applicant  from
        the risk of suicide. In light of those precautions to be  taken  by
        the Government and the existence of adequate  psychiatric  care  in
        Nigeria, the Court could not be persuaded that  there  would  be  a
        breach of Article 3 if the Applicant was deported to Nigeria (paras
        29 - 34).
    19. The finding by the Judge that article 3  ECHR  is  not  engaged  in
        relation to the risk  of  suicide  is  therefore  not  infected  by
        arguable legal error. This matter is specifically mentioned by  the
        Judge who dismissed the  appeal  on  article  3  (medical  grounds)
        within the body of the determination at [38].
    20. In relation to the submission the  medical  aspects,  even  if  not
        engaging article 3, were  relevant  to  the  appellants  article  8
        claim,  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2012] EWCA Civ 279 the Court of Appeal noted  that  the
        courts had declined to say that Article 8 could never by engaged by
        the health consequences of removal but they had never found such  a
        breach and had not been able to postulate  circumstances  in  which
        such a breach was likely to be established. The  only  cases  where
        the absence of adequate medical treatment in the country to which a
        person was to be deported would be relevant to Article 8 was  where
        it was an additional factor to be weighed in the balance with other
        factors that engaged Article 8 (paras 17 - 23). This  approach  was
        endorsed by Lord Justice Laws in GS(India) and Others 2015 EWCA Civ
        40 (para 86).  See also MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797.
    21. Interaction with the medical services in the  United  Kingdom  form
        part of the appellants private life but that it was  not  made  out
        that such could not occur with medical services in Albania such  as
        to make any interference with this aspect of the appellants private
        life disproportionate.
    22. The conclusion by the Judge that the appellant had not  established
        a case sufficient to displace the  public  interest  is  a  finding
        within the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on  the
        evidence. No arguable legal error is made out.
    23. In relation to the submissions made by  Mr  Lewis  in  relation  to
        whether the appellant will be able to integrate back into  Albania,
        the assertion of obstacles to preventing such integration,  it  has
        not been made out that any arguable material error has been made in
        relation to this aspect. Mr Tufan relies upon the decision  of  the
        Court of Appeal in AS v Secretary of State the Home Department [two
        thousand seventeen] EWCA Civ 1284 at paragraphs 58  and  59  where,
        giving the lead judgment, Lord Justice Moylan held:


             58.  I do not consider that Mr Buley's categorisation of  some
                  factors as "generic"  is  helpful.  Consideration  of  the
                  issues of obstacles to integration requires  consideration
                  of all relevant factors some of which might  be  described
                  as generic. What Mr Buley identified as "generic" factors,
                  as referred to above, can clearly be relevant to the issue
                  of  whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles   to
                  integration. They can form part of the  "broad  evaluative
                  judgment" as is specifically demonstrated by the reference
                  in Kamara to "good health" and "capable of working".


             59.  I also  reject  Mr  Buley's  submission  that,  following
                  Kamara, whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to be
                  determined by reference to their  ties  or  links  to  the
                  country. This is to turn what Sales LJ said in Kamara into
                  just the sort of gloss which he expressly warned  against.
                  It is clear, to repeat, that generic  factors  can  be  of
                  significance and can clearly support the  conclusion  that
                  the person will not encounter very  significant  obstacles
                  to integration.


    24. The appellant failed to establish before the Judge the existence of
        'very significant obstacles' on the  basis  of  his  mental  health
        difficulties, when combined with other facts,  to  satisfy  such  a
        requirement.
    25. The appellant may have a strong subjective fear of  being  returned
        to his father's home where he will come under his father's  control
        and may face, in his opinion, a real risk of further abuse from his
        father. The appellant previously lived in Dobrac, Shkoder, an  area
        in the North of Albania 60 miles from the capital  Tirana.  It  was
        not made before the Judge the appellant would need to return to his
        home area especially as he is now an adult.
    26. As mentioned to Mr Lewis at the  hearing,  that  the  Tribunal  has
        judicial notice of the existence of a shelter in Tirana set  up  to
        provide protection for those  in  precisely  the  position  of  the
        appellant who, as a result of acts of violence  or  other  problems
        within the home, were unable to return home and require alternative
        support and accommodation. The shelter was set up in December  2014
        at an undisclosed location within Tirana with the  support  of  the
        United States Agency for  International  Development,  the  British
        Embassy in Tirana and the Albert Kennedy Trust.  A  plaque  on  the
        building also confirms that  it  has  been  made  possible  through
        Assist Impact and in partnership with the Aleaca LGBT and ProlGBT.
    27. Whilst the shelter may have a limited number of beds its purpose is
        to enable young people aged 18 to 25 facing rejection and  violence
        at the hands of  members  of  their  family  due  to  their  sexual
        orientation to avoid having to face homelessness and to live within
        a supportive  and  protective  environment.   The  shelter  has  an
        allocated social worker  responsible  for  assisting  young  people
        staying there in obtaining accommodation, employment,  and  medical
        and other assistance with a view to  enabling  them  to  leave  the
        shelter and live within Albanian society, more likely than  not  to
        be within Tirana, free from harm. Funding is  provided  by  the  US
        Department for International Development.
    28. Those  in  the  shelter  include  individuals  abandoned  by  their
        families and provides  medical  referrals  for  both  physical  and
        psychological issues. Its stated aim is to support provide  support
        to enable people to go out into the community  and  live  a  normal
        life.
    29. It is not made out that an  approach  through  the  respondent  and
        connections with the British Embassy would not enable the appellant
        to  be  allocated  a  place  at  the  shelter  or  for  appropriate
        facilities to be made available. It was  not  therefore,  arguably,
        made out that even if the appellant faced a real risk in  his  home
        area that there will not be a viable internal relocation option  to
        Tirana that it is reasonably for him to avail himself of in all the
        circumstances.
    30. It was not made out that the  appellant  will  be  unable  to  seek
        assistance from  the  police  if  he  experiences  difficulties  in
        Tirana. The Judge noted no submissions were  made  challenging  the
        conclusions on asylum in the reasons for refusal letter,  which  at
        paragraph 53 stated "Consequently you have  not  demonstrated  that
        the Albanian authorities or any party or  organisation  controlling
        Albania are unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  protection  against
        persecution or serious harm".
    31. There was also no challenge in  relation  to  the  finding  of  the
        availability or reasonableness of internal relocation at paragraphs
        54 - 59 of the Reasons for Refusal letter.
    32. It is not made out that as part of any  work  undertaken  with  the
        appellant  those  providing  support/counselling   cannot   provide
        reassurance that he will not be returning to his home  area  or  to
        his father and that support will be available to  assist  with  the
        return process and his reintegration into Albania.
    33. Taking all matters in the round, I find the appellant has failed to
        make out error of law material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal.  The  appellant  has  failed  to  establish,  however  much
        sympathy one may feel for him in  his  circumstances,  that  it  is
        appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to interfere with this decision.

Decision

    34. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 April 2018




