
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2018                         |On 18th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MISS VJ
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjain (Counsel), Lillywhite Williams & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A J Parker, promulgated on 10th May 2018, following a hearing  at
    Manchester on  20th  April  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant was born on [~] 1992, is a national of Albania, and is  a
    female.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  6th
    March 2018, refusing her claim to asylum and to paragraph  339C  of  HC
    395.

 3. The Appellant subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 4. The Appellant's claim is that she left Albania with her boyfriend,  who
    subsequently abandoned her to a  trafficker,  and  that  she  became  a
    victim of trafficking, and if she were now to return back  to  Albania,
    she would be at risk from other traffickers.  It is noteworthy  that  a
    NRM decision was negative, concluding that the Appellant had not been a
    victim of trafficking.  This decision is not binding on this  Tribunal,
    which has to determine the issue of Appellant's  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the lower standard.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge noted how the Appellant had left Albania of her own volition,
    as she was in a genuine relationship with her boyfriend, and they  went
    for a better life, according to the judge, travelling through Italy and
    Spain, after which they both  returned  back  to  Albania,  from  Italy
    (paragraph 18).   The  judge  observed  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    consistent on the dates that she had  visited  the  various  countries.
    She had also been "open and honest regarding her  immigration  history"
    (paragraph 20).  It was also noted by the judge how the  Appellant  had
    spent with her boyfriend two  months  in  Albania  and  experienced  no
    problems when they had returned (paragraph 23).  She had also travelled
    out of her country on her own passport by air.  She illegally travelled
    to Belgium where her boyfriend had then left her, and she  then  became
    pregnant (paragraph 24).

 6. However, the Appellant's claim then was that her boyfriend had  "forced
    her to work as a prostitute and she fell pregnant and  then  one  night
    they went by car to a forest" and then she managed to escape  with  two
    other girls and that "within one hour she boarded a lorry due to go  to
    London with fellow asylum seekers", and the judge  did  not  find  this
    credible, on the basis that the Appellant would not have been  able  to
    get a lorry within one hour so quickly (paragraph 25).  The judge  went
    on to say that even if the account given  by  the  Appellant  was  true
    "this is simply explained by the fact that she had a bad experience  in
    Belgium and this does not create a risk profile in Albania"  (paragraph
    26).  Moreover, it was not credible that the  traffickers  had  allowed
    the Appellant six months without forcing  her  into  prostitution  (see
    paragraphs 27 and 28).

 7. Account was taken by the judge of an expert report  by  Antonia  Young,
    which had treated the Appellant's account as being credible  (paragraph
    30).  However, the judge was of the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    story was not plausible and that she had not been trafficked, and would
    return as a single woman with a child to Albania, because she had  left
    her own country on two occasions voluntarily with  her  boyfriend,  and
    that the relationship had ended and she had become pregnant  (paragraph
    32).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge erred for the following
    reasons.  First, at paragraph  25,  the  judge  had  stated  that,  the
    Appellant's account of being forced to work as  a  prostitute  was  not
    credible, but the Appellant had given detail of this in her  interview,
    her witness statement and in  her  oral  evidence,  and  this  was  not
    referred to in the determination at all.  The judge simply states  that
    the account "does not sound credible", and this is not a proper  reason
    upon which to disbelieve the account.

10. Second, the judge had failed to  make  any  reference  to  the  country
    guidance case in relation to trafficked women from Albania of TD and AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  The judge  had  regarded  the
    Appellant's evidence account of having left Albania with her  boyfriend
    voluntarily as something that damaged her credibility.  But if one  had
    given consideration to the country guidance of TD and AD, there it  had
    been made clear that:

         "Some women are lured to  leave  Albania  with  false  promises  of
         relationships or work. Others may seek out traffickers in order  to
         facilitate their departure from Albania and their establishment  in
         prostitution abroad. Although such women cannot  be  said  to  have
         left Albania against their will, where they have fallen  under  the
         control of traffickers for the purpose  of  exploitation  there  is
         likely to be considerable violence within the relationships  and  a
         lack of freedom: such  women  are  victims  of  trafficking.   (See
         paragraph 119(c)).


11. Third, the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  material  evidence.   For
    example, the judge had stated (at paragraph 57) that the Appellant  had
    failed to report her  traffickers  to  the  Belgian  police  after  she
    escaped, but the judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    explanation in oral  evidence  that  an  hour  after  she  escaped  the
    traffickers, she had boarded a lorry in order to leave the  area.   Any
    failure to seek out the police and report the matter must  be  seen  in
    the context of how she had escaped.

12. Fourthly, it was said that the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings
    could not be sustained, when it was said that the  Appellant  had  been
    "disowned by her  father  (at  paragraph  38),  and  yet  in  the  next
    paragraph it had been stated (at paragraph 39) that there has been  "no
    breach of the family's honour".

13. Finally, what is perhaps most important in this appeal,  was  the  fact
    that the judge referred to the Appellant returning back to Albania as a
    single mother, without family support, and  yet  no  consideration  was
    given to her vulnerability in this respect, if she were to be returning
    alone with a child.



Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 29th November 2018, Mr Chakmakjain,  relied
    upon the grounds of application, and set out to explain them before the
    Tribunal.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's  conclusions  as  to  the
    Appellant's lack of credibility were not sustainable.   The  judge  had
    failed to refer to the country guidance case of TD  and  AD.   Finally,
    the judge failed to take into account the fact that the  Appellant  was
    returning back as a single mother, disowned by her family, without  any
    other support, and in a country that was small enough to raise risks to
    her.

15. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that he would have to accept that  the
    judge's failure  to  make  any  reference  whatsoever  to  the  country
    guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092, was
    remis of the judge, particularly given that the  case  that  the  judge
    does refer to, is one that deals with lesbians, and not with those  who
    have been trafficked (see paragraph 42).  He would also have to  accept
    that the judge had not considered the Appellant's position as a  single
    mother, estranged from her family, without visible  means  of  support,
    who  was  returning  back  to  Albania  now.   Nevertheless,  Mr  Bates
    submitted that the credibility findings that had been made should stand
    intact.  The judge did rightly not find the Appellant to  be  credible,
    given that the Appellant had not been put to work as a  prostitute  for
    six months by her traffickers when she left Albania.  Also,  the  judge
    rightly did not find the Appellant credible when she  gave  details  of
    how she escaped, and how she managed to find a lorry within an hour  of
    escaping to enable her to get away.

16. In reply, Mr  Chakmakjain,  submitted  that  the  judge's  errors  were
    sufficient for the decision to be set  aside.   For  example,  she  had
    recognised that "her father  has  disowned  her  and  has  no  contact"
    (paragraph 38).  Yet, this was immediately contradicted  by  the  judge
    when she noted that "she returns a single mother and there has been  no
    breach of the family's honour" (paragraph 39).  Moreover, her case  was
    not that she had been trafficked right from the beginning from Albania.
     Her case was that she had left with her  boyfriend  for  another  life
    elsewhere, and it was only when in Belgium the boyfriend fell  on  hard
    times and could not find work, that she was forced  into  prostitution,
    and this was recognised as a clear possibility in the country  guidance
    case of TD and AD, and one which the judge misunderstands.   This  also
    explained why the Appellant was  not  put  to  work  immediately  as  a
    prostitute.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, this is a case where  the  judge  fails  to  apply  the  country
    guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00092.
    The case is important, because it expressly recognises that "some women
    are lured to leave Albania with  false  promises  of  relationships  or
    work" (paragraph 119(c)).  The Appellant's position  was  presented  as
    such.  Her boyfriend took her away, and it was only  subsequently  that
    she was forced into prostitution in Belgium.

19. Second, it is implicitly accepted that the Appellant may well have been
    forced to work as a prostitute.  However, the recognition of this state
    of affairs is not properly brought out. What the judge states is  that,
    "I find that even if this was true this is simply explained by the fact
    that she had a bad experience in Belgium and this  does  not  create  a
    risk profile in Albania" (paragraph 26).  If the judge was prepared  to
    accept that the Appellant had been forced to work as a prostitute, this
    could not be put down to as being just "a bad experience", and if  this
    was the case, then it does not follow that "this does not create a risk
    profile in Albania", when plainly the evidence suggests that it does.

20. Third, the judge recognised, as a matter  of  obvious  fact,  that  the
    Appellant would be returning as a single woman with a  child,  disowned
    by her own family, and without any other support, and yet the viability
    of her return, and as to whether this would be "unduly harsh"  was  not
    something that was expressly considered by the judge.

21. In fact, the factual assessment was confused towards  the  end  of  the
    determination, when the judge concluded that the Appellant could indeed
    return because "there has  been  no  breach  of  the  family's  honour"
    (paragraph 39), which did  not  follow  from  the  recognition  in  the
    previous paragraph that "her father has disowned her" (paragraph 38).

22. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this  appeal  only  to  the  extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Brookfield.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge  Brookfield  pursuant  to  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)
    because the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  Rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.




24. An anonymity order is made.


25. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th January 2019




