

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/03042/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|Decision & Reasons promulgated      |
|On 3 May 2017                          |On 5 May 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   N A S H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Janjua of Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Shergill ('the Judge') who in a  decision  dated  14  October
        2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
        claim for asylum or leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  any
        other basis.
     2. At [33] the Judge finds:
        33.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  move  back  to
             Maqbaba/Makkbanna where his family is based. I see  no  reason
             why he would have to move to Taiz city which is where military
             activity is occurring. I  was  not  assisted  by  any  of  the
             evidence before me as to where Maqbaba/Makkbanna is located. I
             was able to ascertain from  an  Internet  search  that  it  is
             located about halfway between Taiz City and the coast  to  the
             west; in the south-west of the country in Taiz Governorate. It
             is some 211 km from Sana. The nearest city is Taiz city  which
             is 24 km away. There  is  a  hospital  in  Maqbaba  given  the
             reference to it in a BBC News article.
                    http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-34388463
                    http://wikimapoa.org/14270401/Maqbana-Center


     3. The applicant asserts the Judge erred in law by  undertaking  post-
        hearing research and relies upon the decision  of  the  Asylum  and
        Immigration Tribunal in EG (post-hearing Internet research) Nigeria
        [2008] UKAIT 00015, the head note which reads:


        "... it  is  most  unwise  for  a  judge  to  conduct  post-hearing
        research, on the Internet or otherwise,  into  the  factual  issues
        which have to be decided in a case. To derive evidence  from  post-
        hearing research on the Internet and to base  conclusions  on  that
        evidence without giving the parties the opportunity to  comment  on
        it is wrong."


     4. The need for fairness in relation to the treatment of the  evidence
        was also confirmed in the case of AM (fair  hearing)  Sudan  [2015]
        UKUT 00656 (IAC) in which it was held that if a judge is  cognisant
        of something conceivably material  which  does  not  form  part  of
        either party's case, this must be brought to the attention  of  the
        parties at  the  earliest  possible  stage,  which  duty  could  in
        principle extend beyond the hearing date;
     5. The appellant is a national of  Yemen  who  claimed  he  could  not
        return to his home area because of an alleged risk arising  from  a
        family land disputes/blood feud and threat from Houthi  rebels.  It
        was incumbent upon the appellant to produce sufficient evidence  to
        inform the Judge of  where  exactly  his  home  area  was  in  that
        country, especially considering the nature of the current  conflict
        in Yemen and the country material made available, which showed that
        in the north, west and centre of the country the  humanitarian  and
        security conditions are likely, in many cases, to breach Article  3
        and/or Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive. The appellant
        failed to produce evidence showing where his home area  was  within
        Yemen. When  asked  why  this  information  was  not  provided  the
        appellant claimed he was not asked either by his  solicitor  or  by
        the Judge.
     6. The Judge may well have been entitled to take a view  that  as  the
        appellant had not produced evidence to show  where  his  home  area
        was, he had failed to show that it  was  within  a  region  of  the
        country where a real risk of serious harm might  arise.  The  Judge
        did not do this, however, and took it upon himself to research  the
        location of the appellant's home area which was shown to be in  the
        south west of the country outside those  areas  identified  in  the
        country material as giving rise to a real risk. The appellant  must
        have been aware of where his town was located  and  if  the  reason
        this information was not communicated was an attempt to mislead the
        First-tier Tribunal that is not acceptable.
     7. What the appellant has failed to make out is that he  suffered  any
        prejudice or that there was any unfairness in the Judge undertaking
        the research and in not informing the parties of the nature of that
        research prior to receipt  of  the  decision  under  challenge.  On
        behalf of the appellant it was accepted that the Judges finding  in
        relation to the location of the appellant's home town is  factually
        correct. The research did not provide the Judge with knowledge  the
        appellant did not already possess. No arguable legal error material
        to the decision  is  made  out  as  the  appellant  has  failed  to
        establish any procedural irregularity amounting  to  an  unfairness
        which has caused prejudice to the appellant or denied the appellant
        a fair hearing. As noted from the head  note  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant, undertaking post-hearing research,  whilst  unadvisable,
        does not automatically give  rise  to  arguable  legal  error.  The
        question is whether the parties have been denied the opportunity to
        comment upon evidence that such research may have given  rise  too.
        In this case the was no need to invite such comment.
     8. The second challenge  relates  to  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
        appellant can safely return to his home area. The relevant parts of
        the decision under challenge are in the following terms:


        34.  I am satisfied that the appellant would be  returning  to  his
             family who are located sufficiently far away from any  ongoing
             fighting in Taiz city to which the news cuttings relied on  by
             the appellant refer.


        35.  I am satisfied that the humanitarian situation in  some  areas
             in southern Yemen while harsh do not in general breach Article
             3. I am not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  particularly
             vulnerable so as to bring him under  international  protection
             [2.3.7]. I also note that whilst relocating to most  parts  of
             Yemen is difficult a number of people have located  internally
             to  flee  combat  zones  including  to  the  appellant's  home
             governorate. That would tend to support, along with  the  oral
             evidence that I heard, at  the  situation  generally  in  Taiz
             Governorate is safe albeit  that  Taiz  city  has  been  under
             siege. I am satisfied that the appellant will be able to  rely
             on his family to return to Maqbana/ Makkbanna or elsewhere  in
             Taiz governorate and avoid Taiz City. It will not be necessary
             to relocate  to  Aden.  The  airport  issue  is  a  matter  of
             practicality of removal but once flights resumed there  is  no
             protection ground preventing his removal.


        ...


        38.  I have decided that on  the  basis  of  the  facts  found  and
             applying the relevant country guidance and Article 15(c)  law,
             that the appellant has not discharged the burden of  proof  to
             show that he would face a  real  risk  of  suffering  "serious
             harm" within the meaning of paragraph 339C of the  immigration
             rules if he was to return to Yemen.


     9.  The  question  of  an  entitlement  to  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
        Protection arises as at [30] the Judge found he was  not  satisfied
        to the lower standard that there is a family land dispute  that  is
        ongoing or that because of any such dispute the appellant's life is
        at risk as claimed from his family members or from  being  targeted
        by Houthi rebels or otherwise when looking at all the  evidence  in
        the round. The Judge concluded  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
        appellant's family remain in Maqbana/ Makkbanna and that he can get
        in touch with them.
    10. The appellant's representative was asked to refer to  any  specific
        paragraphs in the country information made available to  the  Judge
        that supported the assertion the Judge had erred in law in reaching
        the  conclusions  set  out  above.  No  specific  submissions  were
        received as the representative indicated that he  did  not  have  a
        complete bundle before him.
    11. The evidence before the Judge appears to  be  composed  of  various
        country reports including the respondents Country  Information  and
        Guidance Yemen: Security and  humanitarian  situation  Version  2.0
        dated April 2016 which is referred to in the  appellant's  skeleton
        argument prepared for  the  purposes  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing.
    12. Based upon the evidence the Judge was entitled to conclude that the
        appellant's home area, being in the south-west of Yemen was not one
        where the appellant did face a real risk of indiscriminate violence
        as a result of an internal armed conflict. It is  accepted  that  a
        Saudi led coalition is fighting the  Iranian  backed  Houthi  rebel
        movement which has resulted in a number of deaths and areas where a
        real risk may arise. That is referred to in the country information
        as being those areas mentioned above and not the south-west  region
        which, as the Judge noted, is viewed by some fleeing internally  as
        a relatively safe haven.
    13. The conclusion by the Judge that the appellant had not  established
        he fell within the category of those who may be at risk as a result
        of their personal profile, such  as  single  women  or  a  disabled
        person is also an arguably sustainable finding.
    14. In 2012 the European  courts  found  in  AA  and  others  v  Sweden
        (Application no. 14499/09) that  the  general  situation  in  Yemen
        remained volatile and extremely tense despite some recent political
        improvements.  There  were  several  internal  conflicts  going  on
        between various groups; however, in the Court's view,  the  general
        situation of instability and violence in  Yemen  was  not  of  such
        intensity that it might be said that the Appellants will be exposed
        to a real risk of ill-treatment simply by being returned there.
    15. Whilst it is accepted by both  advocates  that  the  situation  has
        deteriorated since 2015 the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant
        was still arguably insufficient to show that this appellant will be
        exposed to a real risk of ill-treatment as a result of an  internal
        armed conflict solely as a result of his being in Yemen.
    16. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out.


Decision

    17. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 May 2017












