

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/03044/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 7th December 2018                   |on 14th January 2019          |
|                                       |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal David Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is an Iranian national.  He claims to fear persecution
      because he has converted to Christianity.  He previously had an
      unsuccessful appeal in November 2016 on similar grounds. Since the
      earlier appeal he has been attending a different church and has been
      baptised.  In the current appeal Judge Clapham did not accept the
      appellant's conversion as genuine and did not believe he would
      proselytise in Iran.  The judge also found against the appellant on
      human rights grounds, having considered the appellant's relationship
      with his girlfriend, who is a British citizen.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the ground that the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal arguably erred in carrying out a
      proportionality assessment under Article 8.  The other ground of the
      application, which was also considered arguable, was that the judge
      applied too high a standard of proof, having regard to support for the
      appeal by the evidence of a clergyman with personal knowledge of the
      appellant.

Submissions

   4.  Mr Forrest addressed me on the grounds of the application.  In
      relation to the question of the appellant's alleged conversion he
      relied on TF & MA [2018] CSIH 58, which set out, at paragraphs 41-52,
      the correct approach to assessing whether a conversion is genuine and
      considered, at paragraphs 52-59, the status of a minister of religion
      as a witness.  Mr Forrest submitted that the assessment of the
      genuineness of the appellant's faith was not approached properly and
      adequate reasons were not given for the findings made.

   5. Mr Forrest explained that since the earlier unsuccessful appeal a
      fresh claim for protection had been made.  This was based on the
      evidence of the Pastor who appeared as a witness before Judge Clapham.
       Nevertheless, Judge Clapham had relied upon the Devaseelan principles
      in applying the findings made in the earlier appeal to the decision in
      the present appeal (Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1).  This was contrary to
      TF & MA, where it was pointed out that even if an appellant was not
      believed on one issue, he could be believed on another.  In addition,
      the judge erred in his approach to the evidence of the Pastor by not
      giving him the status of an expert witness.

   6. Mr Forrest further contended that Judge Clapham erred when considering
      the appellant's Article 8 claim.  The judge had asked whether the
      appellant 's girlfriend would face persecution as a Christian in Iran
      but this was irrelevant.  The question was whether there would be a
      disproportionate interference with the relationship between the
      appellant and his girlfriend.  The judge did not consider
      proportionality properly.

   7. For the respondent Mrs O'Brien acknowledged the difficulty of making a
      finding of fact on a matter which no one could know but the individual
      themselves.  There was a question of whether the decision in the
      current appeal had been unduly infected by the previous appeal.  The
      current appeal did not arise from a second claim in the classic sense.
       In TF & MA the original claim had been on different grounds, not on
      alleged religious conversion.  The appellant in the current appeal was
      someone who had previously made an unsuccessful claim to be a
      Christian attending an established Church.  He then made his second
      claim with a different Church.  The outcome of the previous claim
      could not be disregarded in the manner which was suggested in TF & MA.
       The appellant's claimed conversion had already been disbelieved.

   8. Mrs O'Brien further submitted that the evidence of the Pastor in the
      present appeal was nowhere near the standard of the evidence of church
      involvement expected in TF & MA.  The evidence had very little depth
      in relation to matters such as how a person goes through the church
      process and how the Pastor comes to know a convert is genuine, by
      reference for example to Bible classes and eagerness to participate in
      faith-related activities.  In TF & MA the Church had clearly defined
      processes to attest and affirm faith.  There were classes and
      interviews.  In the present appeal there had been no cross-referencing
      to the Pastor's expertise, for example in relation to how many people
      he had spent time with discussing conversion.  The Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal found the Pastor did not explain why the appellant had
      converted.  There was no "road to Damascus" interaction.  Not every
      religious witness was to be regarded as an expert.  The judge was
      entitled to look at the differentiation of the evidence and its
      quality, as the judge had done.  The judge was concerned over the
      depth of the evidence.  The judge would have acted incorrectly by
      ignoring the fact that the appellant had not proceeded to baptism in a
      structured and well-ordered organisation.  The evidence in the present
      appeal was not infected by a previous claim on different grounds.  The
      previous appeal was refused because the appellant was unable to secure
      baptism at his previous church.  The judge also found relevant the
      timing of the appellant's move from one religious organisation to
      another.  This was contemporaneous with the adverse decision in the
      previous appeal.  The previous appeal was on the same basis for
      seeking protection as the present appeal. There was no error as
      described in TF & MA.

   9. Mrs O'Brien then turned to the proportionality assessment.  The
      Article 8 assessment was very brief but the question was whether it
      was sufficient.  The judge found at paragraph 71 of the decision that
      the quality of the relationship was not such as to engage Article 8.
      It would have been best practice to have fleshed out the issues but
      the decision was sufficient.

  10. In reply Mr Forrest referred to the question of whether the evidence
      showed a "road to Damascus" conversion.  It was not necessary to show
      a Damascene conversion.  In terms of paragraph 43 of TF & MA what was
      required was an assessment of the appellant's state of mind.  The
      evidence recorded by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph
      37 of his decision showed a genuine belief by the Pastor in the
      appellant's conversion.

  11. I informed the parties that I would reserve my position on the issue
      of error of law.  If I found in favour of the appellant the appeal
      would be remitted.

Discussion

  12. Mrs O'Brien made the obvious point that no one but the appellant can
      really know what is in his mind.  With respect, this is not the way in
      which a tribunal should approach its fact-finding role in an appeal of
      this nature.  The tribunal has to assess what is in an appellant's
      mind by examining his or her statements and actions while taking
      account also the evidence of other witnesses, particularly evidence
      from any minister of religion or equivalent person with knowledge of
      the appellant.  This point is made at paragraph 44 of TF & MA.

  13. The issue for me to decide is whether the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal made an error of law.  Mrs O'Brien made a number of
      potentially cogent criticisms of the evidence before the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal.  Had the judge rejected the evidence for the
      appellant specifying all the matters raised by Mrs O'Brien, it might
      have been that the judge would have given adequate and valid reasons
      for his decision.  A major difficulty I perceive with the decision is
      that the judge did not give sufficient reasoning for the findings
      which he made along the lines suggested by Mrs O'Brien.

  14. At paragraph 37 of his decision the judge summarised the evidence if
      the Pastor of the appellant's church.  The Pastor appeared to be
      entirely satisfied that the appellant is a practising Christian.  The
      reasons why the judge did not accept the Pastor's evidence, however,
      were not wholly those to which Mrs O'Brien referred.  The principal
      reason why the judge did not accept the pastor's evidence seemed to be
      that the appellant had been found in his previous appeal not to be a
      genuine convert.  At paragraph 56 of his decision Judge Clapham states
      that he adopts the negative credibility findings made by the judge in
      the previous appeal.  Subsequently, at paragraphs 65-67 he considers
      in some detail the Pastor's evidence but by the time he reaches this
      point he appears to have already found against the appellant.

  15. It is not for me to decide at this juncture whether the appellant is a
      genuine convert.  My concern is whether the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal gave adequate reasons for finding he was not.  When
      addressing the evidence of the Pastor, however, the judge specified
      very few reasons along the lines of those inferred by Mrs O'Brien.
      The judge commented that anyone seeking to portray himself as a
      genuine convert would be a regular attender and active participant at
      the church.  The judge referred to a lack of depth in a supporting
      letter from the Pastor, notwithstanding that the Pastor appeared at
      the hearing to give evidence and offered himself for cross-
      examination.  The judge stated nevertheless that he would have
      expected the Pastor to give detailed information in his letter about
      what had attracted the appellant to Christianity.  By this point in
      the decision it appears that the judge had already made up his mind
      that the appellant was not a genuine convert before he turned his
      consideration to the Pastor's evidence.  The reader is left with the
      impression that the Pastor's evidence was rejected because the
      appellant was found in his previous appeal not to be a genuine
      convert.  This is not a proper application of the Devaseelan principle
      nor does it comply with the holistic approach endorsed at paragraph 50
      of TF & MA.  I do not consider that the judge gave adequate reasons
      for the findings he made and this amounts to an error of law in his
      decision.


  16. I am not without sympathy for the position of the judge, who gave his
      decision without the benefit of having seen the decision of the Inner
      House in TF & MA.  Nevertheless, by the standards of that decision it
      cannot be said that the judge dealt with the evidence of the Pastor in
      a proper manner.


  17. The other issue before me was the sufficiency of the judge's
      consideration of the appellant's private and family life under Article
      8.  It was contended for the appellant that the question of the safety
      of the appellant's girlfriend as a Christian in Iran was irrelevant.
      I do not entirely agree.  This was a matter potentially relevant to
      the reasonableness of the couple carrying on family life together in
      another country.  However, as Mrs O'Brien pointed out, the judge did
      not find that there was a private or family life sufficient to engage
      Article 8.  While the reasons for this finding were very brief, in the
      absence of any other factor I think it unlikely this would have
      amounted to an error of law requiring that the decision should be set
      aside.  As it is, however, if the decision is to be set aside and re-
      made then the decision under Article 8 should also be re-made.

  18. The position is that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
      in his assessment of the evidence relating to the appellant's alleged
      conversion.  The decision is set aside.  The findings of fact required
      are such that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal in terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The
      appeal will be reheard before a differently constituted tribunal with
      no findings preserved from the decision of Judge Clapham.

Conclusions

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  20. The decision is set aside.

  21. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before
      differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.


Anonymity


   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.
    I consider that such a direction should be made in the following terms
   in order to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is
   finally decided.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
   indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
   direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
   with the direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.




   M E Deans
                         31st December 2018
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
