
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03763/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 May 2017                        |On 01 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     PVT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, counsel instructed by Russell Wise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  I
    Ross, promulgated on 9 January 2017. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge M Robertson on 20 April 2017.

Anonymity

 2. A direction has been made previously, and is reiterated below.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 August 1994 with  his
    wife, having been recognised as a refugee in Hong Kong. During  January
    2008, the appellant was convicted of conspiring to  supply  a  Class  C
    drug; producing a Class C  drug,  cultivating  cannabis  plants,  money
    laundering and abstracting electricity and was sentenced to a total  of
    8 years' imprisonment. On 7 October 2011,  the  respondent  decided  to
    revoke the appellant's refugee status. His appeal against that decision
    and the decision to deport him was dismissed.

 4. The appellant applied for asylum on  11  March  2014.  The  appellant's
    protection and human rights claim was refused on  12  April  2016.  The
    respondent considered that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  rebut  the
    presumption in section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002; that some aspects of his protection claim had  been  rejected
    by a judge in 2013; that he had involved himself with a political group
    in the United Kingdom only after he was facing deportation and that  he
    failed to mention this during his previous appeal; he was excluded from
    eligibility for Humanitarian Protection and that no  fresh  information
    or very compassionate circumstances  had  been  raised  in  respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR since his appeal was dismissed.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant and  a  Mr
    Clive Lindsay gave evidence. The judge found that the appellant had not
    rebutted the presumption under Article 33(2)/Section 72 of the 2002 Act
    and that he represented a danger to the community. His Article 3 appeal
    was  dismissed,  with  the  judge  finding  that  he  did  not  have  a
    significant political role and was not a credible witness.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal challenged the judge's finding that a letter from
    a witness HG was unreliable;  argued  that  the  judge  did  not  state
    whether he  accepted  Mr  Lindsay's  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    political involvement; that the judge dismissed or reduced  the  weight
    accorded reports by  Professor  Thayer,  Professor  Bluth  and  Amnesty
    International; that the judge failed to engage  with  the  evidence  of
    monitoring by the Vietnamese authorities abroad and the judge failed to
    consider evidence that the appellant had been photographed in prominent
    positions at every demonstration and one of these had been published by
    BBC Vietnam.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that as the  evidence  of
    Mr Lindsay was not mentioned, this may arguably  be  an  error  of  law
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

 8. Furthermore, Judge Robertson considered that there was  no  mention  of
    the report of Professor Bluth and she was of the view that the  judge's
    permissible findings on the reports of Professors Seddon and Thayer  as
    well as that of Amnesty International may need to be re-examined should
    there be favourable credibility findings.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 4 May 2017  opposed  the
    appellant's appeal and submitted  that  the  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed himself appropriately. The judge had referred to  the
    oral evidence of Mr Lindsay and correctly found that this did not  take
    matters further than the background reports; he adequately  dealt  with
    the evidence of HG and the grounds were inaccurate to  state  that  the
    judge failed to mention or consider the evidence  of  Professor  Bluth.
    The response drew attention to  the  decisions  in  VHR  (unmeritorious
    grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC) and VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA
    Civ 522. The grounds were dismissed as mere disagreement.

The hearing

10. Mr  Singer  submitted  that  the  appeal  concerned  Article  3  alone;
    particularly the manner in which the First-tier Tribunal dealt with the
    expert evidence. He argued as  follows.  The  appellant's  fresh  claim
    concerned his sur place political activities. These were not low  level
    in that he was co-ordinating activities. The issue before the judge was
    whether the appellant's  claims  were  true.  The  appellant  called  a
    witness, Clive Lindsay  who  was  cross-examined  for  10  minutes.  No
    mention was made of Mr Lindsay's evidence. Nor was there any assessment
    of Professor Bluth's evidence as set  out  in  two  2  expert  reports.
    Professor Bluth's evidence went to  the  level  of  scrutiny  that  the
    Vietnamese authorities address to opponents.

11. Mr Singer spent some time on  the  judge's  findings  that  there  were
    inconsistencies between the appellant's description  of  his  political
    activity and reality. He argued those findings were not safe  if  judge
    failed  to  make  findings  on  Mr  Lindsay's  evidence  or  failed  to
    adequately reason his findings. The same could be said of the  evidence
    of Professor Bluth. Acknowledging the respondent's position, Mr  Singer
    agreed that the judge did not have to particularise everything, however
    he contended that the evidence of Mr Lindsay was material and weighty.

12. Referring to YB (Eritrea)  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360,  Mr  Singer
    criticised the  judge  for  requiring  affirmative  evidence  that  the
    appellant was definitely photographed and these  photographs  would  be
    sent to the  Vietnamese  authorities.   The  judge  was  provided  with
    photographs of the appellant, some of which were publicly available  on
    Facebook, You Tube and on the BBC website. This evidence could  not  be
    dismissed as immaterial and if taken into consideration the  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility and the level of risk  on  return  would
    have been different. He argued that the case was suitable for  remittal
    owing to unsafe credibility findings and that there needed to be a  new
    fact-finding exercise on the sur place issue.




13. For the respondent, Mr Clarke addressed the grounds in order.  Firstly,
    he asked me to note that HN's letter raised an allegation of  solicitor
    misconduct, yet there had been no compliance with the  findings  in  BT
    (Former solicitors'  alleged  misconduct)  Nepal  [2004]  UKIAT  00311.
    Furthermore, the copy of the  appellant's  letter  to  his  solicitors,
    Victory @ Law, was unsigned and occurred 2 years after the event, there
    was no evidence it was sent and there were no  follow  up  letters.  Mr
    Clarke argued that it was hard to see  how  far  HN's  letter  went  in
    demonstrating solicitor misconduct. Mr  Clarke  reminded  me  that  the
    appellant had previously been found not to be a truthful witness. There
    was a lack of medical evidence in relation to the non-attendance of  HN
    and in any event the appellant's evidence was that he did not  ask  him
    to come.



14.  Mr Clarke described the arguments in support of the second  ground  as
    misconceived.  The judge noted that the  evidence  of  Mr  Lindsay  was
    internally consistent  but  that  it  was  different  to  that  of  the
    appellant. The judge found that the appellant  was  merely  a  steward.
    This was inconsistent with Mr Lindsay's evidence that the appellant was
    a co-organiser. The issue as to when  the  appellant  started  his  sur
    place activities went to credibility given that the judge noted that he
    took part in two demonstrations in 2012 and two in 2013 and would  have
    been aware of this at his  2013  appeal  hearing.  The  judge  directed
    himself appropriately, with reference to the previous judge's  findings
    as well as the description in the probation report of the appellant  as
    predatory and manipulative. He conceded  that  the  judge  did  not  go
    through the evidence of Mr Lindsay, he gave very clear  findings  based
    on the appellant's evidence and Mr Lindsay's evidence did  not  advance
    the appellant's case as it was inconsistent. It was open to  the  judge
    to find that the appellant's activities were exaggerated.



15. Mr Clarke argued that YB (Eritrea) concerned a  different  country  and
    that it was wrong to take that case as the basis for saying no evidence
    was needed to demonstrate surveillance. The judge was entitled to  take
    the circumstances of the founder of  the  organisation  in  issue,  who
    returned to Vietnam without problems and was enlisted  into  the  army.
    His subsequent arrest was for something different  and  therefore  even
    with his profile, he was not at risk. The reports of Professors  Seddon
    and Thayer provided no evidential basis for the existence of monitoring
    of opponents. Professor Thayer's report  contained  only  a  series  of
    assertions, with the only footnote relating to  his  own  role  at  the
    University of New South Wales.  Mr Clarke  summed  up  the  appellant's
    case as follows. His role in the organisation was low-level work  as  a
    steward; there was no evidence of surveillance; no evidence of  members
    of the organisation being persecuted;  no  evidence  of  informants  or
    monitoring and therefore it was open to the judge to find there was  no
    risk on return.








16. In reply, Mr Singer argued that the judge cherry-picked the appellant's
    evidence. It could be seen from the appellant's witness statement  that
    there was more to what the appellant saying about his  activities  than
    that stated in his oral evidence. While it was right that the appellant
    said that there was no evidence that he had persuaded  others  to  join
    the organisation, he was referring to corroborating evidence and  there
    was no inconsistency between his evidence and that of Mr Lindsay.   The
    appellant's evidence was capable of being consistent with  that  of  Mr
    Lindsay, however the judge did not say if Mr Lindsay  was  telling  the
    truth. Even  if  the  sur  place  activities  were  undertaken  by  the
    appellant to bolster his claim, that came within the directive,  Danian
    considered. Lastly, that the founder of the movement was  not  arrested
    on his return to Vietnam over  7  years  ago  did  not  mean  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk. It was not necessary for the  appellant
    to show that persecution was routine but that there was a real risk  of
    it occurring.

17. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

18. The judge neither set out nor assessed the reliability of the  evidence
    of Clive Lindsay  in  respect  of  his  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
    political activities. The witness is briefly mentioned at  [8]  in  the
    following terms, "Mr Clive Lindsay gave evidence in accordance with his
    witness statement. His assessment of the risk faced by the appellant in
    Vietnam was based on the contents of an  Amnesty  International  Report
    and also  Professor  Thayer's  report."  Mr  Lindsay  became  Farnham's
    Amnesty  International's  co-ordinator  in   relation   to   Vietnamese
    Prisoners  of  Conscience  from  2007  onwards.  This   role   involved
    organising an annual protest outside the  Vietnamese  embassy,  sending
    out letters of support by group members and keeping the  group  updated
    on the situation in Vietnam  via  speakers,  information,  reports  and
    urgent actions. He became aware of  the  appellant's  participation  in
    demonstrations  since  2012,  describing  him  as  "one  of  the   main
    initiators of protest amongst the UK Vietnamese diaspora with whom (he)
    had contact." He further describes the appellant as a co-founder of  UK
    Vietnamese Youth for Democracy, co-organiser of its protests and  being
    responsible for increasing the  attendance  of  younger  Vietnamese  at
    Amnesty  protests.  He  gives  detailed  examples  of  the  appellant's
    involvement in these activities. This evidence was  deserving  of  some
    assessment and if it was rejected, at least  some  reasoning  ought  to
    have been provided.

19. The judge was of the view that the appellant  had  grossly  exaggerated
    his involvement,  referring  to  aspects  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and his evidence at the hearing in doing so.  Mr  Singer  was
    right to describe this as cherry-picking. At [37] the judge finds  that
    the appellant's role was no more  than  as  an  occasional  steward  at
    demonstrations. Yet, the appellant's description of his  role  in  Viet
    Youth for Democracy was far more extensive than this and  includes  his
    claim that he invited people to join and support the organisation, that
    he had encouraged many new members to join and was jointly  responsible
    for the organisation of demonstrations with  Mr  Lindsay  and  HN.  The
    appellant's claims in his  witness  statement  were  supported  by  the
    written evidence of Mr Lindsay.

20. It is regrettable that the judge did not explain why he  rejected  this
    evidence or why he found that the appellant was not instrumental in the
    founding of the group and had no directing role in it. The  appellant's
    oral evidence that there was no evidence that  others  had  joined  the
    group because of his activities was not an admission but a statement of
    fact, attesting to a lack of corroboration.

21. The judge dismisses the evidence of Professor  Thayer  because  he  has
    already decided that the appellant's account of his activities  is  not
    to be believed. He did  not  indicate  whether  he  accepted  Professor
    Thayer's expertise or his detailed  evidence  as  to  the  surveillance
    methods used  by  the  Vietnamese  authorities  including  the  use  of
    informants among the Vietnamese community. The  use  of  monitoring  of
    dissidents by  the  Vietnamese  authorities  was  referred  to  in  the
    decision notice as well as by Mr Lindsay who gave eye-witness  evidence
    to that effect.  In any event, the judge concluded  that  the  risk  of
    return was "wholly dependent" on whether the appellant was telling  the
    truth as to the extent of his involvement and whether  the  reports  of
    embassy staff  taking  photographs  and  monitoring  demonstrator  were
    accurate. For reasons given above,  the  judge's  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's involvement are unsafe.

22. Furthermore, I have had regard to what was  said  in  YB  (Eritrea)  as
    follows at [18]:

    Where, as here, the tribunal has objective  evidence  which  "paints  a
    bleak picture of the suppression of political  opponents"  by  a  named
    government, it requires little or no evidence or speculation to  arrive
    at a strong possibility - and perhaps more - that its foreign legations
    not only film or photograph their nationals who demonstrate  in  public
    against the regime but have informers  among  expatriate  oppositionist
    organisations who can name the people who are filmed  or  photographed.
    Similarly it does not  require  affirmative  evidence  to  establish  a
    probability that the intelligence services of such states  monitor  the
    internet for information about oppositionist groups."

23. Given the large quantity of expert, background and eye-witness evidence
    all pointing to the existence  of  surveillance  of  opponents  by  the
    Vietnamese authorities, it is possible that had the judge not made  the
    errors identified, the outcome of the appeal could have been different.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ross.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 19 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
