
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03294/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st April 2016                            |On 14th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

                     mr mohamed ismail abdul hazan asfak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, instructed by Marsh and Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Bradshaw dismissing an  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant was born on 3rd September 1992 and is a national  of  Sri
    Lanka.  He entered the UK in January 2011 as  a  student.   In  January
    2012 he was encountered  working  illegally.   He  claimed  asylum  but
    failed to attend his substantive interview  on  2nd  March  2012.   His
    claim was rejected for non-compliance.  The Appellant was  detained  in
    October 2015 and he made a further claim for  asylum.   His  claim  was
    refused after a substantive  interview,  giving  rise  to  the  present
    appeal.

 3. According to the Appellant he was rejected by his family and  community
    in Sri Lanka because of his physical deformities.  He was born with six
    fingers on each hand and seven toes on each foot.  He was befriended by
    a man called Vijay, who was a member  of  the  LTTE.   Vijay  delivered
    supplies to the LTTE three or four times  a  month  and  the  Appellant
    helped him.  Both were arrested in February 2007.   The  Appellant  was
    tortured but both he and Vijay were released after two days on  payment
    having been made by the Appellant's  father.   The  Appellant  was  not
    fingerprinted or photographed by the police and  was  released  without
    charge.  He had  no  further  problems  after  his  release  but  Vijay
    continued to be a member of the LTTE and  the  Appellant  continued  to
    help him.  Vijay was arrested again in March 2009  at  the  Appellant's
    home, although the Appellant was absent at  the  time.   The  Appellant
    went to live with an aunt in Colombo where he stayed until  2011.   His
    aunt kept him indoors telling him that his father had been arrested  in
    2009 and that she was arranging for him  to  leave  the  country.   The
    Appellant has had no contact with his immediate family since 2009.   He
    spoke to his aunt in 2015 on the day of his asylum  interview  and  she
    told him it was not safe to return to Sri  Lanka.   The  Appellant  has
    produced two summonses to appear in court in Sri  Lanka,  dated  August
    and October 2015.  These were addressed to the Appellant at his  family
    home.

 4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe the evidence  upon
    which the Appellant based his claim  for  asylum.   The  Judge  further
    found that even if the Appellant had been arrested and detained for two
    days and mistreated,  he  was  released  without  charge  and  was  not
    photographed or fingerprinted.  His release was secured by the  payment
    of a bribe.  This all indicated that he was no longer of  any  interest
    to the authorities.  He was not arrested  again  in  2009  although  he
    claimed that Vijay was arrested.  The authorities at  that  time  would
    have had no difficulty tracing the  Appellant  if  they  were  actively
    seeking him.

 5. In the application for permission to appeal it was contended  that  the
    Judge did not  take  adequate  account  of  the  medical  evidence,  in
    particular a report by a Clinical Psychologist and GP, described  as  a
    medico-legal report.  The report  had  made  clear  findings  that  the
    Appellant had sustained severe PTSD, trauma, concussion and had  memory
    loss.  His memory loss explained why the Appellant was not able to give
    a detailed account of what had happened to him in Sri Lanka during  his
    detention.  The  Judge  had  not  taken  into  account  submissions  in
    relation to this.

 6. In addition it was contended that the Judge failed to make findings  on
    a submission  on  Article  3  with  Article  14.   This  was  based  on
    discrimination the Appellant would experience in Sri Lanka  because  of
    his disability.  There was no protection for such  disabled  people  in
    Sri Lanka.

 7. It was further contended that the Judge relied on the country guideline
    case of GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 but this has been overtaken by the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in MP and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

 8. Finally it was pointed out that the medico-legal report was prepared by
    two medical experts, one dealing with the medical  assessment  and  the
    other with the psychological assessment.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    report was signed by both experts but it was not clear  which  of  them
    made  which  findings.   It  was  submitted  in  the  application   for
    permission to appeal that the experts  prepared  the  report  together.
    They should not have  been  required  to  make  separate  findings  and
    distinguish who was responsible for which parts  of  the  report.   The
    Judge found that the report could not be relied upon  because  of  this
    but this was an error.

 9. In the grant of permission to appeal it was stated that it was arguable
    that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had not made findings on  the
    discrimination claim, although the Judge said that the Appellant  would
    not face treatment on return to Sri  Lanka  which  would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3.  This was the only point upon which permission  to
    appeal was granted.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Khan sought permission to argue one of the
    other grounds in the application for permission to appeal, as  well  as
    the one on which permission was granted.   Mr  Wilding  submitted  that
    this was contrary to the decision in Ferrer  (limited  appeal  grounds;
    Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304.  I nevertheless allowed Mr Khan to address  me
    on the point by way of a submission, in terms of  the  case  management
    powers in rule 5(3)(d) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

11. In relation to the ground on  which  permission  was  granted  Mr  Khan
    submitted that the Judge had failed to make a finding on the  issue  of
    disability.  The Judge referred at paragraph  37  of  the  decision  to
    whether the Appellant would face  treatment  that  would  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3.  This was the only assessment made in  respect  of
    Article 3.  There was no assessment of Article 3 with Article 14 and no
    mention of Article 14 in the decision.  A  skeleton  argument  prepared
    for the Upper Tribunal referred to Article 14 and, at paragraph  5,  to
    the scope of Article 3, which  included  treatment  which  was  grossly
    humiliating or capable of arousing feelings of anguish and  inferiority
    and was capable of humiliating and debasing the victim.  Although  this
    description  was  originally   formulated   in   relation   to   racial
    discrimination, it would apply equally  to  disability  discrimination.
    In paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument it was pointed out that alleged
    discrimination  should  be  subjected  to  severe  scrutiny.   Mr  Khan
    observed that paragraph 37 of the decision showed that there  had  been
    no scrutiny at all of the issue of discrimination  on  the  grounds  of
    disability.  No findings were made in relation to this and there was no
    reasoning.  This was despite  the  matter  being  referred  to  in  the
    witness  statement  of  the  Appellant,  at  paragraph  12,  where  the
    Appellant recorded that  since  childhood  he  had  been  subjected  to
    mockery and mental torture by his community, including his  own  family
    members, because of his abnormality.  As was pointed out at paragraph 7
    of the skeleton, in Sri Lanka the Appellant  would  be  regarded  as  a
    second class citizen.  An article by Francesca Bombi on the concept  of
    disability in Sri Lanka was attached to the  skeleton  argument,  along
    with Disability Information Sheet on Sri Lanka from May 2014.

12. Mr Khan then referred to the medical report prepared by the two medical
    experts, of whom one was a physician  and  the  other  a  psychologist.
    Each had provided a CV and their individual contributions were  clearly
    identifiable.  In addition, with  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal Dr Beeks had provided a letter dated 29th February 2016  seeking
    to clarify some of the material in the report,  as  had  Dr  Hall,  the
    Clinical Psychologist.  Mr Khan submitted that the Judge's findings  in
    relation to the medical report were perverse as the report clearly  set
    out which medical expert had been responsible for preparing which part.



13. In his submission on behalf of the  Respondent,  Mr  Wilding  submitted
    that there was no permission for the  Appellant  to  argue  the  second
    point,  in  relation  to  the  medical  report.   He  would  limit  his
    submission to the issue of Article 3  and  Article  14.   He  described
    Article 14 as a "red herring".  The question was whether  return  would
    breach Article 3.  The grounds before the First-tier Tribunal were only
    concerned with asylum issues and did not raise any issue in tandem with
    Article 14.  The background evidence now relied  upon  in  relation  to
    disability was not before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  only  evidence
    was a report from January 2014 on the return of asylum seekers  and  an
    Amnesty International Report.  The Appellant's claim was bound to fail.
     There was no evidence in the form of country  information  to  support
    it.

14. Mr Wilding submitted that there was a further point as to  whether  the
    issue of Article 3 and Article 14 together constituted a  "new  matter"
    under section 85 of the 2002 Act.  He drew attention to the grounds  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Mr  Wilding  further  submitted  that  if  the  Appellant  had  made  a
    discrimination claim and the discrimination was so bad as to amount  to
    serious harm then it would be a breach of Article 3 without the need to
    refer to Article 14.  It was pointed out that serious harm to  disabled
    people as a group  might  also  amount  to  persecution  by  reason  of
    membership of a particular social group.

16. Mr Wilding accepted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    deal explicitly with the discrimination point.  Any submissions on this
    point before the First-tier Tribunal would  have  been  bound  to  fail
    because  there  was  no  background  evidence  on  societal  attitudes.
    Furthermore, the point  was  not  in  the  grounds  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It might have been advanced orally in submissions but  would
    not have succeeded without the background material.

17. Mr Khan stated that he sought to submit additional  evidence  today  in
    relation to discrimination and that the issue was not a new matter  but
    was covered by section 85A of the 2002 Act.

18. Mr Wilding responded that the point did not fall within section 85A but
    was covered by section 85(6) as a new matter.

19. Mr Khan recorded that the evidence he sought to lodge today was not new
    but showed what was happening in Sri Lanka.  Articles  3  and  14  were
    raised before the First-tier Tribunal and no findings were  made.   The
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    not objected to this matter being raised.

20. Following the hearing, the solicitors for the Appellant sent in a  copy
    of the original grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  although
    these were in fact in the appeal file before me.  These grounds do  not
    refer expressly to the Appellant's disability and do not invoke Article
    14.

Decision

21. Before me Mr Wilding raised the issue  of  whether  a  claim  based  on
    discrimination on the grounds of disability would be a new matter under
    section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
    amended by section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014.  I was not addressed
    by the parties on whether the relevant provision was in  force  at  the
    relevant date.  I note that the refusal decision is dated 19th November
    2015.  By this time it appears that the amended  form  of  section  85,
    including sub-sections (5) and (6), was in force so far as a protection
    claim was concerned, in terms of Article 8 of the Immigration Act  2014
    (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional   and   Savings   Provisions   and
    Amendments) Order 2015, SI 2015/371.  In terms  of  section  85(5)  the
    Tribunal may not consider a new matter unless the  Secretary  of  State
    has given the Tribunal consent to do so.  A matter is a new  matter  if
    it constitutes a ground of appeal of the kind listed in Section 84  and
    has not previously been considered by the Secretary of State either  in
    the decision appealed against or in a statement made by  the  Appellant
    under section 120.

22. Turning to section 84, which sets out the available grounds of  appeal,
    these include that removal of the Appellant from the  UK  would  breach
    the Refugee Convention and that removal would be unlawful under section
    6 of the Human Rights Act.  This is a broad  category.   The  Appellant
    had clearly made both a protection  claim  and  a  human  rights  claim
    invoking Article 3.  As he had already invoked Article 3 in his grounds
    of  appeal,  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  would   encounter
    discrimination contrary to Article 3 would not be a new matter in terms
    of section 85 of the 2002 Act.  It was a matter which was open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider.

23. There is still the point, however, that the  discrimination  issue  was
    not referred to specifically in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was not recorded by the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in his decision when summarising the Appellant's claim.  It was  raised
    indirectly in the Appellant's witness statement, where at paragraph  12
    he described having been subjected to mockery and mental torture  since
    childhood because of his abnormality.  Prior to the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal the parties did not ask for a  copy  of  the  Record  of
    Proceedings kept by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Khan,
    however, stated that he did refer to Article 14 at the  hearing  before
    the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  given  the  Appellant's
    evidence in his witness statement, I  accept  that  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's disability was before the Judge.

24. This brings me to Mr Wilding's next point, which was that there was  no
    background evidence before the Judge as to the  treatment  of  disabled
    people in Sri Lanka or of societal attitudes towards them.  This  is  a
    significant issue.  Mr Wilding's submission was that  without  relevant
    background evidence, the Judge was bound to dismiss any claim  made  by
    the Appellant on the grounds of disability.  The Judge did not  err  by
    failing to consider a point  which  was  not  supported  by  sufficient
    evidence.

25. I note that at paragraph 34 of the decision the Judge of the First Tier-
    tier Tribunal found a large measure of  inconsistency  and  a  lack  of
    credibility in the Appellant's evidence overall.  In other  words,  the
    Judge did not accept the Appellant's  evidence  in  its  entirety.   In
    conclusion the Judge found at paragraph 37 that the Appellant would not
    face a real risk of serious harm on return to Sri Lanka and  would  not
    face mistreatment that would amount to a breach of Article 3.  Although
    this finding does not address the disability  point  specifically,  the
    Judge had before him the Appellant's witness statement  and  had  heard
    the submissions of Mr Khan.  If the Judge had thought that the issue of
    disability was sufficiently serious to bring  the  Appellant  over  the
    Article 3 threshold, it was open to the Judge to have made a finding to
    this effect.  The absence of such a finding does not  mean  necessarily
    that the Judge  did  not  direct  his  mind  to  this  point.   It  may
    alternatively be taken to mean that the Judge did not consider that the
    Appellant would have any prospect of succeeding in his appeal  on  this
    ground.  On the basis that the Article 3 issues were argued before  the
    Judge, having regard to the Judge's findings on the evidence I would be
    inclined to conclude that the Judge did  not  mention  the  Appellant's
    disability because he did not consider it material  in  relation  to  a
    breach of Article 3.

26. The second criticism which was made by Mr Khan of the Judge's  decision
    at the hearing before me related to the Judge's treatment of the medico-
    legal report.  I accept that there are criticisms which may be made  of
    the Judge's approach to this report.  The significant findings made  by
    the Judge, however, are at paragraph 34 in relation  to  ill-treatment,
    where the Judge records that even if the  Appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained for two days and mistreated by the Sri Lankan authorities,  he
    was released without charge; he was not photographed or  fingerprinted;
    and his release was secured by the payment of a bribe.  He would not be
    regarded as having escaped from custody. All  these  factors  indicated
    clearly that he was no longer of any interest to the  authorities.   He
    was not arrested again in 2009 when his friend  was  arrested  and  the
    authorities would at that time have had no difficulty  in  tracing  the
    Appellant if they were actively seeking him.  It was for these  reasons
    that the Judge found that the Appellant was not a refugee.  It was  not
    because the Judge rejected  the  findings  of  the  medical  report  in
    respect of the Appellant's detention and ill-treatment but because  the
    manner of the Appellant's release and subsequent events showed that the
    Appellant was no longer of any interest to the authorities.

27. On this basis the Judge was correct to dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds as well as on human rights grounds.  I find that  there  is  no
    error of law in the Judge's decision which would have had any  material
    effect on the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have  not
been asked to make such order and I  see  no  reason  or  substance  for  so
doing.






Signed                              Date: 14 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

