
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03681/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 August 2018                            |On 4 December 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                  UMED [K]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is Kurdish, a citizen of Iran born in 1983.   He  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  James  made
    following a hearing at Glasgow on 22 August 2017. The judge allowed the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds  (to  which  there  is  no  challenge)  but
    dismissed his asylum claim.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he is at risk of persecution if returned
    due to his political opinion as a supporter and member of KDPI in  Iran
    and also his sur place activities in the UK.

 3. The respondent refused the application in a decision made  on  3  April
    2017. It was noted that a judge at a previous appeal  hearing  in  2007
    had found that the appellant had failed to establish that he had been a
    supporter or member of the party in Iran.  Whilst it was accepted  that
    he had joined the party in the UK he was not truly a supporter and  his
    membership would not be known to the Iranian authorities.  Noting  that
    for the  current  application  the  appellant  produced  various  court
    documents and witnesses to support his claim to be a member of the KDPI
    both in the UK and Iran and that he would be at  risk  on  return,  the
    respondent, nonetheless, refused the application not accepting  that  a
    court summons or order had been made in his  absence  or  that  he  was
    wanted by the Iranian authorities.  It was also not  accepted  that  he
    would be at risk on return as a Kurd or as a failed asylum seeker.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following the First tier Tribunal hearing at which  the  appellant  and
    four witnesses attended, as indicated, Judge James dismissed the asylum
    appeal.

 6. The judge noted at paragraph [29]: "The respondent was not  represented
    at the asylum appeal hearing  and  therefore  the  witnesses  were  not
    subject to cross-examination and the matter was dealt with  by  way  of
    submissions only."

 7. The judge went on at [30(j), (k), (l),  (m)  and  (n)]  to  reject  for
    numerous reasons the evidence of the witnesses. At (p) she added:  "Not
    one of the  letters  of  the  witnesses  has  a  declaration  of  truth
    attached, some are undated and some are unsigned. I thus give them less
    weight." She continued at (q): "In summary, I found the evidence of the
    witnesses to be unreliable, contradictory,  uninformed,  generally  not
    based on direct experience and  heavily  reliant  on  the  self-serving
    statements of the appellant himself as relayed to them.  I thus did not
    find the witnesses' evidence to be credible."

 8. The judge concluded (at [37]) that she did not believe "the entirety of
    his account."

    Error of law hearing

 9. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  21
    November 2017.

10. At the error of law hearing before us Ms O'Brien did not demur from the
    submission that the judge erred by making adverse credibility  findings
    in respect of witnesses who attended  the  hearing  but  who  were  not
    called because the judge indicated their statements and  letters  would
    be taken as read.

11. We agree.

12. The situation before the  judge  was  this:  the  four  witnesses  were
    present for the hearing.  The  appellant's  representative  wished  the
    witnesses to formally  adopt  their  statements.   However,  the  judge
    indicated she was content to  adopt  them  as  read  and  none  of  the
    witnesses required to present themselves to  give  evidence  or  answer
    questions.

13. The problem is that the  judge  adopted  a  contradictory  approach  by
    confirming she would take the statements as read and thereafter  giving
    these statements less weight due to the statements  being  undated  and
    unsigned when the witnesses were in attendance ready to  give  evidence
    and ready to adopt their statements.

14. Further, the judge identified many issues at [30(j)-(n)] which  in  her
    view undermined the reliance  that  could  be  placed  on  the  various
    witness statements  and  letters.   However,  she  did  not  raise  any
    concerns with the appellant's representative and she failed to give the
    witnesses an opportunity to comment on her concerns.

15. These failings amounted to procedural unfairness such as to  constitute
    a material error of law with the result that the asylum appeal must  be
    heard again.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in that regard  is  set  aside.
    The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice
    Statement paragraph 7.2 to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing.  No findings stand. The member(s) of the First-
    tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include  Judge
    James.

    No anonymity order has been requested or made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                        30 November 2018

