
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03273/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Bradford      Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 30 May 2019   On 12 June 2019


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Profumo, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as AA.






Introduction

      1. Having already found that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FTT') dated 26 June 2018 contains an error of law in an 'error of
         law' decision sent on 22 January 2019, I now remake the decision.

      2. Ms Profumo submitted that  there  was  ample  medical  evidence  to
         support the appellant being treated as  a  vulnerable  witness.  Mr
         Diwnycz agreed with this, as did I, and the  hearing  proceeded  on
         this basis.

Issues in dispute

      3. The appellant, a Sri Lankan citizen  of  Sinhalese  ethnicity,  has
         been in the United Kingdom since 2011, but did not apply for asylum
         until 27 September 2016.  This was refused in a decision  dated  28
         March 2017.  The appellant's delay in claiming asylum and  some  of
         the reasons provided by the respondent for rejecting his claim  are
         of historic interest only, because the appellant's account of  what
         happened to him in Sri Lanka is no longer disputed.  Indeed, in his
         decision letter, the respondent accepted much  of  the  appellant's
         account as it was corroborated by a medical legal report  dated  21
         December 2016, prepared by Dr Peter  Toon,  on  behalf  of  Medical
         Justice. A summary of the appellant's accepted history in Sri Lanka
         includes the following:


          a) The appellant permitted a Tamil ('Mr G') to live in  his  home
             from around 2007. Unbeknown to the appellant, the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities believed Mr G to  have  links  to  the  LTTE.   In
             November 2010 the police took away Mr G and the appellant  has
             not seen him since.


          b) On 20 January 2011,  the  police  arrested  and  detained  the
             appellant. During his detention, the appellant was  repeatedly
             interrogated about assisting Mr G and  helping  him  with  his
             LTTE activities. The appellant was beaten and tortured.  As  a
             result  of  this,  he  has  scarring  and  has  suffered  with
             psychiatric difficulties.   These  are  particularised  in  Dr
             Toon's report.


          c) After 10 days of detention, on 30 January 2011, the  appellant
             was forced to sign blank pieces  of  paper.  He  was  released
             because his family arranged for a Buddhist monk to  bribe  the
             authorities.


          d) The appellant remained in hiding for a short period until  the
             monk facilitated his departure from Sri Lanka through bribery,
             on 4 February 2011.


          e) The authorities attended the appellant's home looking for him,
             whilst his mother was still in  Sri  Lanka  in  2011-12.   His
             mother left Sri Lanka to join her husband in Italy in 2013.

      4. The only outstanding issue in dispute is whether the appellant  has
         a prospective well-founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka in  the
         light of the country guidance in  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [20131 UKUT 00319 (IAC)  and  his  accepted
         history.

Procedural history

      5. The appellant's asylum appeal was allowed by FTT Judge Buchanan  in
         a decision dated 27 June  2017,  but  the  respondent  successfully
         appealed this to the Upper Tribunal ('UT').  In a decision dated 24
         February 2018, UT Judge Taylor considered that Judge  Buchanan  was
         entitled to look at up to date country  background  evidence  post-
         dating GJ but was not entitled to "in effect, create a further risk
         category", not warranted by the application of GJ. The  appeal  was
         remitted to the FTT to enable further factual findings to  be  made
         regarding the circumstances in which the appellant left Sri Lanka.

      6. The appeal was reheard by FTT Judge Cope, and in a  decision  dated
         26 June 2018, he dismissed the appellant's appeal. Judge Cope noted
         that the respondent  conceded  that  the  appellant  was  arrested,
         detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan  authorities  in  2011  for
         reasons relating to his connection  with  an  LTTE  supporter,  who
         lived with him for about  three  years.   Judge  Cope  went  on  to
         address two factual matters not accepted  by  the  respondent,  and
         concluded that the appellant: (i) escaped  from  detention  in  the
         manner claimed, with the use of bribery and  the  assistance  of  a
         Buddhist monk and; (ii) was  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  with  the
         assistance of  bribery,  notwithstanding  his  recent  'release'  /
         escape from detention.

      7. The only outstanding matter before Judge Cope was therefore whether
         the appellant continued to be of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan
         authorities. Judge  Cope  rejected  the  submissions  made  on  the
         appellant's behalf and dismissed his appeal.  As set out above,  in
         my 'error of law' decision, I concluded that Judge  Cope  erred  in
         law but the decision should be remade  by  me  in  the  UT,  at  an
         adjourned hearing.

Hearing

      8. At the beginning of the hearing before me, Mr Diwnycz re-emphasised
         that the appellant's factual account of what happened in Sri  Lanka
         is not in dispute and as such there was no  need  to  cross-examine
         him. As the appellant is a vulnerable witness,  Ms  Profumo  agreed
         with me that it was important to explain this clearly to him and  I
         stood the matter down for this to  take  place.  In  addition,  the
         representatives agreed the issues to be determined by the  Tribunal
         should be narrowed further, as follows:


          i) As it is accepted that the appellant was 'released' or escaped
             from detention and Sri Lanka through the use of bribery, is it
             reasonably  likely  that  since  this  time,   there   is   an
             outstanding arrest warrant such that he is on the 'stop'  list
             and for reasons relating to this is at risk  of  serious  harm
             upon return  to  Sri  Lanka  pursuant  to  the  risk  category
             identified at headnote 7(d) of GJ?


         ii) In the alternative, if the appellant  is  not  on  the  'stop'
             list, is he nonetheless at risk of serious harm in  the  light
             of the GJ country guidance when considered together  with  the
             country background evidence post-dating GJ?

      9. After  the  short  break,  the  representatives  returned  to  make
         submissions.  Mr Diwnycz simply accepted that it was highly  likely
         that the appellant meets the requirements of the GJ  risk  category
         relevant to the 'stop' list and did not wish to add anything beyond
         that. He clarified that he was unable  to  resist  the  submissions
         made on the appellant's behalf in Ms Profumo's  very  detailed  and
         comprehensive skeleton argument in this regard, but  did  not  have
         the authority to concede the appeal at the hearing.

     10. Ms Profumo relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument  and  took  me  to
         relevant extracts from the detailed  bundle,  including  a  country
         expert report prepared by Dr Chris Smith dated 25 February 2019, in
         support of her submissions.

     11. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Country guidance

     12. It is clear from the headnote in GJ that those  on  a  'stop'  list
         face a real risk of persecution  upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
         headnote includes the following:


             "...


             (4) If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
             services there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm
             requiring international protection.


          5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.


          6) There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities
             are or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after
             arrival in their  home  area,  where  their  arrival  will  be
             verified by the CID or police within a few days.


          7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


               a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


                  ...


                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                  list accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant. Individuals whose name appears on a  "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.


             (8)  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
             sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities  within  Sri
             Lanka and in the diaspora. The  Sri  Lankan  authorities  know
             that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as  economic
             migrant and also that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.
             In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history  will
             be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.


             (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces. That will be a  question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual."

     13. The GJ country guidance on the 'stop' list continues to be accepted
         by the respondent as valid -  see  his  June  2017  CPIN  on  Tamil
         separatism in Sri Lanka at 2.3.34 to 2.3.38.

Re-making the decision

     14. Both representatives agreed that if there is a reasonable degree of
         likelihood that the appellant's  name  appears  on  a  computerised
         'stop' list at the Sri Lankan  airport,  he  will  be  stopped  and
         handed over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  at  which
         point there would be a risk of ill-treatment.  The  first  question
         that therefore arises is whether the appellant's name is reasonably
         likely to appear on  the  'stop'  list.   If  the  answer  to  that
         question is affirmative, then it is undisputed that this  would  be
         the end of the matter and the asylum appeal must be allowed.

     15. The country guidance in GJ makes it  clear  that  the  'stop'  list
         includes those against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or
         arrest warrant. It has been submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf
         that it is reasonably likely that the person who accepted the bribe
         to release the appellant reported this as an  escape,  which  would
         have led to an arrest warrant being issued against  the  appellant.
         As acknowledged by Mr Diwnycz, there is cogent and credible support
         for this proposition in the circumstances of this case.

     16. Dr Smith's evidence before the Tribunal  in  GJ  is  summarised  at
         Appendix J to the decision and includes the following at [13]:


             "If someone of adverse interest is released upon payment of  a
             bribe, those who accepted the bribe will  be  responsible  for
             ensuring there is a record of why the suspect was released;  a
             note indicating that a person was released because they were a
             person of no further interest, being one option. If the person
             who accepted  the  bribe  could  not  acquire  access  to  the
             records, it is more likely that they would report the  release
             as an escape which would  lead  to  an  arrest  warrant  being
             issued.  Someone who is recorded as escaped or  missing  would
             be of significant adverse interest to the authorities."

     17. Dr Smith has been recognised as an authoritative country expert  on
         Sri Lanka, albeit the Tribunal in GJ did not accept the entirety of
         his evidence (see for example [264] to [272] of GJ).  Although  the
         Tribunal accepted Dr Smith's evidence  regarding  the  presence  of
         'stop' lists and the proliferation of  intelligence  gathering,  it
         did not expressly accept that a  person  released  informally  from
         detention was likely to be the subject of an  arrest  warrant,  and
         described this aspect of his evidence as based  on  speculation  at
         [131].  However, the Tribunal in GJ did not have  to  resolve  this
         issue on the facts of the three appellants before it.  Although the
         first appellant was released with a payment of a bribe the Tribunal
         found  at  [397]  that  his  and  his  family's  significant   past
         involvement with the LTTE together with the enquiries made  by  the
         Sri Lankan authorities and his sur place activities were sufficient
         to allow his appeal.  In relation  to  the  second  appellant,  the
         Tribunal noted at [425] that if he was on a  'stop'  list,  in  the
         circumstances of his case the Grama Sevuka would have been aware of
         this, and concluded that he was therefore not  on  the  stop  list.
         The third appellant lived and worked in Sri Lanka  for  some  three
         years after his release.  I  emphasise  that  I  have  applied  and
         followed the country guidance provided in GJ.  Whilst those on  the
         stop list are in a risk category and that includes  those  with  an
         arrest warrant, the exact delineation of all those who may have  an
         arrest warrant outstanding  has  not  been  specified  in  GJ.   My
         findings are  therefore  based  on  assessment  of  the  particular
         accepted facts and cogent evidence available, set sensibly  against
         the country guidance in GJ.

     18. I did not have the benefit of oral evidence from Dr Smith  and  was
         unable to tease out matters that required clarification.  With this
         caveat in mind, I do not accept the entirety of Dr Smith's evidence
         in his recent report.  There are aspects  that  are  insufficiently
         explained, and which contradict part of the guidance in GJ  without
         clearly identifying  cogent  evidence  in  support.   However,  the
         disputed issues in this  appeal  are  very  narrow.   I  accept  Dr
         Smith's evidence in his recent report at [20] to [24]  that,  given
         the extensive use of  records  in  order  to  support  intelligence
         gathering which are logged on a permanent basis, a person  who  was
         detained and tortured because of suspected LTTE  links  in  January
         2011 and then obtained his release  by  bribery,  would  either  be
         recorded as a consequence  of  this  as  a  person  of  no  further
         interest or an escapee.  However, the more  pertinent  question  is
         whether it is reasonably likely that this appellant would have been
         recorded as the latter, as opposed to the former, by the Sri Lankan
         authorities.  That is a question of some  significance  because  if
         recorded as an escapee, it is likely (but it does  not  necessarily
         follow) that an arrest  warrant  would  be  drawn  up  against  the
         appellant.

     19. Dr Smith's evidence that it is  more  likely  that  this  appellant
         would be recorded as an escapee, is consistent  with  his  evidence
         before GJ that it is generally more  likely  that  a  'release'  by
         bribery would be recorded as an  escape  which  would  lead  to  an
         arrest  warrant  being  issued.   This  is  also  supported  by  Mr
         Punethanayagam's evidence in GJ, as recorded at [1461]: those cases
         recorded as 'escaped from detention' in the database of the  police
         would lead to absconder action and  details  being  passed  to  the
         National Intelligence Bureau.  I note that the  Tribunal  commented
         that this  information  was  not  sourced  at  [147]  but  it  also
         commented that Mr Punethanayagam is  a  barrister  who  represented
         about 3000 detainees and his evidence regarding criminal process in
         Sri Lanka was generally useful and reliable - see [275] of GJ.   In
         addition, in his recent report, Dr Smith maintains this analysis by
         reference to further interviews and country background evidence.  I
         also note that the Tribunal accepted in GJ that a bribe can be paid
         to  secure  release  even  where  the  person  remains  of  ongoing
         interest.

     20. Thus far, my analysis has been on  the  general  situation  in  Sri
         Lanka.  There are no certainties.  One act does not inevitably lead
         to another.  I now address the  particular  circumstances  of  this
         appellant and assess  the  likelihood  of  there  being  an  arrest
         warrant against him.

     21. The accepted circumstances relevant to  this  particular  appellant
         supports the submission that he would  have  been  recorded  as  an
         escapee (with an associated arrest warrant issued)  rather  than  a
         person of no interest. Firstly, the appellant was severely tortured
         and  made  to  sign  blank  pieces  of  paper,  indicative   of   a
         'confession', before being  released.  The  respondent's  own  fact
         finding report on Sri Lanka dated 11-23 July 2016, makes  it  clear
         at 8.1.14 that after torture the detainee is normally made to  sign
         a 'confession' that they have been associated with the  LTTE.    In
         other words, the blank pieces of paper  tend  to  signpost  to  the
         authorities  having  recorded  a  signed  'confession'   from   the
         appellant.  If he was no longer of interest there would  have  been
         no need to force him to sign the blank pieces of paper.  Second, it
         has  been  accepted  that  there  was  continued  interest  in  the
         appellant in 2011 to 2012.  In particular, his mother told him that
         the authorities  visited  several  times  after  his  release  from
         detention and departure from Sri Lanka looking for him  -  see  the
         appellant's  responses  to  questions  94  to  98  in  his   asylum
         interview. Although there is no firm evidence  that  the  appellant
         has been charged with any offence  and  there  is  no  up  to  date
         evidence of the authorities enquiring into his  whereabouts,  these
         matters do not necessarily obviate  a  reasonable  likelihood  that
         after his escape, an arrest warrant was drawn up.  Confirmation  of
         this would not necessarily be known by the appellant.  He  and  his
         parents have been out of Sri Lanka for many years. In addition,  if
         having  made  enquiries,  the  authorities  were  told   that   the
         appellant's whereabouts were unknown or that he was  abroad,  there
         would have been no need to continue to make enquiries.

     22. The appellant's ability to leave with the assistance  of  the  monk
         through the airport does not mean that there was no  extant  arrest
         warrant in existence - see [146] and [170]  of  GJ.  This  is  also
         consistent with the evidence summarised by Dr  Smith  in  his  2019
         report at [35] to [37].

     23. I note that on  his  own  case,  the  appellant  has  not  actually
         participated in separatist  activity.  However,  whilst  important,
         this is not a pre-requisite - see [43] and [50]  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal's decision in MP and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
         829.  In his recent report, Dr Smith referred to numerous  examples
         of those who have been targeted for serious harm upon  return  when
         they have not been involved in any separatist activity. I also note
         that the appellant is Sinhalese  and  not  Tamil.  The  appellant's
         ethnicity was of course insufficient to prevent his  detention  and
         torture  in  2011  (after  the  end  of  the  conflict)  when   the
         authorities continued to perceive that he had links  to  the  LTTE,
         considered to be worthy of sustained interrogation  under  torture.
         The appellant was of past adverse  interest  and  suffered  serious
         harm in the past.

     24. Although many years have passed and the situation in Sri Lanka  has
         changed, it remains the  case  that  the  appellant  is  reasonably
         likely to have become the subject of an arrest warrant in  all  the
         circumstances of his case, in particular for  reasons  relating  to
         the information held by the authorities against him  together  with
         his release from detention and the continued adverse interest shown
         after his release.  I acknowledge that at first blush the appellant
         appears to be at low risk of having any ongoing interest  in  Tamil
         separatism and  this  is  the  more  typical  barometer  for  risk.
         Although  the  'stop'  list  generally  includes  those  who   have
         committed very serious crimes or those  who  are  perceived  to  be
         connected to terrorism, it  also  includes  those  with  a  warrant
         outstanding.  It is reasonably likely  that  this  appellant  falls
         into that last category  for  the  reasons  I  have  provided.   In
         reaching this conclusion, I acknowledge that the  country  guidance
         in GJ does not  expressly  state  that  those  in  the  appellant's
         particular circumstances are reasonably likely to  have  a  warrant
         outstanding.  However as observed by Green LJ (with whom  Baker  LJ
         and Moylan LJ agreed) in SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  160
         at [70]:


             "But Country Guidance must be  applied  with  some  degree  of
             subtlety.   By  its  nature  it  is  "guidance";  and  however
             valuable  it  cannot,  and  does   not   purport   to,   cover
             definitively every permutation of fact or circumstances  which
             emerges.  Each case must be assessed on its facts and sensibly
             against the Guidance."

Conclusion

     25. I conclude that the risk  category  identified  at  (7)(d)  of  the
         headnote in GJ applies to the appellant and he faces a  prospective
         risk of serious harm for reasons relating to  a  political  opinion
         imputed to him.

     26. Ms Profumo also relied  upon  the  appellant  additionally  falling
         within the risk category identified at (7)(a) of  the  headnote  by
         reference to more up  to  date  material  post-dating  GJ.   It  is
         unnecessary to make any findings on  this  alternative  submission,
         which in any event is due to be considered in an  upcoming  country
         guidance case on Sri Lanka.

Decision

     27. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum
         grounds.




Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 June 2019
