
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03844/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2020                |On 3rd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     X G
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Albania  born  in  1996.  She  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carroll  dated  27
    September 2019  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
    protection claim on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on three grounds:-
     (1) the failure to consider  the  risk  of  trafficking  on  return  to
         Albania;
     (2) the failure to consider expert evidence; and
     (3) unsafe findings of fact as to the Appellant's ability to return  to
         Italy.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch  on  16
    December 2019 for the following reasons:-

     "It is arguable that the Judge did not  give  sufficient  consideration
         to the content of the expert report or case  law  relating  to  the
         risk of being trafficked from Albania as a young woman on  her  own
         with child dependents.

     It is also arguable that the reasons given for finding that  she  could
         return to Italy were not sustainable as they were speculative. As a
         consequence, there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Courtney's (sic) decision and it is  appropriate  to
         grant permission to appeal."


Submissions

4.   Ground 1: Ms Benitez submitted that  although  the  Appellant  did  not
    claim to be a victim of trafficking her return as a single mother  with
    two illegitimate children would expose her to a risk of trafficking and
    the judge erred in law in failing to consider that ground at  all.  The
    Appellant was 22 years old, a single mother with two children. She came
    from  Northern  Albania,  lacked  education  and  was  suffering   from
    depression.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  her  personal
    circumstances and the risk to her on return to Albania.

5.   Ground 2: Ms Benitez submitted that the judge appeared to  dismiss  the
    expert report on the basis that there was an incorrect reference to the
    Appellant working as a  prostitute.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the expert's conclusion at page 38 of the report and  the  risk
    as a lone female returning to Albania.

6.   Ground 3: Ms Benitez  submitted  the  possibility  that  the  Appellant
    could return to Italy, because she was  in  possession  of  an  Italian
    residence card, was irrelevant to  the  consideration  of  whether  she
    would be at risk on return to  Albania.  It  was  not  clear  from  the
    judge's decision how this conclusion had affected her reasoning.

7.   Ms Everett submitted that at [15] the judge set  out  the  Respondent's
    view and was therefore aware of the Appellant's claim to be  identified
    or targeted in Albania on the basis of her status as  a  single  woman.
    She also set out in summary the content of the expert  report  at  [21]
    and [22]. Ms Everett submitted it was clear that  the  judge  was  well
    aware of the need to consider whether the  Appellant  was  at  risk  on
    return as a single  mother.  However,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had not been rejected by her family and therefore  would  not
    be returning to Albania without their support. There was also  evidence
    that the Appellant could obtain protection and support from NGOs.
8.   Ms Everett  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant's  negative  credibility
    finding was not challenged. Accordingly, the  Appellant  would  not  be
    returning to Albania as a single mother  without  the  support  of  her
    family and she would not be at risk following country guidance: TD  and
    AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92(IAC). The judge had found  that
    the Appellant was not a credible witness and therefore she did not have
    the vulnerabilities that would bring her  within  the  risk  categories
    identified in TD and AD.

9.    In  response,  Ms  Benitez  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 23(c) was inadequate  to  support  the  conclusion  that  her
    family had not rejected the Appellant. The judge  should  have  made  a
    positive finding that the Appellant would be returning to Albania  with
    the support of her family. The judge had failed to do so.  It  was  not
    possible to say that the error was  immaterial  because  there  was  no
    clear finding on whether the Appellant would not have  the  support  of
    her family on return to Albania and would therefore be vulnerable.

10.  Further, the judge failed to give reasons for the weight  she  attached
    to the expert report and, since it was accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    family was in Italy, their support in Albania was limited. The  judge's
    implication that the Appellant could return to Italy had  infected  her
    findings on risk on return.


Conclusions and Reasons

11.  The judge found at [25] that the Appellant was not credible as  to  the
    circumstances in which she claimed she was compelled to flee  Italy  or
    as to her claimed fear of return to Albania and she gave cogent reasons
    for coming to this conclusion at [23]. There was no  challenge  to  the
    judge's credibility findings.   Accordingly,  the  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk of domestic violence from her  partner,
    ER. She rejected the  claim  that  ER  would  be  able  to  locate  the
    Appellant in Albania. She rejected the claim that the Appellant did not
    have the support of her family  and  she  found  that  the  Appellant's
    overall credibility was undermined by her failure to  claim  asylum  en
    route to the UK.

Ground 1
12.  The Appellant did not claim she had been trafficked and she was  not  a
    victim of trafficking. Her case was not put forward on the  basis  that
    she had been trafficked or that it was  in  any  way  relevant  to  her
    presence in the UK. Ms Benitez argued that TD and AD  applied  and  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return as a young single mother  rendered
    vulnerable because  of  her  lack  of  education  and  her  depression.
    However, on the facts found by the judge the  Appellant  would  not  be
    returning as a single mother without family support. The judge rejected
    the Appellant's claim that her family had rejected her on the basis  of
    her relationship with ER at [23(c)].


13.  The letter produced in support of this part of  the  Appellant's  claim
    was inconsistent with her evidence about her relationship with  ER  and
    her explanation for how she obtained the  document  was  contradictory.
    The judge attached little weight to that evidence and, in view  of  the
    overall  conclusion  rejecting  the  Appellant's  claim  that  she  was
    compelled to flee  Italy,  the  judge's  conclusions  at  [23(c)]  were
    sufficient to establish that the judge rejected the  Appellant's  claim
    to be lacking family support. Accordingly, the Appellant would  not  be
    returning to Albania without support from her family and  she  did  not
    come within the risk categories identified in TD and AD.

Ground 2
14.  At page 38 of the report, the expert was asked whether  the  Appellant,
    as a single woman, would be able to relocate within Albania and be able
    to access employment and support? He stated:
         "On the issue of internal relocation within Albania,  in  order  to
         avoid the risk of being located, the Appellant would face a  number
         of difficulties. The absence of family support would make it harder
         for the  Appellant  to  secure  employment,  which  in  turn  would
         increase her vulnerability and increase the  risk  of  her  falling
         into the hands of criminal networks that operate in Albania.
     ...
     Furthermore, in Albanian traditional  culture  single  women  would  be
         considered as being in the charge of their fathers. Property owners
         or employers often demand to speak to the father, brother or  other
         male relative of a woman before they will enter into  any  kind  of
         agreement with her.  Traditionally to enter into an agreement  with
         a young woman without the intermediation of the men of that  family
         may be considered to have dishonoured the family, a slight that can
         only be repaired by taking revenge against one of the men from that
         family that caused the dishonour."

15.  The judge set out some of the passage  quoted  above  at  [21].  It  is
    apparent from [24] and [25] that she considered the  expert  report  in
    concluding that the Appellant was not a credible witness. She placed no
    reliance on one aspect of the expert report, which she referred  to  at
    [24], after seeking clarification from the Appellant that she  had  not
    been forced to work as a prostitute. There was no error of law  in  the
    judge's treatment of the expert report. Having  found  the  Appellant's
    claim to be totally incredible, the Appellant has failed to  show  that
    she would be returning to Albania without family support.


Ground 3
16.  Ms Benitez accepted that ground 3 was  dependent  on  establishing  the
    other two grounds. In any event, the Appellant's ability to  return  to
    Italy was not relevant to the judge's earlier sustainable findings that
    she was not credible and not at risk on return to Albania.



Conclusion
17.  The Appellant's case was put forward at the appeal  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the Appellant was a victim of  domestic
    violence.  The  judge  concluded  at  [26]  that,  notwithstanding  her
    negative credibility finding,  there  was  sufficient  protection.  She
    found that there  were  organisations  to  assist  the  Appellant  with
    housing, security, reintegration and who worked  with  Albanian  social
    services to help women re-enter the community.

18.  The judge appreciated the factual basis of the  Appellant's  claim  and
    had taken into account the expert evidence. There was no material error
    of law in the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds.  Accordingly,  I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 17 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 17 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
