
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03305/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [E K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Albania, date of birth [ ~ ], appealed
against the Respondent's decision dated 21 February 2018 to refuse to grant
asylum, Humanitarian Protection and on human rights grounds.  Her appeal
came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton, who, on 19 April 2018,
dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper
Tribunal, on a renewed application on 6 August 2018.  He identified the
single issue as follows:

"The grounds challenge the Judge's assessment that the Appellant would be
able to reintegrate on return notwithstanding she was a single mother with
a medical condition.  Despite noting submissions that were made regarding
her claim that she would be vulnerable as a woman with children born out of
wedlock, the Judge appears not to have addressed those at all in his
findings.  This grant of permission does not mean that even if accepted the
Appellant would return as a single mother with two illegitimate children
she would be at risk, but the grounds are at least arguable."


3.   It is clear that the Judge's findings are not challenged in that the
Appellant was not as a fact trafficked into the United Kingdom but there
was no substantive challenge to the presence of the two children and the
evidence that the Appellant gave in statements as to first, the reaction of
her father to the whole business; but secondly, more importantly, her
assessment of how it would now be judged on return and how that would
impact upon her and the life she could give her two children.  Therefore,
although one of the children is not illegitimate the fact was that the
impact on her of societal scorn and ill-treatment did not necessarily
solely relate in terms of the wellbeing of the illegitimate child.

4.   The Judge carried out the exercise in assessing the best interests of
the children as a material consideration of the primary importance of their
interests which the case law has well identified but in truth the Judge
simply made no reference at all to the implication for the children and
their best interests collectively or individually from the impact on
return: When the issue had clearly been raised in the representations made
[D 14] by the Appellant's representative at the hearing where the Judge
recorded the submission in the following way:

"It was submitted that the arrival of the Appellant's second child was of
fundamental importance as it was a child born out of wedlock which is not
being contested by the Respondent.  Reference was made to the head note of
the TD case and it was stated that there was no typical profile of a
trafficked woman and that [of] women with children born out of wedlock are
particularly vulnerable in Albania."


5.   I find, having heard the arguments and in particular Mr Tufan's point
that the best interests were considered, that on a fair and proper
analysis, quite simply the Judge did not address the background evidence
and indeed the country guidance cases, which indicate, whether for a
trafficked woman or otherwise, the societal problems that may arise from
having an illegitimate child as opposed to simply the practical problems of
how a single mother can work and meet childcare requirements and so forth.

6.   The Appellant's evidence in the bundle before the Judge (AB 1 to 3 and
24 to 26) show the extent of her concerns.  Whilst Mr Tufan correctly says
at the moment on the evidence that he has seen there is nothing that solely
directs to the implications for an illegitimate child as opposed to an
illegitimate child of a trafficked woman it seems to me that that may not
be a material distinction when assessing the best interests of the children
together or indeed individually in terms of its impact upon the Appellant
in the context of her coming from a Muslim family, in a culture where it is
widely acknowledged there is considerable intolerance for behaviour
objected to generally by society.

7.   For these reasons therefore, I conclude that the failure to consider
that when addressing the important interest of best interests as a
consideration which is perhaps part of the starting point of making
conclusions on proportionality was a significant and material error of law.

8.   The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the matter will have
to be remade on the issue of the children and the considerations of Article
3 ECHR or Article 8 ECHR, so the appeal on those discrete issues will be
returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision in accordance with the
law.  The findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's claim to have
been trafficked will stand but other than that the issues relating to the
children, their best interests and the life they might face with their
mother in Albania on return are to be determined.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it will be  remade  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal on the issues of the children's best interests and  Article  3
or 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

      1) List for further hearing.

      2) Time estimate 2 Hours.

      3)  Albanian interpreter required.

      4)  Issues; Children' best interests; Articles 3 & 8 ECHR.

      5)  Do not list before F-t Tribunal Judge Swinnerton.


Signed                                  Date 17 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

