
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03255/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th November 2018                          |On 22nd November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     XD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Wyman made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 10th April 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  on  1st  April  1998.   He
    arrived in the UK in October 2015 and claimed asylum.  He was  referred
    to the competent authority to assess whether he was a victim  of  human
    trafficking or slavery but it was concluded that he was not a victim of
    modern slavery.  It was on that basis that his application  for  asylum
    was refused.

 3. The judge, having heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant,  concluded
    that the competent authority was wrong to find that he was not a victim
    of trafficking.  Indeed she found that  the  trafficking  decision  was
    irrational and that the appellant had provided a reasonable explanation
    in relation to the various issues raised.

 4. It is the appellant's case that he had been trafficked to the UK by his
    father and another man,  O,  as  a  consequence  of  his  father  owing
    substantial debts to O.  His father had become unemployed in  2014  and
    was unable to obtain work.  He owed O 10 million  Albanian  lek  and  O
    suggested that he would find the appellant a job and he would  then  be
    able to repay the debt.  His father told him that he needed to go  with
    O and to obey him.

 5. In September 2015, O took the appellant to Belgium where he was told to
    beg in the main train station before coming to the UK illegally on  the
    back of a lorry a month later.  The appellant was told to stay  in  the
    house of a friend of O's in order to water  the  numerous  plants  that
    were growing on the first floor.  He was  not  allowed  to  leave.   In
    November there was a police raid on the house and the appellant managed
    to escape. He contacted an Albanian man who  helped  him  to  go  to  a
    solicitor and make an application for asylum which he did.

 6. The judge  accepted  the  appellant's  account  and  properly  referred
    herself to the relevant case law, in particular TD and  AD  (trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  She observed that of course the appellant
    was not a woman and would not be subject to the additional difficulties
    faced by lone women being returned to Albania.  She concluded  that  he
    would have no need to live within his previous family home and would be
    able to support himself and it would be reasonable to expect him to  do
    so.  There were good reasons to consider that no persecution  would  be
    repeated if he  was  returned  to  Albania  and  there  was  sufficient
    protection available to him.

The Grounds of Application

 7. Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that it was not open  to
    the judge to find that internal relocation would be reasonable for  the
    appellant or that there would be a sufficiency of  protection  to  him.
    She had failed to give adequate reasons why he would not be the subject
    of interest of the gangs  which  had  trafficked  him  or  his  violent
    father.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

The Hearing

 9. There was no appearance by the appellant.  I am satisfied that  he  was
    properly served with notice as were his representatives who had  chosen
    not to appear.  There is no reason not to proceed in their absence.

10. Mr Avery submitted that there was no error of law in this decision  and
    the judge was fully entitled to conclude that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk on return to Albania.  He asked  that  the  decision  should
    stand.

11. I agree with Mr Avery.  The  judge  observed  that  the  appellant  had
    obtained qualifications in the UK and had said at the hearing that many
    of his friends from college had already found work.   He  is  a  single
    adult male with no known vulnerabilities. He could support  himself  by
    finding a job and indeed over time could repay the debts of his  father
    should he choose to do so.

12. The judge properly referred herself to the  objective  evidence  before
    her, noting that there was freedom of movement within Albania  and  the
    appellant could live in any town or city there.  She considered whether
    registering for an ID card would put him at risk of  being  located  by
    his father or by O but since  the  appellant  has  never  claimed  that
    either of them were members of a significant  gang  or  that  they  had
    convictions with the police there was no real risk  of  his  being  re-
    trafficked.  Indeed, there has been no evidence put before the Tribunal
    to suggest that O has any interest in the appellant whatsoever.

13. Accordingly, the judge was fully entitled to conclude that even  though
    the appellant had originally been a victim of trafficking, there was no
    real risk to him on return to Albania and he could reasonably  relocate
    to an area away from his family should he choose to do so.  There is no
    error in the decision.

Notice of Decision

14. The original decision of the judge will stand.

15. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

