
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/03148/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 6 December 2018                   |on 17 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 RUIQIN XUE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr N McCluskey, Advocate, instructed by LB & Co,
                    Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  6  February  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge McManus, promulgated on 11 May 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 25 May 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by Deputy UT Judge Chapman, dated 23 August
         2018.

 2. The first part of the grounds relates to refusal of an adjournment  and
    to the appellant's  husband  being  subject  to  a  witness  protection
    programme.  Mr McCluskey advised that in light of information which has
    recently come to hand, those aspects  were  no  longer  pursued.   (The
    grant of permission may not have extended to  these  issues,  but  that
    does not now need be taken any further.)

 3. The remaining grounds say that  the  judge  erred  under  reference  to
    paragraph EX.1 of the rules; there were insurmountable obstacles to the
    appellant and her husband returning to China; and in assessing  article
    8, given the length of time the appellant's husband had resided in  the
    UK, the nature of his occupation, his level of income and the financial
    dependence of the appellant upon him it was "clearly not  proportionate
    to expect him to return to China at this stage of his life".

 4. The numbering of the paragraphs in the FtT's decision has  gone  astray
    at several points.  This determination needs to be related back to that
    decision, bearing that in mind.

 5. It was agreed during submissions that  the  word  "not"  in  the  first
    sentence  of  the  second  paragraph  numbered  16  on  page  14  is  a
    typographical error.

 6. Mr McCluskey added to the grounds as follows:

      i) The article 8 assessment (at the paragraph referred to  above)  was
         inadequate, both under the rules and in  terms  of  proportionality
         outside the rules.

     ii) In that paragraph, and elsewhere in the decision, the judge  failed
         to allow for the degree of flexibility available in  applying  part
         5A of the 2002 Act, as shown by Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58.

    iii) At page 13, paragraph 12, and in the paragraph referred  to  above,
         the judge over-emphasised the  appellant's  precarious  immigration
         status.

     iv) At  page  9,  paragraph  6,  the  judge  set  out  factors  in  the
         appellant's favour, which she failed  to  recognise  later  in  the
         decision.

      v) The respondent's refusal letter had  baldly  refused  to  recognise
         that there might be any exceptional  circumstances  to  permit  the
         appeal to succeed outside the rules.  Such  questions  were  highly
         fact-sensitive.  The judge had fallen into the same error of a non-
         analytical approach.

     vi) Based on the factors which were not properly recognised  -  the  20
         years the appellant's husband has spent in the UK, and his business
         and property interests - and  on  the  flexibility  available,  the
         decision should be reversed.

 7. Having heard also the submissions for the  respondent,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 8. Rhuppiah was an example of a case so  strong  on  its  individual  (and
    unusual) facts that the  Court  considered  it  might  have  succeeded,
    outside the rules, on private life alone.

 9. The immigration rules, including paragraph EX.1, are intended to comply
    with article 8 so far as possible.  It has  not  been  shown  that  the
    present case disclosed any feature of private or family life  which  is
    not reflected in  the  rules.   Accordingly,  everything  relevant  had
    already been considered, and no extensive treatment outside  the  rules
    was required.

10. The judge's decisive paragraph did not have to repeat everything  which
    went before.  It mentions positive factors (no indication  of  recourse
    to public funds, and no criminal record) as well as negative ones.  The
    next paragraph is explicit that all factors mentioned in  the  decision
    have been considered.

11. The immigration history of the appellant was worse that the judge said,
    because, as Mr Govan pointed out, her status  in  the  UK  at  relevant
    times was not simply  precarious  but  unlawful.   Part  5A  at  s.117B
    required little weight to be given both to her private life and to  her
    relationship.

12. The grounds are not shown to be any more  than  disagreement  with  the
    judge's assessment of insurmountable obstacles, within the  rules,  and
    of proportionality, as to any further case  outside  the  rules.   That
    assessment was firmly grounded in the facts of the case, and  discloses
    no error on a point of law, such that it should be set aside.

13. Page 9, paragraph 26 of the FtT decision records  the  submission  that
    the appellant should not be expected to return to China and  apply  for
    leave from there because "it would be impossible to meet  the  language
    test".  The judge does not resolve the point.   I  enquired  about  the
    foundation for that submission, and it turns out there was none.  There
    is no more difficulty in the way of the  appellant  preparing  for  and
    taking the language test than for the average person.  It  is  presumed
    to  be  a  reasonable  and  achievable  requirement.   The   point   is
    incidental, but given the appellant's poor immigration history,  it  is
    as well to make it clear that there would be no reason  not  to  expect
    her to apply from abroad, if the rules so require.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]
            10 December 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




