
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03084/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2018                     |On 22 October 2018                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                   mr a b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, Counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan born on 16 January 1996.  He is a
    non-Arab Darfuri.  He arrived in the UK on 9 August 2017 and claimed
    asylum on 23 August 2017.  On 20 February 2018 the respondent refused
    his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.  The appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie.  In a decision promulgated on 27 June
    2018 Judge Devittie dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now
    appealing with permission against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that he is from Darfur and a member of the non-
    Arab tribe of the Zhagawa.  He claims that his family moved to a camp
    (the intifada camp) in 2003 after an attack on their village.  He
    claims that his brother was involved with the opposition and that the
    authorities believe that he was also involved.  He also claims that his
    father was beaten as a consequence of him and his brother being sought
    and that he fled Sudan in order to avoid being killed by the
    authorities.  He claims that his brother remained in Sudan and joined
    with friends who were supporters of the opposition.

Decison of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. It was accepted by the judge that the appellant is a member of the non-
    Arab tribe of the Zhagawa and that he lived in a camp before leaving
    Sudan to travel to the UK.  However, the judge did not accept the
    appellant's account of being at risk because of an imputed political
    opinion and having been mistaken as a member of the opposition.

 4. The judge considered whether the appellant would be reasonably likely
    to face persecution on account of his ethnicity if he were to relocate
    to Khartoum.  He observed that the applicable Country Guidance cases of
    MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) and AA (Non-Arab
    Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 make clear that he
    would.  He also commented that the more recent decision of IM and AI
    (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG
    [2016] UKUT 00188 (IAC) is consistent with MM and AA.

 5. The judge stated that a Tribunal may depart from Country Guidance cases
    if there are strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to justify
    such a departure.  He referred to a number of sources post dating the
    Country Guidance cases, including a 2016 Danish-UK fact-finding mission
    and a 2017 Human Rights Watch report.   At paragraph 12(6) he cited a
    letter dated 29 September 2016 from the British Ambassador to Khartoum
    who wrote that

         "[No] substantial concerns have been raised over the treatment of
         non-Arab Darfuris that we would consider ethnic persecution,
         although many face economic marginalisation having been displaced
         due to conflict."

 6. The letter also states that many Darfuris, including non-Arab, are
    represented at senior levels in Government, academia and the security
    forces, the media, and in other institutions.

 7. At paragraph 15 the judge stated:

         "I have read closely the Danish-UK Fact Finding report.  It is a
         comprehensive document and is supported by the letter from the UK
         Embassy in Khartoum which clearly outlines it's (sic) network of
         sources of information on the ground relating to non-Arab Darfuris
         including the risk they may face on return as failed asylum
         seekers.  ... I am satisfied that this appellant would not be at
         risk upon his return via Khartoum airport solely on account of his
         being a non-Arab Darfuri who sought asylum in the UK."



Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. The appellant submitted two grounds of appeal.  The first ground
    contends that the judge adopted a mistaken approach to the Country
    Guidances cases of AA and MM and that the Danish UK fact-finding report
    taken at its highest is insufficient alone to supersede AA and MM.

 9. The second ground argues that the judge erred by failing to consider
    that the appellant would be required to undertake national service upon
    return and that if he is forced to undertake national service it is
    unlikely that he would remain in Khartoum and therefore he would be at
    risk as the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal was that it would be
    safe to return to Khartoum, not to other parts of Sudan.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Landes.  In the grant of permission Judge Landes commented that the
    judge only found that the appellant was not reasonably likely to be
    exposed to persecution in Khartoum but had not addressed the
    reasonableness or otherwise of his relocation to Khartoum.

11. Before me, Mr Anderson on behalf of the appellant argued firstly that
    the Country Guidance cases are clear that non-Arab Darfuris cannot
    safely be returned to Sudan.  He argued that the judge had departed
    from the Country Guidance case law solely because of a single fact-
    finding report and that this was insufficient to justify deviation from
    the Country Guidance case law.

12. Mr Anderson also argued that the decision is fundamentally flawed
    because the judge failed to give any consideration to the risk arising
    from the likelihood that the appellant will be required to undertake
    national service.  Mr Anderson observed that although this was raised
    at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal there is no mention of the
    issue in the decision.  He described the failure to consider the point
    as fatal to the decision.  I asked Mr Anderson whether there was any
    objective evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to support the
    contention that the appellant would be required to undertake national
    service; and/or that he would be at risk of persecution as a
    consequence.  Mr Anderson acknowledged that there was no such evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal (other than the oral evidence of the
    appellant).  However, he maintained that the respondent ought to have
    investigated this issue and that it was unreasonable to expect the
    appellant to adduce evidence on something that would not reasonably be
    available to him.

13. Mr Anderson also argued that the decision is deficient because
    reasonableness of relocation to Khartoum was not addressed.  He argued
    that as this issue had been identified in the grant of permission to
    appeal there was no prejudice to the respondent in it being considered
    at this stage, even though it was not raised in the grounds of appeal.



14. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the respondent maintained that the judge was
    entitled to conclude that the Country Guidance case law could be
    departed from for the reasons given.  With regard to military service,
    he argued that this was never put to the Secretary of State prior to
    the hearing and, in any event, the failure to deal with it was not
    material to the conclusions reached.  As to reasonableness of
    relocation, Mr Tarlow submitted that it was too late for the appellant
    to raise it at this time, but in any event, if there were an error, it
    was not material to the conclusion reached.

Analysis

15. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to depart from the Country
    Guidance case law for the reasons he gave.  The judge identified the
    relevant Country Guidance cases and correctly set out the circumstances
    in which he was entitled to depart from them.  He considered the
    objective evidence post-dating the Country Guidance cases that was
    before him, and having done so concluded that there had been changes in
    the conditions affecting non-Arabs from Darfur, such that there were
    cogent and strong reasons to depart from the Country Guidance.  Mr
    Anderson contends that the judge placed too much reliance on the Danish-
    UK Fact Finding report.  I disagree.  This was credible evidence that
    the judge was entitled to rely on.  Moreover, although the judge placed
    significant weight on the report, this was not the only evidence upon
    which his decision was based.  For example, it is clear that the judge
    had regard to a 2017 Human Rights Watch report.  Having reviewed the
    objective evidence the judge relied on, I am satisfied that, having
    correctly identified the law and followed the correct approach, the
    judge reached a conclusion that was open to him based on that evidence.



16. I agree with Mr Anderson that the judge erred by failing to address the
    appellant's contention that he faces a risk because of a requirement to
    undertake national service.  I accept that this was raised during the
    First tier Tribunal hearing and that it was incumbent upon the judge to
    make a finding in respect of the submission.  However, I agree with Mr
    Tarlow that the error was not material.  The burden of proof is on the
    appellant to establish his case (to the lower standard).  The only
    evidence submitted in respect of national service was the oral evidence
    the appellant gave at the hearing.  There was no objective evidence
    before the judge showing that the appellant would be required to
    undertake national service, or that if he were so required he would be
    at risk as a consequence.  The fact that the appellant would, as a
    civilian, be at risk outside of Khartoum does not mean that he would be
    at risk outside of Khartoum whilst engaging in national service.

17. Mr Anderson argued that there is an absence of available evidence about
    the risk arising from national service and the issue should have been
    investigated by the respondent.  The difficulty with this submission is
    that the burden lies with the appellant.  If Mr Anderson is right, and
    there is no publicly available objective evidence relating to the
    issues raised about national service, then the appellant could have
    taken steps to obtain evidence, for example by instructing an expert.
    In the absence of objective evidence to establish a risk arising from
    national service, it follows that the appellant was unable to discharge
    the burden of proof.  I therefore find that, although the judge erred,
    the error was not material.

18. The grounds of appeal do not contend that the judge erred by failing to
    address the reasonableness of relocation to Khartoum and no application
    was made in advance of the hearing to amend the grounds of appeal.
    However, as the issue was raised in the grant of permission, and
    therefore the respondent has not been taken by surprise, I am prepared
    to consider the submission.

19. Although the judge has not explicitly stated that it would be
    reasonable (in addition to being safe) for the appellant to relocate
    internally to Khartoum, it is apparent, when reading the decision as a
    whole, that this is the conclusion the judge reached based on his
    understanding of the objective evidence. The judge found that the
    appellant speaks the national language of Sudan and is a young adult
    male who has spent the majority of his formative years in the country.
    At paragraph 12(5) the judge stated:

         "The primary source of information obtained by a joint Danish - UK
         fact-finding mission, of early 2016, an Australian government
         report of April 2016, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office -
         indicate that there is a significant and established population of
         non-Aarb Darfuris living in Khartoum and surrounding areas.  This
         includes people who have moved from Darfuri since the conflict
         began in 2003, who are able to go about their business and daily
         lives in Kartoum.  They are present in all areas and levels of
         society including at a senior level in the government, in academia,
         as university students, in the security forces and in the media."

20. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled, for the reasons summarised
    at paragraph 12(5) of the decision, to reach the view that internal
    relocation is reasonable.

21. Although the decision contains errors of law, I am satisfied that they
    were not material and that the judge reached a conclusion that was open
    to him based on the evidence.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    therefore stands.

Decision

22. The appeal is dismissed.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 16 October 2018               |

