
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03199/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3 July 2017                         |On 10 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Jane Conteh
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr J Nicholson, instructed by CAB (Bolton)
For the appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Durance promulgated 7.4.17, allowing on immigration
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State, dated 17.11.15, to refuse her application made on 5.8.15 for FLR
    on private and family life grounds.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 30.3.17. The appeal of Edward Marvie  was
    dismissed.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    4.5.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 3.7.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Durance should be set aside.

 6. The appellant made an asylum claim in 2010,  to  the  effect  that  she
    would be subjected to FGM on return to Sierra Leone. She  had  come  to
    the UK in 2006 and given birth to two children, in 2008 and  2010,  the
    father of whom is Mr Marvie. Her appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
    protection claim was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal,  with  Judge
    Hague concluding that the appellant was a dishonest  witness  giving  a
    false story and that there was no risk on return. She was no longer  in
    contact with the father of the  children.  The  appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, but Judge  Lever  found  no
    error of law and dismissed her appeal.

 7. The appellant was subsequently granted a period of discretionary  leave
    (DL), for a period of 30 months from 28.2.13. Within extant leave,  she
    made an application for FLR on  5.8.15.  She  maintained  she  and  her
    daughter were at risk of FGM on return to Sierra Leone. She also relied
    on private and family life outside the  Rules  pursuant  to  article  8
    ECHR.

 8. Judge Durance found no risk on return. The judge also  found  that  the
    appellant was not in any genuine or  subsisting  relationship  with  Mr
    Marvie. However,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE, following MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, to find that she had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a qualifying child (P having lived in the UK for at least 7 years)
    and it is not reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK,  and  in
    the best interests of the children that the appellant remain with  them
    in the UK as their principle carer.

 9. The grounds complain that whilst the judge  referenced  MA  (Pakistan),
    the decision failed to take account of the appellant's conduct and  all
    relevant factors, including the 117B public interest considerations and
    wrongly gave  credit  for  the  appellant  not  claiming  benefits  but
    working, when the 117B factors are  either  neutral  or  negative,  not
    positive. It is submitted that the judge failed to  give  any  adequate
    consideration to the mandatory public interest factors.

10. In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Woodcraft  observed  that
    although  the  grounds  made  complaint  about  s117B  public  interest
    considerations, those only applied when the matter is being  considered
    outside the Rules, and it is clear that the judge  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Rules. However, Judge Woodcraft considered it  arguable  that
    in considering the  reasonableness  test,  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of the wider public interest, in accordance with MA (Pakistan),
    and that this may have affected the result.

11. I cannot see how the appeal could have  been  allowed  under  paragraph
    276ADE at  all.  That  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child is not the test for the  appellant
    under 276ADE, which is a ground relating to private life, not a  family
    life relationship with a child. The appellant is not under the  age  of
    18 and thus the test of reasonableness under 276ADE(iv) does not arise.
    The judge has conflated the  application  by  the  appellant  with  the
    reasonableness test applicable to a child under the age of 18  who  has
    lived in the UK for at least 7 years, and the  s117B(6)  reasonableness
    test outside the Rules. Mr Nicholson conceded that the appellant  could
    not meet the Rules for leave to remain  under  either  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The appeal could  only  have
    been allowed outside the Rules.

12. However, from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and thus consideration of s117B(6) outside  the  Rules
    would have been appropriate. In MA (Pakistan) the Court of Appeal  held
    that in considering s117B(6)  the  court  should  have  regard  to  the
    "conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public
    interest," and that "the only significance of section 117B(6)  is  that
    where the seven year rule is satisfied, it is a factor of  some  weight
    leaning in favour of leave to remain being granted."  However,  it  was
    acknowledged  that  a  child  seven  years'  residence  must  be  given
    significant weight in the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise:

         "After such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

13. Relying on EV (Philippines) the Court of Appeal  stated,  "...the  fact
    that the child has been in the UK for seven  years  would  need  to  be
    given significant  weight  in  the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
    related reasons: first, because of its  relevance  to  determining  the
    nature and strength of the child's best interests; and second,  because
    it establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary." Reference was also made to
    the Secretary of State's published guidance in August 2015 in the  form
    of Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled  "Family  Life  (as  a
    partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes"  in  which  it  is
    expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement  is
    satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.
    11.2.4). It was said that to require compelling reasons to refuse leave
    would be putting the threshold too high.

14. The judge concluded that despite the assertion to the contrary  in  the
    refusal  decision,  the  appellant  remains  a  single  parent  of  two
    children. As Mr Nicholson put, her situation is no  different  to  when
    she was granted DL in 2013. It  is  not  the  case  that  she  and  the
    children can continue family life in Sierra Leone with Mr Marvie.

15. The judge could have found that  the  child  met  the  requirements  of
    276ADE for leave to remain, on the basis that it was not reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK, and in effect that is what the  judge
    must have found, when the decision is read as a whole. The child is not
    to blame for the appellant's conduct and poor immigration  history  and
    the wider public interest considerations do not apply when the child is
    being considered under 276ADE.

16. It would  then  follow  that  in  an  article  8  ECHR  proportionality
    assessment outside the Rules, the appellant would  have  met  s117B(6),
    but that even without that, once the child meets the  requirements  for
    LTR, it cannot be proportionate to require the appellant to  leave  the
    UK. In essence, if the child succeeds, then so must the mother, as  the
    sole and primary carer for that child. There  can  be  no  question  of
    separating the family.

17. Thus whilst the decision should have been framed as allowing the appeal
    on article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Rules, the effect of the decision
    would have been the same as allowing it under  the  Rules.  Neither  Mr
    Nicholson nor Mr Bates could identify any  advantage  to  remaking  the
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds, dismissing it  on
    immigration grounds. In the circumstances, whilst there is an error  of
    law, it is not one material to the outcome of the appeal.

18. I make clear that if the appeal had been set aside on grounds of  error
    of law, I would have immediately remade it by allowing  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds, relying on the relevant findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and on the basis that the even taking  the  wider  public
    interests and the appellant's conduct into account,  it  would  not  be
    reasonable  to  expect  the  qualifying  child  P  to  leave  the   UK,
    particularly  bearing  in  mind  that  that  child   would   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE and the reasonableness  test  therein,
    even with the MA (Pakistan) wider considerations applied.  In  such  an
    assessment, the child is not to  be  blamed  for  the  conduct  of  the
    parent, or her poor immigration history, and there was  ample  evidence
    of the child's integration into the UK, where she was born some 9 years
    ago. The best interests of the child are to remain in the UK, which  is
    a primary but not paramount consideration. The child has  no  knowledge
    of and has never lived in Sierra  Leone.  The  child  is  now  part-way
    through primary  school  education  and  it  would  be  disruptive  and
    traumatic to now remove the child from the UK. The second child is  now
    also approaching the seven-year threshold. The parent and the  children
    were given DL in 2013 and there is in fact no  material  difference  to
    their circumstances other than by the elapse of time they have acquired
    a greater degree of integration into life in the UK.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law  such  as  to  require  it  to
    should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

     The appeal remains allowed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
