
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03555/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On 6 January 2021                    |On 28 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                    H A H
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Hussain, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Wilson) (hereinafter referred  to
         as the "FtTJ") who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated  on
         the 20 November 2020.


      2. Whilst this is the appeal of the Secretary of State,  for  ease  of
         reference I intend to refer to the parties as they were before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.


      3. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      4. The initial hearing took place on 12 March 2020 but  was  adjourned
         due to the illness of one of the advocates. Directions  were  given
         on the same date but were not served until 24 April 2020.

      5.  In the light of the present need to take precautions  against  the
         spread of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the
         Procedure Rules, directions were sent out to the parties  that  the
         provisional  view  was that it would be  appropriate  to  determine
         whether the decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
         law without a hearing. Following further directions the appeal  was
         listed as a remote hearing.

      6. The hearing took place on 6 January 2021, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant so that he could  listen  and  observe  the  hearing.
         There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:


      7. The appellant is a national of Iraq. The history of  the  appellant
         is set out in the decision of the  FtTJ  and  the  decision  letter
         dated 28 March 2019.

      8. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom in 2000 and made  an
         asylum claim on 28th of November 2000. His application  for  asylum
         was refused by the respondent on 8  July  2003.  He  appealed  that
         decision on 23 July 2003 and the adjudicator dismissed  his  appeal
         in a written decision promulgated on 19 November  2003.  The  judge
         rejected the appellant's factual account of being at risk  in  Iraq
         and  expressly  rejected  his  account  that  his  uncle  had  been
         kidnapped and killed. The judge was satisfied that he  was  not  in
         any danger from  the  KDP,  Kurdish  population  generally  or  the
         Kurdish authorities and that he was of no interest to any  of  them
         and could return to Iraq safely.

      9. Permission to appeal that decision was refused on 3  February  2004
         and on 20 February 2004 he became appeal rights exhausted.

     10. The appellant left the United Kingdom in 2007 but it  appears  that
         the authorities in France returned him  to  the  UK  in  2007.  The
         appellant made a second claim for  asylum  but  then  withdrew  the
         application in 2009 and returned to Iraq.

     11. The appellant remained in  Iraq  until  June  2014.  The  appellant
         claimed that militants killed his sister and brother  in  2014  and
         therefore he left Iraq for a second time. His claim  was  that  his
         sister was working as a policewoman for a bank and  that  militants
         had targeted her. He last saw her on 2 June 2014 and the  next  day
         the manager at the bank telephoned to say that his sister had  been
         arrested by militants. When they went to find out what had happened
         they found that she had been killed the following day. As a result,
         the appellant stated that the family had to leave Iraq as they were
         likely to be targeted by the militants.

     12. The appellant states that he, his mother and younger brother walked
         across the border to Turkey and that his elder brother  was  killed
         the same day. The family were in a refugee camp in Turkey,  but  he
         could not remain there and left  his  mother  and  younger  brother
         whilst he found an agent to help him travel to Europe.

     13. In October 2015 he found a place in a van  going  to  Bulgaria  and
         then travelled  through  a  number  of  European  countries  before
         travelling to the UK. En  route  and  whilst  in  Finland,  he  was
         arrested, and they took his Iraqi national ID card  and  that  they
         continued to retain that identity document.

     14. The appellant arrived in the UK in February 2016 and in March  2016
         claimed asylum.

     15. It appears that originally his case was  considered  by  the  third
         country unit but thereafter was considered as a fresh claim  having
         lodged further submissions on 7 March  2018.  This  resulted  in  a
         decision letter of 28 March 2019 whereby the respondent refused his
         claim on all grounds.

     16. The appellant lodged an appeal against this decision, and  it  came
         before the FtT on 30 October 2019.

     17. In a decision promulgated on the 20 November 2019 the FtTJ  allowed
         his appeal. The FtTJ found that the appellant had no  documentation
         to enable him to return to Iraq and that the appellant would not be
         able to obtain a CSID within a reasonable timescale. This was based
         on the appellant having  no  family  left  in  Iraq  and  that  the
         appellant confirmed at the hearing he did not know the page  volume
         number or any details that might  lead  to  the  discovery  of  his
         information to enable the authorities to issue him with a CSID  (at
         [18).] The judge found that without a CSID the appellant  would  be
         likely to face a real risk of destitution amounting to serious harm
         and any funds provided to him by the Secretary of State  to  assist
         his return would be exhausted. The judge found also that  he  could
         not relocate safely to the IKR.

     18. Permission to appeal was sought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
         permission was granted by FtTJ Grant on 8 January 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     19. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     20. Ms Pettersen, on behalf of the SSHD relied upon the written grounds
         of appeal. There were also further written submissions dated 18 May
         2020.

     21. Mr Hussain, Counsel on behalf of the  appellant,  provided  written
         submissions dated 15 May 2020 and 23 May 2020.

     22. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         consider their respective submissions when addressing  the  grounds
         of challenge advanced on behalf of the Secretary of state.

Decision on error of law:

     23. Following the direction made  by  UTJ  Plimmer  in  March  2020  at
         paragraph  5  of  her  directions,  the  respondent   submitted   a
         clarification of the written grounds of challenge. The UTJ did note
         that her provisional view was that the clearest  ground  of  appeal
         appeared to be the submission that the FtTJ's acceptance  that  the
         appellant had no family was "inadequately reasoned".

     24. Thus there are two grounds of appeal identified, firstly, ground  1
         is that the FtT has had inadequate regard to the possibility of the
         appellant obtaining a CSID, by  reference  to  exploring  with  the
         Finnish authorities the return of  his  own  documents;  background
         information and country guidance caselaw on the ability of an Iraqi
         national to obtain a CSID from abroad even if not in possession  of
         supporting documentation; and unreasoned findings as to the absence
         of family assistance in  Iraq.  Ground  2  is  that  the  FtTJ  has
         inadequately reasoned his acceptance of the appellant's credibility
         on key matters leading to an erroneous assessment of  documentation
         and return to Iraq.

     25. In  considering  those  grounds  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to
         carefully read and consider the written submissions submitted by Mr
         Hussain on behalf of  the  appellant  (dated  15  May  2020  and  a
         skeleton argument 23 May 2020) and also the oral submissions of the
         advocates. It seems to me that ground 2 should be considered  first
         because if there is a material error of law  which  arises  on  the
         basis of the arguments advanced there, it must follow that the FtTJ
         did not properly address  the  issues  of  redocumentation  on  the
         correct factual basis.

     26. It is submitted on behalf of  the  respondent  that  the  FtTJ  has
         inadequately reasoned his acceptance of the appellant's credibility
         on key matters that arise for analysis on the facts of this appeal.
         Those relate to the whereabouts of his documentation,  his  ability
         to either obtain or replace them which  involves  consideration  of
         the whereabouts of family members.

     27. The written submissions set out that on these "key issues" the FtTJ
         unquestioningly accepted the appellant's evidence that  he  had  no
         access to any documentation and that he had no family relatives  in
         Iraq who  could  provide  him  with  any  assistance.  The  grounds
         expressly  identify  the  following  matters;  the  judge  has  not
         considered why the appellant  cannot  obtain  his  CSID  and  other
         papers from the Finnish authorities whom the appellant  claims  are
         in possession of them (see paragraph 7 and 15  and  appeal  hearing
         minute), the claimed lack of a CSID  is  a  crucial  point  of  the
         appellant's claim which was unresolved by the FtTJ and thus renders
         findings at paragraph [14 - 25] as inadequate. The judge found that
         the appellant had made no attempt to contact the Iraqi  embassy  in
         the  UK  (paragraph  19)  which   impacted   on   the   appellant's
         credibility, having been in the UK for so many years yet making  no
         attempt to obtain support. As regards family members, the appellant
         has 21 aunts and uncles  but  claims  none  are  in  Iraq  and  the
         findings at paragraph 16 - 18, 21 and  24  overlook  this  material
         point and are a "bare acceptance" of the appellant's claim that  he
         has no family support either to obtain the CSID or to help  him  to
         relocate.

     28. By way of response, Mr Hussain on behalf of the  appellant  submits
         that the FtTJ did not err in law in respect of the findings made as
         to documentation and that he had no family support in Iraq. In  his
         oral submissions Mr Hussain reminded the tribunal that the FtTJ had
         the advantage of hearing oral evidence from the appellant and  that
         this was a well-reasoned decision and one where the judge  accepted
         the appellant's account as credible and was therefore  entitled  to
         find that he was not in touch with family members nor would he have
         access to any documentation to enable him to return safely. Thus Mr
         Hussain submitted that the grounds were simply an  attempt  by  the
         respondent to re-argue  their  case  and  that  the  appeal  should
         therefore be dismissed.

     29. In answer to my question as to whether the judge had  made  factual
         findings  concerning  the  claimed  events  in  Mosul,  Mr  Hussain
         submitted that the judge did not expressly deal with these  events.
         However, it would not have taken the matters any further as without
         a CSID he would not be able to travel anywhere in Iraq.  Whilst  he
         accepted that it would have  been  better  for  the  FtTJ  to  have
         considered the  circumstances  in  Mosul,  he  submitted  that  the
         omission was not material due to the fact that without a  CSID  the
         appellant would not  be  able  to  negotiate  the  checkpoints  and
         therefore would be left stranded  in  Baghdad  which  would  be  in
         breach of Article 3.

     30. Ms Pettersen by way of reply submitted that those observations made
         on behalf of the appellant did not deal with the position  advanced
         by the respondent that the judge had  failed  to  take  account  of
         documents that the appellant would have access to  if  he  were  to
         contact the Finnish authorities nor did it properly deal  with  the
         appellant's failure to attend at the Iraqi embassy  both  of  which
         were points relevant to assessment of the appellant's credibility.

     31. I have carefully considered the  submissions  made  on  behalf  the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the material before  the
         judge and his decision. Having done so, I am satisfied that  ground
         2 is made out and that the respondent has demonstrated there is  an
         inadequacy of reasoning in  the  decision  to  deal  with  the  key
         factors in this appeal. I shall set out  my  reasons  for  reaching
         this decision.

     32. The FtTJ allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  for
         the reasons that he set out at paragraph 25. The judge stated  that
         he was satisfied "of the real risk that  he  would  suffer  serious
         harm as  defined  in  paragraph  339CA  of  the  immigration  rules
         specifically that he would suffer inhuman or degrading treatment or
         punishment  in  Iraq,  or  that  he  would  suffer  a  serious  and
         individual threat to his life or person by reason of indiscriminate
         violence in situations of internal armed conflict there. His appeal
         consequently succeeds."

     33. It is unclear to me upon  what  basis  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant would suffer a "serious and individual threat to his life
         by reason of indiscriminate violence in  a  situation  of  internal
         armed conflict" given that the FtTJ made no assessment of   Article
         15 (c )  by reference to the country materials or by any  reference
         to the appellant's own personal circumstances. However, it is clear
         that the judge  did  not  allow  the  appeal  having  made  factual
         findings that the appellant would be at risk either  in  Mosul;  on
         humanitarian protection grounds or on Refugee Convention grounds.

     34. Nonetheless, it is common ground the judge appeared  to  allow  the
         appeal on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  no  documentation
         available to him and that he was not in  contact  with  any  family
         members who would be able to obtain the requisite documentation,  a
         CSID, within a reasonable timeframe (see paragraph [23]).

     35. Ground 2 relies on the failure of the FtTJ to make factual findings
         as to the appellant's  personal  circumstances  relevant  to  those
         issues. It was common ground that the  appellant's  home  area  was
         Mosul, however there are no factual findings as to the events  that
         the appellant claimed took place there in 2014 which gave  rise  to
         the appellant's return to the UK for a second time.

     36. The  appellant's  fresh  claim  was  advanced  on  the  basis  that
         following his return to his home area in 2009  he  remained  living
         there with his family members  until  2014.  He  claimed  that  his
         sister was killed by militiamen in June  2014  when  she  had  been
         working  as  a  policewoman  at  a  bank  and  that  she  had  been
         specifically targeted by militants. His claim  was  that  the  bank
         manager had telephoned him to say that his sister had been arrested
         at the bank by militants and that the next day she was found  dead.
         The appellant's claim was that he left Iraq because he was  related
         to a policewoman and also on  account  of  his  ethnicity.  It  was
         further claimed that after he left Iraq he went to Turkey with  his
         mother and younger brother and that his elder brother  was  killed.
         His claim was that he had left his family members in Turkey and had
         not seen them since and had no other relatives  remaining  in  Iraq
         who could provide support or assistance.

     37. There were no factual findings made as to  those  events  in  Mosul
         either by reference to the appellant's factual account  or  in  the
         context of the objective country  materials.  The  decision  letter
         expressly challenged the appellant's  claim  that  his  sister  and
         brother were killed by militia in Iraq (set out at paragraph 54  of
         the decision letter) and that the appellant had failed to  evidence
         that his brother and sister died, how it occurred  and  whether  it
         was at the hands of the militia.

     38. Whilst  Mr  Hussain  submits  that  the  failure  to  consider  the
         circumstances in Mosul was not material to the FtTJ's assessment, I
         do not consider that that is correct. The question of documentation
         and availability of documentation and return to  Iraq  relies  upon
         factual findings being made as to the existence of family  members,
         what happened to them and whether steps had been taken to locate or
         trace them and in the light of previous credibility findings. It is
         also relevant to consider  those  issues  in  the  context  of  the
         country materials and in particular the events  and  conditions  in
         the home area.

     39. Whilst Mr Hussain submits that the decision was well  reasoned,  in
         my judgement, the FtTJ did not address any of those factual  issues
         and as identified by the respondent  and  as  to  the  question  of
         family members in Iraq, the FtTJ operated on a bare acceptance that
         he had no family members living in Iraq the militia  having  killed
         his  sister  and  brother  in  2014  (see  paragraph  [17]  of  the
         decision). The FtTJ also set out at [17] " he further  stated  that
         time he saw his mother and his younger brother  was  in  a  refugee
         camp in Turkey and confirm during the course of his  evidence  that
         he had no idea where they were now, or  indeed  whether  they  were
         still  alive."  At  [21]  the  judge  stated,  "I  am  additionally
         satisfied that because he has no family or other members likely  to
         be able to provide a means of support him once he is back in  Iraq,
         without a CSID he is likely to face  a  real  risk  of  destitution
         amounting to serious harm when any funds provided  to  him  by  the
         Secretary of State to assist his return are exhausted."  There  are
         no reasons given by the FtTJ  for  reaching  those  conclusions  or
         accepting the appellant's evidence on those key issues  as  to  the
         whereabouts of family members or his  documentation.  At  best  the
         reasoning appears to stem from the appellant's further  submissions
         made on 7 March 2018 that he had no family members, but I  can  see
         no other reasoning as to why the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
         evidence. Mr Hussain has  not  pointed  out  to  the  Tribunal  any
         reasoning  to  underpin  such  an  assessment  beyond  his  general
         submission that the appellant had given  oral  evidence  which  the
         FtTJ accepted.

     40. As set out the decision letter expressly challenged the appellant's
         account of events in  Mosul  and  the  whereabouts  of  the  family
         members but the FtTJ did not assess that claim in the light of  the
         appellant's evidence or against any background  evidence  available
         to  resolve  those  issues  of  fact.  I  accept  the  respondent's
         submission that instead, the FtTJ expressed his  satisfaction  with
         the appellant's evidence on this issue, and in fact on all material
         issues, without supporting this with any reasoning or any  critical
         analysis.

     41. In particular, the respondent points to  the  cross-examination  of
         the appellant and that it was elicited in  cross  examination  that
         the appellant had a large number of aunts and uncles  but  that  he
         claimed that none were in Iraq. The grounds attach a  copy  of  the
         appeal hearing minute which evidences this, and it is also set  out
         in the handwritten record of proceedings. It has not been submitted
         on behalf of the appellant that the contents of the  appeal  minute
         hearing was incorrect in any  way.  Given  this  evidence  and  the
         express challenge made by the respondent in  the  decision  letter,
         the judge was required to resolve those  issues  by  analysing  the
         evidence and giving reasons for reaching his  view  rather  than  a
         bare acceptance of the appellant's claim  that  he  has  no  family
         support or any family members available in Iraq to  assist  in  re-
         establishing himself, or re-documenting himself.

     42. A further point identified by the respondent is the  FtTJ  did  not
         take into account any previous adverse credibility findings in  his
         assessment of the appellant's claim.

     43. There is no dispute that  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was
         dismissed by a judge having reached adverse  credibility  findings.
         The judge expressly rejected that the appellant's  uncle  had  been
         kidnapped and killed in Iraq and found that  his  account  was  not
         only incredible but was a  fabrication.  Whilst  the  present  FtTJ
         stated that he  did  not  have  the  decision  and  that  the  only
         information that he had was the  "selective  quoted  text"  in  the
         decision letter,  there  was  sufficient  material  quoted  in  the
         decision letter for the judge to proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant's previous claim  as  regards  what  happened  to  family
         members had been rejected as a fabrication. I would accept that the
         decision was  of  some  age,  having  been  made  in  2003  and  as
         identified by the judge at  [13].  However,  the  previous  adverse
         credibility findings made played no part in  the  FtTJ's  decision-
         making  process  or  in   his   assessment   of   credibility.   No
         consideration was given his failure to contact  the  Iraqi  embassy
         during the lengthy period of  time  that  he  had  been  in  United
         Kingdom  which  was  a  further  matter  which  impacted   on   his
         credibility nor his failure to make any requests for his  documents
         from the authorities in Finland whom the appellant claimed  was  in
         possession of them (see paragraph 7,  15  and  the  appeal  hearing
         minute). Consequently, his claimed inability to obtain a CSID which
         is a key point in the assessment made by the judge, was  unresolved
         and which in my judgement rendered his assessment at paragraphs [14
         - 25] to be inadequately reasoned.

     44. In my judgement without those issues being considered  and  in  the
         absence of any reasoning on those issues, they undermine the FtTJ's
         assessment that the  requisite  documentation  cannot  be  obtained
         which led to the appeal being allowed.  For  example,  the  country
         guidance decisions make reference to applications being made by  an
         appellant and being supported by evidence from family members  (see
         paragraph 26 and 101 of  AAH(Iraq)).  Thus  the  relevance  of  the
         identity  and  whereabouts  of  family  members  are  key  to   the
         assessment of the availability or otherwise  of  documentation  and
         the ability to be able to return to Iraq either to his home area or
         in terms of relocation.

     45. Each case must be analysed on a fact specific  basis  and  for  the
         reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ
         is inadequately reasoned  on  the  key  factual  areas  which  were
         necessary to underpin a proper analysis of the risks on  return  to
         Iraq.

     46. In  reaching  that  decision  I  recognise  that  allegations  made
         concerning the failure to give adequate reasons are frequently made
         and as Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran)
         v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
         982, the obligation on a tribunal is to give reasons in  sufficient
         detail to show that the principles on which the tribunal has  acted
         and the reasons that have led to the decision.  On  the  fact  this
         particular appeal I am satisfied that  it  does  fall  within  that
         category and that there was a failure to give adequate reasons  for
         his decision.

     47. Consequently, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated that the
         decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a  point
         of law and that the decision should be set aside. In the  light  of
         that assessment, it is not necessary to consider ground  1  because
         the assessment of a return to Iraq relies upon the factual findings
         being adequately reasoned.

     48. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     49. As it  will be necessary for the appellant  to give evidence and
         to deal with the evidential issues, further fact-finding will be
         necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return in the light of
         the relevant  evidence,  and the up-to-date country guidance
         decision of SMO and others and in my judgement the best course and
         consistent with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted
         to the FtT for a further hearing. I further note that the appellant
         also seeks to rely upon further and more recent evidence in support
         of his human rights claim on Article 8 grounds in relation to his
         British citizen son living in the United Kingdom.


     50. For those reasons, the appeal shall be remitted to the FtT for a
         further hearing.

Notice of Decision:



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be  set  aside
and to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
                                Dated   19 January 2021


         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

         1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must
         make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

         2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         3. Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

         6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.
