
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03851/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2020                  |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    M S U
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rayner ("the judge"), promulgated on  7  June  2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of  his  protection  claim.  However,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim, specifically in relation to Article 8 ECHR.

 2. As a result of the  partial  success  his  appeal,  the  appellant  was
    granted limited leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  This  in  turn
    gave rise to a jurisdictional  issue  as  to  whether  the  appellant's
    ongoing appeal to the Upper Tribunal in respect of the protection claim
    was to be treated as abandoned.

 3. Following the grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb,  this
    question was subject of consideration by  a  panel  consisting  of  the
    President  and  the  Vice-President,  resulting  in  the  now  reported
    decision of MSU (S.104(4b) notices) [2019] UKUT 412 (IAC). In short, it
    was concluded that the appellant's appeal on the protection  claim  did
    not fall to be treated as abandoned.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, had  claimed  that  he  was  an
    active member of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party ("BNP") and that this
    had in the past, and would on return, cause  him  significant  problems
    amounting to a real risk of persecution and/or  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR. In particular, it was  said  that  political  opponents
    from the Awami League had instigated false criminal cases  against  the
    appellant in Bangladesh.

 5. In a lengthy decision, the judge rejected the appellant's account. Core
    aspects of that account are dealt with under a number of sub-headings.

"BNP member in Bangladesh"

 6. The judge concluded that the appellant's  account  as  to  his  claimed
    membership/activity for the BNP had been materially  inconsistent  over
    the course of time. Supporting evidence from witnesses was deemed to be
    lacking  in  relevant  detail.  Expert  evidence  from  Dr  I  Amundson
    (contained in three reports) was undermined by the apparent failure  of
    the author  to  have  seen  or  considered  materials  adverse  to  the
    appellant, in particular the reasons for refusal letter and a  previous
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal from  2014  (relating  to  a  human
    rights claim only). The late timing of the claim political activity was
    also held against the appellant's overall credibility.

"Arrest in 1987"

 7. A claimed arrest in 1987 was said to have been provided in a  "confused
    and contradictory" manner by the appellant. It was not accepted.

"Political activity in the United Kingdom"

 8. Although the judge accepted that the appellant was a member of the  BNP
    in the United Kingdom, the timing of this raised real concerns  and  it
    was concluded that this activity was an attempt to "bolster" his claim.

"Fear of return for political reasons"

 9. The judge rejected the claim that the appellant was at risk  on  return
    solely in respect of any political activity  undertaken  in  Bangladesh
    all the United Kingdom.

"Land dispute"

10. The judge placed reliance upon observations made by the  judge  in  the
    previous appeal in 2014, noting that the appellant was found not to  be
    credible. The judge goes on to identify an  inconsistency  between  the
    account in 2014 and that been  relied  upon  for  him.  The  change  in
    account (it had previously been said  that  other  family  members  had
    forcibly occupied land in Bangladesh, whereas that had then changed  to
    other family members still residing there) was deemed to be "an example
    of how the appellant is prepared to adapt his evidence so  as  to  best
    suit the claim that he is making at the time."  In  addition,  even  in
    light of the expert evidence, the judge considered that  the  appellant
    had failed to give a sufficiently detailed account  in  either  of  his
    interviews with the respondent.

"Police visit to appellant's home in Bangladesh February 2018"

11. For five reasons set out in this sub-section,  the  judge  rejects  the
    appellant's account that the police had in fact visited  his  house  in
    February 2018 as a result of adverse influence by members of the  Awami
    League.

"Documents"

12. The appellant had produced a number of documents  relating  to  claimed
    false criminal cases against him in Bangladesh. These included: a First
    Information Report; a Complaint; a series of Orders;  a  Charge  Sheet;
    and an Arrest Warrant. Having considered Dr Amundsen's expert evidence,
    the judge concluded that when taken in the round together with the rest
    of the appellant's evidence, no  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the
    relevant documents.

13. The protection claim was duly rejected.

14. The judge went on to consider Article 8  length,  concluding  that  the
    respondent's decision was disproportionate on the grounds that  it  was
    not reasonable for the appellant children to leave the United  Kingdom,
    with reference to section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, as amended.





The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

15. Five grounds of appeal were  put  forward.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    expressly limited to grounds 2-5. Ground 1,  which  asserted  that  the
    judge  should  have  made  additional  findings  on  the  link  between
    political activities and  claimed  falls  charges,  has  not  been  the
    subject of a renewed application before me.

16. The five grounds relate to: the  judge's  treatment  of  Dr  Amundsen's
    evidence; the alleged failure of the judge to have due regard to  other
    supporting evidence; a claimed misunderstanding by the  judge  relation
    to who was occupying land in Bangladesh;  an  absence  of  reasons  for
    rejecting certain evidence.



The hearing

17. Mr Bandegani made an application to rely on an addendum by Dr Amundsen,
    dated 24 June 2019, which sought to confirm that she had  in  fact  had
    sight of the reasons for refusal letter and the 2014  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. It was said that this evidence could  properly  be
    admitted because it went to show that the judge had  laboured  under  a
    mistake of fact when criticising the expert for not  considering  these
    two items of evidence when preparing reports.

18. The application was formally opposed by the respondent.

19. I decided to admit the addendum report. It  did  go  to  the  issue  of
    whether the judge had made a mistake fact. The respondent had had prior
    sight of the short addendum (it having been referred to in the rule  24
    response) and I note that the respondent's position has  in  fact  been
    that the appellant's challenge on this particular point is misconceived
    in any event.

20. Mr Bandegani submitted that the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Amundsen  was
    rejected solely because she  had  apparently  failed  to  consider  the
    reasons for  refusal  letter  and  previous  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  Absent  that  error,  it  was  submitted  that  the  overall
    assessment of the expert evidence and the appellant's credibility might
    have been very different. It  was  also  submitted  that  there  was  a
    failure  to  have  undertaken  a  cumulative  assessment  of  all   the
    supporting evidence adduced by the appellant, including, letter from  a
    lawyer in Bangladesh. Grounds 4 and 5 were relied on although they were
    not the subject of additional oral submissions.

21. Ms Bassi relied on the rule 24 response. She submitted that even if  Dr
    Amundsen had seen the reasons for refusal letter and previous  Tribunal
    decision, she had not actually considered their import when considering
    the appellant's case.  It  was  accepted  that  there  was  no  express
    reference to the lawyer's letter in the judge's decision, but this  did
    not take the appellant's case any further: the judge's decision had  to
    be read as a whole.

22. In reply, Mr Bandegani submitted that the lawyer's letter could not  be
    segregated from the rest of the evidence, and that the judge's  failure
    to have regard to it was a material error. He referred me to  the  last
    paragraph in the addendum report of 24 June 2019 in which  Dr  Admunsen
    confirmed that she had only  referred  to  those  materials  which  she
    regarded as "professionally relevant" to her reports.




Decision on error of law

23. It is undoubtedly the case that the judge  made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings and that he repeatedly stated that  he  considered
    the evidence before him in the round. In many respects, his decision is
    thorough and, at first glance, unobjectionable.

24. However, for the reasons set out below, I conclude that the  judge  has
    materially erred in law.

25. The court documents produced by the appellant were part and  parcel  of
    his claim and had to be assessed in the round:  there  reliability  was
    capable of having an impact on other aspects of claim; conversely,  the
    assessment of those other aspects would be likely to have had an impact
    on reliability of the court documents.

26. The expertise of Dr Edmondson was accepted. Her conclusions  were  that
    most of the documents were "most probably genuine".  Having  looked  at
    her reports for myself, they are relatively  detailed  and  provide  an
    analysis of the contents of the various materials.  The  judge  was  of
    course entitled to view the expert evidence in light of the evidence as
    a whole. Aside from the appellant's own evidence (with which the  judge
    was decidedly unimpressed), there was the evidence from  a  Bangladeshi
    lawyer, Mr Abdul Karim-Akbory, and Ms Poppy Firmin, a  case  worker  at
    Duncan Lewis Solicitors. In respect of the former, the  letters  at  93
    and 95 of the appellant's  main  bundle  states  that  the  author  had
    himself obtained certified copies of the relevant court  documents.  As
    to  Ms  Firman's  statement,  she  gives  an  account  of  a  telephone
    conversation with another lawyer, Mr Md  Bozlur  Rachid,  in  which  he
    purported to provide confirmatory evidence as to the provenance of  the
    court documents, including attesting  to  the  position  of  Mr  Karim-
    Akbory.

27. The judge has failed to address the lawyer's letters. I take  on  board
    the respondent's submission that a judge need not deal  with  each  and
    every item  evidence  before  them.  That  much  is  correct.  However,
    important evidence on  material  issues  must  be  dealt  with,  albeit
    relatively briefly, depending on the circumstances.  Here,  nothing  is
    said about the letters and their content. It does not appear as  though
    the standing of Mr  Karim-Akbory  was  challenged  at  any  stage.  His
    evidence was  capable  of  supporting  the  reliability  of  the  court
    documents.

28. Ms Firman's credibility does not appear to have been challenged.  While
    she could not of course provide direct evidence as to  the  reliability
    of the documents, she  had  committed  herself,  in  a  signed  witness
    statement,  to  the  accuracy  of  a  telephone  conversation  with  an
    individual holding himself out to be a Bangladeshi lawyer who  in  turn
    had direct evidence of the provenance of  the  documents  in  question.
    Again, the standing of that lawyer had not seemingly  been  challenged.
    The judge has  failed  to  deal  with  the  substance  of  Ms  Firman's
    evidence. If he was of the view that it should be rejected,  there  are
    no reasons in support of this.

29. The cumulative effect of the two matters  just  described  is,  in  the
    circumstances of this case,  sufficient  for  me  to  set  the  judge's
    decision aside. It cannot properly be  said  that  the  errors  I  have
    identified are simply immaterial. It is possible that if  the  evidence
    from the Bangladeshi lawyers and Ms Firman had been expressly found  to
    be credible, this would have had a materially positive  impact  on  the
    reliability of the court documents. In turn, and  whilst  by  no  means
    decisive, this was capable of having a  favourable  impact  upon  other
    aspects of the appellant's evidence.

30. On this basis, I set the judge's decision aside.

31. For the sake of completeness, I consider that there was a mistake  fact
    on the judges  part  in  respect  of  what  materials  were  before  Dr
    Admunsen. I am satisfied that the reasons for refusal  letter  and  the
    2014 Tribunal decision had been provided to her. Although the challenge
    put forward under Ground 1 is not entirely clear-cut, what is  said  at
    the end of [45] and in [47(i)] does indicate that the judge reduced the
    weight attributable to the expert evidence on the  mistaken  assumption
    that the two items in question had not  been  provided.  By  itself,  I
    would not have regarded this error of material. In conjunction with the
    matters set out above, it does attract greater significance.



Disposal

32. Mr Bandegani submitted that if an error  of  law  was  found,  I  could
    remake the decision in this appeal based upon the evidence  before  me.
    Having considered the circumstances of this case as a whole, I  take  a
    different view. In light of my decision on error  of  law,  there  will
    need to be extensive fact-finding in this  case  because  none  of  the
    judge's findings can properly be preserved. Having regard to  paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior Presidents Practice Statement, the appropriate course
    of action is to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    complete rehearing.

Anonymity

33. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) The appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing at the Taylor House
         hearing centre, with no preserved findings of fact;

      2) The remitted hearing shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Rayner.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 2 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

