
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/03933/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 February 2018                  |           On 29 March 2018          |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   Mrs a j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Alban, counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Gambia born on 6.6.77.  She  last
    arrived in the UK on 25.4.16 and claimed asylum on 13.10.16. The  basis
    of her claim is that she  fears  she  would  be  forced  to  marry  her
    deceased husband's brother and her refusal so to  do  had  resulted  in
    threats of violence against her from her father. This  application  was
    refused by the Respondent and the Appellant appealed. Her  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First tier Tribunal Boyes for hearing on 6.6.17. In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 8.6.17 he dismissed the appeal.

    2.     An application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was made, in time on the basis that the FtTJ had  erred  materially  in
    law:

         (i)      in failing to make findings in respect of past persecution
         viz the Appellant's claim that she had been subjected to  a  forced
         marriage to her first husband whilst still a child;

         (ii)     in materially misdirecting himself in law in finding  that
         the starting point for his consideration was the  decision  by  the
         Respondent;

         (iii)    in taking  irrelevant  matters  into  account  and  making
         perverse findings, with regard to the Appellant's personality;

         (iv)     in failing to provide adequate reasoning as to sufficiency
         of protection and internal relocation in light of  the  Appellant's
         evidence that her father is the local governor;

         (v)      in failing  to  take  into  account  material  matters  in
         relation to Article 8 and in failing to have proper regard  to  the
         best interests of the Appellant's child in the UK.

    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  Judge
    of the First tier Tribunal Hollingworth on the basis that:

         (i)      it was arguable that the fact that the Judge did not  make
         a finding of fact as to the claim by the  Appellant  that  she  had
         been subjected to a forced child marriage to her first  husband  is
         relevant;

         (ii)     it was  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  taking  the
         Respondent's decision as his starting point, which did not  detract
         from the necessity of making findings on material issues;

         (iii)    it was arguable that the Judge erred in failing to set his
         finding that the Appellant is  "no  shrinking  violet"  against  an
         assessment of the level of threat to the Appellant;

         (iv)     it was arguable that adequate findings  should  have  been
         made on the issues of sufficiency of protection  in  light  of  the
         Appellant's evidence that her father is the local governor.

    4.     In a rule 24 response dated 13.11.17, the Respondent opposed the
    appeal on the basis that the Judge had directed himself appropriately.

    Hearing

    5.     At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Ms  Alban  on
    behalf of the Appellant. She relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    respect of which permission to appeal  was  granted.  In  addition,  in
    respect of the fifth ground of appeal Ground 5, she submitted that  the
    Judge had  failed  to  make  an  independent  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child in that, although he lists his findings he fails
    to consider the evidence before him. No finding  was  made  as  to  the
    nationality of the child, despite the evidence at AB 77-78 which  is  a
    newspaper  cutting  dated  20.6.14  reporting  his  death,   that   the
    Appellant's first husband and father of child was domiciled in  Sweden.
    Moreover, in her witness statement the Appellant is clear that her  son
    T does not speak the native tongue in Gambia. In respect  of  the  text
    messages and letter from the Appellant's  daughter  the  Judge  has  an
    issue with these and found they did not come from a child  but  she  is
    not a child but rather 18 years of age.

    6.     In his submissions,  Mr  Hibbs  acknowledged  that  the  Judge's
    determination could be better drafted. He sought to rely on  the  clear
    finding at [34] rejecting the Appellant's account and the fact that the
    Judge did not think the documents drafted by the  father  and  daughter
    are genuine but are self-serving. He submitted that  the  finding  that
    the Appellant is "no shrinking  violet"  is  the  starting  point.  The
    Appellant has come and gone from the UK since 2006 and  her  child  has
    been in the UK since birth and not living with  the  father.  Mr  Hibbs
    submitted that, taken in the round there was a clear finding at [34].

    7.     In respect of the second ground of  appeal,  Mr  Hibbs  accepted
    that the Judge could have expressed himself better but effectively  the
    starting point is the Respondent's decision.  He submitted that  whilst
    the language  is  peculiar  the  Judge  has  looked  at  the  issue  of
    Convention reason and at [34] at credibility and he submitted that,  if
    there was an error, it was not material.

    8.     Mr Hibbs submitted that the Judge was entitled to  take  account
    of demeanour and the contents of letters which he considered to be self-
    serving along with the fact that the  Appellant  has  been  coming  and
    going since 2006.  Whilst it may be that her father is in a position of
    authority, Mr Hibbs queried whether the failure by the Judge to make  a
    finding on this point was a material error given his clear findings  on
    credibility. In any event, there was no evidence her father is a  local
    governor within Gambia.

    9.     In respect of Article 8 and best interests, there is no evidence
    that her first husband had been in the UK even  though  he  is  on  the
    child's birth certificate, however, the name is different from that  in
    the newspaper article. In respect of  the  child's  best  interests  Mr
    Hibbs accepted that it was arguable that the finding was  deficient  as
    the child had been brought up by his aunt. He queried, however, whether
    it was a material error given that  the  child  was  not  part  of  the
    proceedings and had been staying with  his  aunt.  The  Appellant,  his
    mother, has been in and out of the UK on a regular basis and the  issue
    arises as to whether the aunt has  taken  on  parental  responsibility,
    however, no evidence to this effect was before the Judge.

    10.    In her response, Ms Alban stated that it appeared that  the  son
    is a dependant on the mother: [13] onwards of the refusal refers, which
    includes a detailed consideration of section 55 of the  BCIA  2009.  Ms
    Alban further submitted that the FtTJ appeared to accept that there was
    a dispute between the Appellant and her father but it was unclear  what
    the Judge accepts as a dispute i.e. whether in respect of  her  current
    or past forced marriage and it was very unclear what findings  of  fact
    are made. With regard to the Respondent's claim that the child was left
    with the sister, in fact he was left with the father who then left  the
    child with the sister and he then returned  to  Gambia  and  died.  The
    evidence was that the Appellant had  been  going  back  and  forth  for
    several years but she was married to her husband who allowed her to  do
    this and the Appellant's documents show she intended to return  because
    she had shipped goods back to Gambia to be sold.

    11.    Ms Alban submitted that the  crux  of  this  case  is  the  past
    persecution and whether the Appellant was a victim of  forced  marriage
    and if this was the case it is likely it could happen again in light of
    her Muslim religion and Sharia law and the fact  that  her  father  has
    forced this upon her in the past and would want her to remain  part  of
    this man's family. Notably polygamy is practiced. The Judge  failed  to
    make a finding on this core fact and the Appellant's claim has not been
    considered properly. No finding was made in respect of the position  of
    the father, which is relevant to protection  and  internal  relocation.
    She submitted that these findings  of  fact  are  clearly  lacking  and
    material.

    12.    I indicated that I found a material error  in  relation  to  the
    treatment of the Appellant's dependent child's  best  interests  but  I
    reserved my decision in respect of the  asylum  and  Article  3  claim,
    which I now give with my reasons.

    Decision

    13.    Dealing first with the last ground of  appeal,  that  the  Judge
    erred in his assessment of Article 8 and  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's dependent son, born on 11.4.08, the Judge  considered  this
    aspect of the appeal at [38]-[47], concluding that the Appellant cannot
    meet the requirements of the financial requirements of the Rules or the
    immigration status requirement as she is a  visitor/overstayer  and  he
    did not accept that EX1 applies to the claim. The Judge held at [45]:

         "45.     I reach this conclusion for the following reasons;  albeit
         the child is 9 he has lived his whole life in the culture and  care
         of a Gambian family. He speaks the same languages as his mother. He
         is familiar with the food. He is able to attend school  in  Gambia.
         The appellant herself stating that there was not problem  with  his
         attending school with his siblings. His full siblings are in Gambia
         and  the  return  of  him  together  with  his  mother  will  be  a
         reunification of the family unit.

         46.      In addition, it is clearly in his best interests  to  live
         with his mother. The child is not a British citizen. The child  can
         speak the language of  the  Gambia  and  will  be  able  to  attend
         school."

    14.    The grounds of appeal assert that there is no mention or  weight
    given to the fact that the child has been under the day to day care  of
    his auntie and living with her since birth; the impact on the child  of
    separation from her and her child with whom he  has  grown  up  like  a
    sibling. There is a letter from the Appellant's aunt, S J at page 1  of
    the supplementary bundle dated 16.5.17 in which she states  inter  alia
    that she has lived together with T since he was born  and  that  he  is
    viewed as a sibling by her son, who is aged 12 years and that  her  son
    would be devastated if T is forced to leave the  UK.  She  also  states
    that T's mental and social wellbeing will be immensely affected  should
    he be taken to the Gambia. There is also a letter from  the  mother  of
    one of T's close friends, both in and out  of  school,  addressing  the
    impact on both children if T has  to  leave  the  UK.  The  Appellant's
    witness statement at [14] asserts that  T  does  not  speak  the  local
    languages or know anything of the culture of Gambia, having  been  born
    and brought up in the UK at the wish of his father;

    15.    At [38] the Judge found that: "I can assume for present purposes
    that the appellant has sole  parental  responsibility  for  the  child.
    There is a question mark over whom has day to day care  of  the  child,
    this seemingly being the appellant's sister." However, the Judge failed
    to make any clear finding on the issue of who is caring for  the  child
    and who has cared for him since birth, which is clearly material  to  a
    sustainable assessment of where his best interests  lie.  I  find  that
    this is  a  material  error.  I  further  find  that  the  Judge  erred
    materially in fact in asserting that the  Appellant's  son  speaks  the
    local languages, which is contrary to the evidence before him and  that
    in making his best interests assessment he failed to  take  account  of
    material evidence viz the letters in the supplementary bundle.

    16.    Turning to the other  grounds  of  appeal,  in  respect  of  the
    assessment by the Judge of the Appellant's asylum claim,  I  find  that
    this too contains material errors of law in the following respects:

    16.1.  It is clear from the Appellant's first witness statement at [6]-
    [10] that the Appellant's marriage to her first husband  was  a  forced
    marriage when she was 17. Whilst at  [16]  the  Judge  noted  that,  in
    summary, the Appellant maintained that she had been forced to  marry  a
    man much older than herself, arranged by her father and that she was 17
    years old, this assertion has not been determined by the Judge who  has
    made no finding of fact on this aspect of the Appellant's evidence.  It
    is clear from [27]-29] of the decision that, on the contrary, the Judge
    placed weight on the fact that the Appellant has,  in  respect  of  her
    second marriage, withstood  pressure  to  marry  without,  it  appears,
    taking account of the fact that the Appellant's account  was  that  she
    was forced to marry her first husband.  For the avoidance of  doubt,  I
    do not consider that the Judge's findings at [27]-[29] cover the forced
    first marriage but reinforce my  view  that  he  failed  to  take  that
    evidence into account in reaching his findings in respect of the second
    forced marriage.

    16.2.  At [34] the Judge found that  the  starting  point  is  how  the
    matter was decided by the Home Office. This was subject to challenge in
    the grounds of appeal on the basis that  the  decision  making  process
    should not be approached from the view that the  Respondent's  decision
    is correct as a starting point. Whilst I am not convinced that this  is
    what the Judge intended by his finding, I accept that it has given rise
    to a risk that by utilising the Respondent's decision as  the  starting
    point it appears that the Judge was accepting the Respondent's position
    rather than reaching independent findings on the material issues.

    16.3.  At [25] the Judge made  reference  to  the  Appellant  as  being
    "resolute, forthright  and  determined  in  her  stance  that  his  was
    something which qualifies for protection." He  repeated  this  at  [27]
    further stating: "The appellant is no shrinking  violet."  At  [28]  he
    held: "these matters paint the picture of a woman who  is  independent,
    firm in her life's endeavours and someone for whom the concept of being
    coerced and bullied into something would not sit well." These  findings
    were subject to challenge on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the
    Judge erred in failing to set his finding that  the  Appellant  is  "no
    shrinking violet" against an assessment of the level of threat  to  the
    Appellant. I find that there is merit in this  assertion,  particularly
    given that at [34] the FtTJ appeared to accept that there is a  dispute
    between the Appellant and her father but that  it  did  not  reach  the
    level of requiring international protection. I  further  consider  that
    the Appellant's assertion that she had, aged 17,  previously  attempted
    to resist pressure to undergo a forced marriage but was beaten  by  her
    father and tied up with a rope and detained in the house to  force  her
    to agree is arguably consistent with her current resolute stance not to
    be forced to marry again, particularly given that she is now  40  years
    of age and runs her own business.

    16.4.  The fourth ground of appeal asserted that the  Judge  materially
    erred in failing to make findings as to the sufficiency  of  protection
    in light of the Appellant's evidence  that  her  father  is  the  local
    governor. It is the case that the Appellant in  her  witness  statement
    clearly states that her father is the Alkalo or head  of  the  village,
    but this evidence has neither been recorded by the Judge in his summary
    of the Appellant's case at [15]-[22] of the decision nor is  there  any
    finding on this aspect of the evidence at [34]  when  the  Judge  makes
    specific findings on  the  ability  of  the  local  police  to  provide
    sufficient protection for the Appellant. This  is  potentially  clearly
    material not only to the issue of sufficiency of protection but also to
    the reasonableness of internal  relocation,  given  the  evidence  that
    Gambia is a small country.

    Decision

    17.    For the reasons set out above, I find material errors of law  in
    the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Boyes.  I  set  the  decision
    aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de  novo  before  a  different
    Judge of the First tier Tribunal.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

26 March 2018
