
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03367/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 25th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                   R M U A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Khan
For the Respondent:    Mrs Willocks-Briscoe


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 31st March 1986 is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mrs Khan.  The Respondent was  represented
    by Mrs Willocks-Briscoe a Presenting Officer.





Substantive Issues Under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 22nd February  2018.   The  Appellant
    had appealed that decision and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Atreya sitting at Taylor House  on  3rd  December  2018.
    The  judge  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made and
    refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21st  January  2019.    The
    application for permission was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on 4th
    March 2019 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts had granted  permission.
    Directions had been issued to the Upper Tribunal  firstly  to  consider
    whether a material error of law had been made  in  this  case  and  the
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. I was referred to the Grounds of Appeal.  It was submitted that it  was
    important to look at the circumstances relating  to  the  two  separate
    periods of detention alleged by the Appellant in 2005 and 2010 and also
    the Appellant's reference to the police still having an interest in him
    and his  family  having  been  approached  in  that  respect.   It  was
    submitted the judge had not dealt properly with those  aspects  of  the
    case.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted that the judge had provided a clear decision  and  had
    adequately dealt with the facts in this case and had  provided  reasons
    in support of those facts.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and the evidence I now provide that decision.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The judge had set out the evidence in this case including  the  medical
    evidence available and  had  then  provided  reasons  for  the  various
    findings that he made both on fact and on credibility.

 7. He accepted that the Appellant had been arrested twice by the police in
    2005 and 2010.  As he noted at paragraph 44 "I am  prepared  to  accept
    the Appellant's oral evidence in relation to his arrest  and  detention
    on two occasions and find this is  plausible  in  the  context  of  the
    supportive medical evidence that he has suffered trauma from torture".

 8. The Appellant's oral  evidence  was  that  the  first  arrest  in  2005
    followed a clash between members of opposition parties (paragraph  21).
    There is nothing to suggest the Appellant was specifically targeted  or
    there was any proceedings or consequences other than the Appellant  had
    a nose bleed as a result of being  beaten  by  sticks.   The  Appellant
    himself had said he had been released without  condition  (question  81
    interview record).  The Appellant's second arrest in 2010 took place in
    a different area of Pakistan (Azad  Kashmir)  when  the  Appellant  was
    arrested and detained allegedly for collecting money for the  MQM.   In
    support of that second incident the Appellant had produced an FIR.  The
    judge had noted that the FIR had been found not  to  be  genuine  as  a
    result of a document verification report.

 9. Whilst the judge was prepared to accept the  Appellant  may  well  have
    been arrested in 2005 and on a second occasion in 2010 he made a number
    of other findings for which he provided an adequacy of  reasons  within
    his decision.

10. He found the Appellant had only ever been an ordinary member of the MQM
    and that during his time in the UK (since September 2010) he had had no
    involvement with the MQM (Appellant's own admission).   He  found  that
    the FIR presented as part of the Appellant's case and providing alleged
    background to the  arrest  in  2010  together  with  other  documentary
    evidence was not reliable.  He did not find  that  any  legal  case  or
    action had been commenced or continued against the Appellant.  He found
    the Appellant not to have been charged with any offence nor was  he  of
    adverse interest to the authorities and  was  able  to  leave  Pakistan
    freely.

11. He further found a lengthy delay in claiming asylum  and  then  only  a
    claim following arrest in the UK damaged his credibility.

12. The judge was perfectly  entitled  when  considering  the  totality  of
    admissions, factual findings made  and  credibility  matters  that  the
    Appellant was not at risk from the MQM (the party in which had formally
    been an ordinary worker).  Furthermore and in the alternative he  found
    that there was a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan and followed  AW
    [2011] UKUT 31 in that respect (paragraph 53).  He found no risk to the
    Appellant from the state  authorities  and  finally  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable he found for the Appellant to relocate if theoretically he
    felt unsafe in a specific location.

13. There was an adequacy of reasons provided by the judge dealing with the
    Appellant's claimed fears of the MQM and alternatively or secondly  the
    state authorities and his conclusion is in line with  the  findings  he
    made  and  discloses  no   irrationality   nor   are   those   findings
    unsustainable.

Decision

14. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



