
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03836/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 April 2018                        |On 24 April 2018                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    mr uG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sandhu, instructed by Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Turkey born on [ ] 1991, who
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 5 April 2017 to refuse to grant his  protection  claim
    and to give directions for his removal.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 8 December 2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manyarara
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with Upper Tribunal permission on  the  following
    grounds:

         Ground 1: That the judge's plausibility findings  were  flawed  and
         that  they  were  not  supported  by  objective  evidence  and  the
         reasoning fell short of the guidance in HK v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
         1037, in that the fact that a story may  seem  inherently  unlikely
         does not mean it is untrue.

         Ground 2:  Failure to reach a reasoned finding in  respect  of  the
         appellant's claimed first detention.  The appellant claimed to have
         been detained on 3 January 2012 and this was inconsistent with  the
         date  of  the  party's  foundation  in  2013;  this   ignores   the
         appellant's claim at the  hearing.   Although  the  appellant  made
         reference in his asylum interview to  his  first  detention  having
         taken place after  the  party's  formation,  he  explained  at  the
         hearing that this was an error and this was addressed at  paragraph
         10 of the appellant's witness statement.  It was submitted that the
         judge's findings did not engage with the appellant's statement  and
         fell foul of the requirements as set out in Budhathoki (reasons for
         decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).

         Ground 3:  Erroneous reliance on the respondent's guidance - it was
         submitted that the judge had conflated the question of  credibility
         with risk on return and had not applied IK (returnees -  records  -
         IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

Error of Law: Hearing

 3. Mr Sandhu relied on the grounds for permission.  He submitted that  the
    risk factors in IK had not  been  properly  considered.   A  number  of
    criteria can  inform  an  appellant's  risk  profile.   The  background
    information confirms that the modus operandi of the Turkish authorities
    is to detain and  release.   Similarly,  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    findings as to the appellant's claim he had obtained medical treatment,
    there was background contrary information in relation to some detainees
    receiving  medical  treatment  when  detained  and  there  is   nothing
    inconsistent in the appellant's account that he was taken to see one of
    their own doctors in order that he could not  take  an  action  against
    them.  In  relation  to  the  negative  credibility  finding  that  the
    appellant was detained in January 2012 was with the party's  foundation
    in 2013, Mr Sandhu submitted that in essence HDP was the same party  as
    BDP and that the appellant had corrected this in his witness  statement
    and that the Tribunal had just considered what the appellant  had  said
    in his interview as opposed to the witness statement.

 4. Ms Everett noted that at [36] the judge had found  in  the  alternative
    that even if the appellant did have  political  associations  with  HDP
    since 2012 he was an ordinary supporter and  there  was  no  risk.   In
    relation to the preceding paragraph, [35], Ms Everett did not accept Mr
    Sandhu's submission that the two political parties were essentially the
    same and submitted that the judge was entitled to reach the decision he
    did; considering someone in the situation of the appellant who  claimed
    to be intimately involved with these parties and  had  been  an  active
    supporter, it was open to the judge to take into consideration his lack
    of knowledge including in relation to the dates of  foundation  of  the
    party.

 5. In relation to the contention that the judge failed to  deal  with  the
    appellant's explanation as to why he was given  medical  treatment,  Ms
    Everett accepted that the  appellant  had  offered  an  explanation  in
    relation to why he was taken to see a doctor whilst  in  detention,  so
    that the authorities could cover themselves and not take action against
    them, which the Tribunal did not address or give any reasons  why  this
    was rejected.  It was Ms Everett's submission that this error  was  not
    material.  She submitted that at [39] the  judge  had  again  made,  in
    essence, alternative findings that even if the appellant's account  was
    credible that he was detained on three occasions, it was  not  credible
    that the appellant was not apprehended when he left Turkey on  his  own
    documentation having  failed  to  report,  despite  claiming  that  the
    Turkish authorities were still interested in him  to  the  extent  that
    they are still visiting his home.

 6. Mr Sandhu, in reply, submitted that the case did turn on the  issue  of
    the medical treatment and the judge's failure to turn her mind  to  the
    appellant's explanation as to why he was taken to  see  a  doctor.   In
    addition, the appellant  had  always  maintained  he  was  a  low-level
    supporter.  However  that  lack  of  knowledge  did  not  diminish  his
    allegiance and his account of what happened objectively  was  accepted.
    He submitted that there was  no  embellishment  and  in  terms  of  the
    treatment that would be given it  is  not  low-level.   The  judge  had
    essentially adopted the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  and  that  was  an
    error.

Error of Law: Discussion

 7. The appellant in this case claimed to be at risk as  a  result  of  his
    political opinion.  He claimed that he was a supporter of the HDP Party
    and as a result was wanted by the authorities in Turkey as a result  of
    having failed to  comply  with  reporting  conditions  after  his  last
    release from detention.

 8. I do not accept the submission that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's explanation, including  at  paragraph  10  of  his  witness
    statement, in relation to his detention.  There was some discussion  at
    paragraph 10 of the witness statement as to the  appellant  giving  the
    date as 3 January 2012 whereas it was recorded as 2 January 2012.   The
    appellant went on to state:  "I admit that I made a mistake, since  HDP
    only declared its foundation in October 2012"  although  the  appellant
    stated that he was asked a leading question that he was  detained  when
    the party was formed.

 9. The Tribunal sets out that the significance of the appellant's lack  of
    knowledge in relation to the foundation of HDP is relevant  because  he
    relies on his association  with  HDP  as  the  basis  for  the  initial
    interest in him by the Turkish authorities.  The judge  also  found  it
    not credible that the appellant would have been arrested in relation to
    a party that was yet to be formed at the time of his first arrest.  The
    appellant relied on the fact that the BDP Party was operating  at  that
    time and he stated in his witness statement (at paragraph 6)  that  the
    need for a new party to be established was discussed in 2012  (with  an
    application in October 2012 and its foundation  in  October  2013)  and
    that although BDP was not officially closed until 2014  "it  was  clear
    that BDP was in the process of closing".  However there was nothing  in
    the information relied on  to  counter  the  judge's  reliance  on  the
    background information that BDP was an independent  party  that  merged
    with HDP in 2014, that HDP was formed in 2013 and that the  appellant's
    claimed detention date lacked credibility in that context.  Even taking
    Mr Sandhu's point at its highest, that the parties were  essentially  a
    reincarnation of each other  (which  I  note,  although  the  appellant
    claimed to have previously supported the BDP, was not explicitly relied
    on by the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal),  that  does  not
    adequately address the appellant's lack of knowledge  as  a  committed,
    albeit ordinary, supporter. The judge adequately directed  herself  and
    specifically noted (at [41]) that all oral and documentary evidence was
    considered cumulatively.  The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    adequate in this regard.

10. Although Mr Sandhu's submission was essentially that the  parties  were
    the same, in essence it is difficult to see how  the  Tribunal  can  be
    criticised for reaching the findings on the evidence  before  it,  that
    the party was not formed until 2013 (having submitted an application in
    October 2012) and that in this context  the  appellant's  claim,  as  a
    supporter of HDP who was allegedly detained, lacked credibility.

11. In any event,  even  if  the  application  (to  found  the  party)  was
    submitted in 2012, despite the fact the  party  was  not  formed  until
    October 2013 and that BDP merged with it in 2014 this  still  does  not
    adequately explain how the appellant was detained on 3 January 2012  in
    respect of his association with a party that had not yet  been  formed.
    The Tribunal was entitled to reach the conclusions it did on the  basis
    of the evidence before it.  In any event, as correctly identified by Ms
    Everett, the Tribunal reached sustainable findings in  the  alternative
    that, even if the appellant's claim to have had political  associations
    with HDP since 2012 was correct, as an ordinary supporter  he  did  not
    have a significant profile and that as someone who was  not  a  member,
    his name would not be on record.

12. Whilst Ms Everett accepted that the judge appeared not  to  have  taken
    into consideration the appellant's claims as to why he was taken to see
    a doctor, essentially so that the authorities could protect  themselves
    from actions against them, any error is not material given  the  weight
    of the credibility findings in their totality including that the  judge
    found that in his oral evidence the appellant confirmed that he himself
    did  not  seek  any  independent  medical  attention  which  the  judge
    considered in the round in reaching the finding  that  the  appellant's
    account was completely lacking in credibility.

13. The Tribunal went on to make sustainable alternative findings including
    that even if the appellant were to be believed and he had been detained
    on 3 separate occasions as claimed, it was not  credible  that  despite
    claiming that the Turkish authorities are still interested  in  him  to
    the extent that they are visiting his home, he was not apprehended when
    he left Turkey, on his own documents, having failed to  report.   Those
    findings have not been substantively challenged and were  open  to  the
    judge.

14. The judge correctly considered and applied the risk factors in  IK  and
    reached findings that were properly open to her.  The Judge's  findings
    do not suggest that the only people who  could  be  detained  and  ill-
    treated were high profile party members  but  took  into  consideration
    that ordinary members of HDP are not generally (my emphasis)  at  risk.
    The  Tribunal  addressed  all  the  relevant  factors  (including   the
    appellant's  activities  in  the  UK)  and  made  adequate  sustainable
    findings.  Read in its entirety the Tribunal decision  demonstrates  an
    awareness  therefore  that  a  number  of  criteria   can   inform   an
    individual's risk profile, but tribunal the Tribunal in this  case  was
    not satisfied that such a risk was engaged in the appellant's case.

15. It was very clear why the First-tier Tribunal decided the case  against
    the appellant and the main points in dispute were addressed.  The  duty
    to give adequate reasons is just that, not a counsel of perfection (see
    MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958).

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside, and shall stand.  The  appeal  by
    the appellant is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid, the appeal is dismissed  and  therefore  no  fee  award  is
applicable.


Signed                                  Date:  23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

