
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03437/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 July 2016                               |On 18 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     I K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Halim, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
    refuse a protection and human rights claim. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pears ("the judge") allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  25
    May 2016.

3.    In a lengthy decision the judge set out the background to the case [1-
    11] and the relevant legal framework [12-20]. In particular,  he  cited
    the whole of the headnote  to  the  country  guidance  decision  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 [14]. He  went  on  to
    summarise the appellant's claim and the arguments put forward  by  both
    parties [22-52]. The judge then  took  some  time  to  outline  certain
    aspects of the background  evidence  including  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines published in April 2016 [53-62]. The  judge  comprehensively
    rejected the credibility of the appellant's account of past events [63-
    70] but noted that it was accepted that  the  appellant  is  an  Afghan
    national who comes from Tagab district  in  Kapisa  province  [71].  He
    noted that the thrust of the respondent's case was that  the  appellant
    could relocate to Kabul [72].

4.    Having set out the background to the case in some detail and made  his
    credibility findings the judge made the following findings relating  to
    risk on return:


         73.      I look at this case on the basis of the very limited facts
         which I am prepared to accept.


         74.      He is single and is a young man with no dependents and  is
         now just over 18. He has shown himself to be resilient. He  has  no
         health issues. Given those are the only facts about him that  I  am
         prepared to accept I have also to accept several things which  give
         him a profile that would put him at risk against  the  backdrop  of
         the worsening security situation both in Kapisa province and within
         Kabul which the Appellant's counsel has set out and which I accept.




         75.      It seems to me that he has  the  following  profile  taken
         from the UNHCR guidelines that put him at risk and he falls  within
         these risk categories


             (3) Men of fighting  age,  and  children  in  the  context  of
             underage and forced recruitment;
             (6) Individuals perceived as contravening AGEs' interpretation
             of Islamic principles, norms and values;
             (10)       Children  with  certain  profiles  or  in  specific
             circumstances.


         76.      I set out (6) and (10) because, in my  view  he  would  be
         identified as westernised and would  or  could  fall  within  those
         categories.


         77.      I find (as will  be  gathered  that  I  do  so  with  some
         reluctance) that the Appellant has shown a  well  founded  fear  of
         acts sufficiently serious by  their  nature  or  repetition  as  to
         constitute a severe violation of a basic human right.  I  find  the
         Appellant to be a refugee."


5.    The Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the ground that the judge failed to follow relevant country
    guidance. His reliance on the UNHCR guidelines was insufficient  reason
    to depart from the country guidance.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

7.    Despite having set out the detailed arguments earlier in the  decision
    with reference to AK (Afghanistan) the judge was still required to give
    adequate reasons for departing from  established  country  guidance.  I
    accept the arguments put forward  by  Mr  Halim,  that  the  Tribunal's
    comments in NM and Others (Lone women, Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005]  UKUAT
    00076 allow for an  analytical  approach  to  what  weight  to  put  on
    evidence from UNHCR. In some cases UNHCR guidance may not  be  focussed
    on protection issues but in other cases it may need to be given greater
    weight. However, the judge was still required to give adequate  reasons
    for preferring that evidence and for departing  from  the  most  recent
    country guidance.

8.    It seems clear that the judge  was  persuaded  by  the  arguments  put
    forward by counsel, which he repeated in the body of the decision,  but
    what is lacking is any reasoning as to why  he  accepted  them  or  any
    adequate  analysis  as  to  why  he  considered  the  current  evidence
    justified  departing  from  the  country  guidance.  While  it  is  not
    necessary for a judge to make detailed findings in relation to each and
    every piece of evidence it is necessary to give sufficient  reasons  to
    understand how and why the main conclusions are reached: see  MK  (duty
    to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 and Shizad (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85. Unfortunately, in this  case  those
    reasons were simply lacking.

9.    Both parties agreed that if  an  error  of  law  was  found  that  the
    appropriate course of action would be to remit the appeal for  a  fresh
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 17 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
