
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03007/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 15 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR HAMID REZA AHMADPOUR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Forster, Counsel, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. He arrived in this  country  on  21
    September 2018 and claimed asylum the same day. The respondent  refused
    his application on 18 March 2019 and the appellant appealed on 29 March
    2019 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

 2. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Turner and in a
    decision promulgated on 08 May 2019 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was given by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Scott-Baker on 12 July 2019 who rejected aspects  of  the  grounds  but
    nevertheless found there was an arguable error in law in  the  way  the
    Judge  dealt  with  the  minister's  evidence,  her  approach  to   the
    appellant's attendance at church and how he would behave, if  returned,
    from a religious perspective.

 4. A Rule 24 response dated 23 July 2019 opposed the  appeal  arguing  the
    findings were open to the Judge.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Ms Forster relied on paragraphs 14-20 of the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
    submitted that regardless of  whether  the  events,  described  by  the
    appellant  were  accepted,  the  Judge  had  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant was a genuine convert regardless  of  where  that  conversion
    occurred. There was evidence before the Tribunal from Rev Hough as well
    as a supporting letter from Rev Livingstone. The  Judge  misrepresented
    what Rev Hough  had  said  about  previous  asylum  converts  when  she
    recorded that "people stopped attending after  being  granted  status".
    The Judge also failed to treat the minister as a Dorodian  witness  and
    consider his expertise and why he was able to give an opinion as to why
    the appellant is a Christian. In  rejecting  his  evidence,  the  Judge
    referred to the minister only having one "one to one" meeting  but  his
    letter clearly demonstrated that the level  of  contact  had  been  for
    considerably longer.

 7. In TF v SSHD [2018] ScotCS CSIH 58 the court stated  at  paragraph  30,
    "It would have been surprising if it was claimed that it  was  possible
    for him to divine the innermost thoughts of a member of his  church  or
    indeed any church" but the  Judge  erred  because  she  approached  the
    evidence from the starting point that the minister did not know and she
    held that against the appellant.

 8. She further submitted that the Judge placed  too  much  weight  on  the
    adverse findings of his activities in Iran when  assessing  whether  he
    was genuine convert. The fact he was not believed about that issue  did
    not mean his claim to now be  a  genuine  convert  should  be  rejected
    because of that previous rejection of his account. The fact he may have
    been dishonest on one matter was not a reason  to  reject  Rev  Hough's
    evidence.

 9. Ms Pettersen adopted the Rule 24 statement and opposed the appeal.  The
    Judge noted that not  all  asylum  claimants,  whom  the  minister  had
    supported, had continued to attend church but then takes that issue  no
    further. The Judge had to decide whether the minister was able to  give
    an opinion of the appellant's religious belief,  as  he  did,  and  had
    noted his attendance at church was only since  November  2018  and  was
    therefore over a five to six month period. Her findings  were  open  to
    her as there was a lack of detailed contact between the  appellant  and
    minister and his claim to be a genuine convert was not rejected  simply
    because his account of events in Iran was rejected. The Judge gave  her
    own reasons for rejecting his current  claim.  The  Judge  went  on  to
    consider his Facebook postings and  concluded  he  was  not  a  genuine
    Christian and so could remove his postings. There  would  be  no  pinch
    point as the Judge found he was not a genuine convert and therefore  he
    would not be questioned on return.

    FINDINGS

10. The  appellant  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity in Iran and had continued to follow his religion  in  this
    country. The  respondent  rejected  his  claim  and  he  appealed  that
    decision.

11. The FTT Judge rejected his account of events  in  Iran  and  went  onto
    reject his claim to be a genuine convert in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant appealed both  aspects  of  that  decision  but  in  granting
    permission  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Scott-Baker   limited
    permission to the question of the Judge's assessment of his  activities
    in this country. No application to appeal the refusal  of  the  Iranian
    events was made and so this Tribunal is only concerned with the Judge's
    approach to UK events.

12. Ms Forster submitted the FTT Judge did not follow the approach set  out
    in TF v SSHD and argued that the Judge drew incorrect conclusions  from
    the evidence, failed to attach the appropriate weight  to  Rev  Hough's
    evidence and placed too much weight on the findings of  his  activities
    in Iran.

13. The undisputed facts  are  that  after  arriving  in  this  country  in
    September 2018 the appellant started attending the church in  Stockport
    from around November 2018. The Judge was provided with letters from Rev
    Livingstone (associate minister) and Rev Hough (minister) and she  also
    took oral  evidence  from  both  the  appellant  and  Rev  Hough.  Both
    ministers had confirmed he was a regular attendee at  church  and  took
    part in learning sessions. Rev Hough recognised  that  if  someone  was
    intent on deception it can be difficult to be satisfied that person  is
    a Christian but whilst it was not possible to look into  the  heart  of
    another person it was nevertheless possible  to  observe  the  person's
    behaviour and the outward signs of their inner faith.

14. In considering the appellant's claim, the Judge noted in paragraph [41]
    of her decision the appellant's claim and the evidence of Rev Hough. Ms
    Forster submitted the Judge had misrepresented the minister's  evidence
    when she wrote, "I got the impression, however, that a number of people
    supported in asylum claims would  stop  attending  church  after  being
    granted status" but  after  considering  the  statements  and  evidence
    recorded in the decision I am satisfied there was no  such  error.  The
    minister was asked what happened to people  who  he  had  supported  in
    appeals such as this and he stated that some  had  continued  attending
    and others had moved to other areas and he went on to say that he  kept
    in touch through the "network of the church" with  some  of  them.  The
    minister clearly told the Judge that some did  not  continue  attending
    and her finding in paragraph [41] (last sentence) does not misrepresent
    the evidence given.

15. The Judge then went onto consider what  the  Minister  had  to  say  in
    paragraph [42] of her  decision  and  Ms  Forster  submitted  that  the
    Judge's finding "he was,  in  my  view,  unable  to  distinguish  being
    Christlike as opposed to just being a genuinely nice  person"  amounted
    to an error in law. However, this finding must be looked  at  alongside
    paragraph [43] as it is in this  paragraph  the  Judge  considered  the
    minster's evidence in more detail and how it affected  this  aspect  of
    the appellant's claim.

16. Ms Forster submits that the Judge's  finding  "I  did  not  accept  the
    Reverend could truly give evidence about the appellant's intention  and
    motivation having only had one 1-2-1 meeting with him in readiness  for
    the appeal" is flawed because the finding failed to take  into  account
    the minister saw him every Sunday and at learning sessions. This  point
    has some merit as does the  submission  that  the  minister  was  being
    criticised for saying "it was not possible to look into  the  heart  of
    another person" because the minister was only saying what he could. The
    evidence of the minister is an important  and  essential  part  of  any
    assessment of the genuineness of his commitment to  Christianity.  Case
    law stresses the importance of Dorodian witnesses, and I  am  satisfied
    the approach of the Judge to this minister's evidence  was  flawed  for
    the reasons set out above. The  Judge's  conclusion  in  paragraphs  47
    reflected her assessment of Rev Hough's evidence and having  identified
    an error in approach I accept there is an error in law. I therefore set
    aside the decision as hereinafter set out.

17. I feel that in order to properly conclude these proceedings there needs
    to be further evidence from the minister and from the appellant himself
    but only with regard to his UK activities. The findings made by the FTT
    Judge about his activities in Iran are not undermined by the  error  as
    those findings were not challenged today and were upheld on an error of
    law application.

18. Under Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  I
    remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for them to deal with
    whether the appellant's UK activities engaged  the  Refugee  Convention
    and article 3 ECHR.

19. I preserve paragraphs 32 to 40 of the FTT decision.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

20. There is an error in law and I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge  other
    than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Turner.

21. The only issues that the First-tier Tribunal need concern  itself  with
    is whether the appellant is a genuine Christian convert  based  on  his
    activities in the United Kingdom and whether returning him would breach
    the Refugee Convention and article 3 ECHR.

Signed                              Date     08/08/2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
