
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2016                |On 25th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     f s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M Christopher of Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Row of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 22nd July 2016.

 2. The Appellant is an Iraqi national born 5th December 1983  who  arrived
    in the United Kingdom clandestinely  on  26th  June  2015  and  claimed
    asylum.

 3. On 10th November 2015 the Respondent decided that the Appellant was not
    entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection,  and  that  his  removal
    from the UK would not breach any of his human rights protected  by  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (1950 Convention).

 4. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 18th July 2016.  The  FtT  was  made
    aware  on  the  hearing  date,  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  had
    withdrawn and were no longer representing him.  The Appellant  attended
    the hearing as did  an  interpreter,  although  the  interpreter  spoke
    Kurdish Kurmanji, whereas the Appellant had  requested  an  interpreter
    who spoke Kurdish Bahdini.

 5. The FtT commenced the hearing but decided to adjourn until later in the
    day, to ascertain whether a Kurdish Bahdini interpreter  could  attend,
    and to make enquiries with the Appellant's solicitors, as to  why  they
    had withdrawn.

 6. When the hearing  re-commenced  the  Appellant  had  left  the  hearing
    centre.  The FtT took the view that the Appellant had chosen to  absent
    himself, and had not applied for an adjournment, and therefore the  FtT
    proceeded and heard the appeal in his absence.

 7. The FtT did not find that the Appellant had given a  credible  account,
    indicating (at paragraph 26) "that even on the low standard of proof  I
    do not believe the Appellant".  The appeal was  subsequently  dismissed
    both on asylum and human rights grounds.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal contending that the  FtT
    erred in law by deciding the appeal in his absence.

 9. The Appellant pointed out that he attended the  hearing  on  18th  July
    2016, but could not understand the interpreter, who was not  a  Kurdish
    Bahdini interpreter.  The Appellant  understood  from  the  interpreter
    that the hearing would not go  ahead  as  no  Bahdini  interpreter  was
    present, and the FtT would inform him  when  to  attend  the  adjourned
    hearing.  The Appellant therefore went home, not understanding that the
    hearing had only been adjourned until later in the day.  The  Appellant
    contended that he had been denied an opportunity to give  his  evidence
    to the FtT.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Froom  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "There are significant obstacles in  the  path  of  this  Appellant
         succeeding in his protection claim but  it  is  axiomatic  that  he
         should be provided with a fair hearing so that he can fully explain
         his case and that the provision of the  correct  interpreter  is  a
         vital element of this.   The  Appellant  had  requested  a  Bahdini
         interpreter and, although I understand this  to  be  a  dialect  of
         Kurmanji, it is arguable that the FtTJ erred in proceeding to  hear
         the appeal in the Appellant's absence.  I note  as  well  that  the
         Appellant said he had been expecting his  solicitors  to  represent
         him.

         I also find it of  concern  that  the  FtTJ's  enquiries  with  the
         Appellant's former solicitors as to the nature of the  conflict  of
         interest which led them to cease  to  represent  him  were  matters
         which were protected by professional privilege."

11. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

12. The Appellant did  not  attend  the  hearing,  apparently  having  been
    advised by his newly instructed solicitors that  he  need  not  attend.
    Mrs  Christopher  relied  upon  the  grounds   contained   within   the
    application for permission to appeal.  I was asked to accept  that  the
    Appellant genuinely believed that his case had been adjourned and would
    be heard at a later date, which is why he left the hearing centre.   He
    did not understand that his case had only been adjourned until later in
    the day.  I was asked to find that it was unfair of the FtT to  proceed
    in the Appellant's absence.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. Mr Richards accepted that there was a real possibility that  there  had
    been a misunderstanding, and while not criticising  the  FtT,  accepted
    that it may be prudent to find that the Appellant  was  denied  a  fair
    hearing.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. I announced at the hearing that I found that  the  Appellant  had  been
    denied a fair hearing and therefore the decision of  the  FtT  was  set
    aside with no findings preserved, for the following reasons.

15. It is common ground that there  is  a  need  for  anxious  scrutiny  in
    appeals involving claims for international protection, and  great  care
    must be taken before making adverse credibility  findings  in  such  an
    appeal.

16. I note that the Appellant attended the hearing before the FtT  on  18th
    July 2016, and that is an indication that he intended to take  part  in
    the proceedings.  The FtT noted (paragraph 11) that the  Appellant  had
    been expecting his solicitors to represent him  at  the  hearing.   The
    Tribunal file indicates that the Tribunal was only made aware that  the
    solicitors had withdrawn, on 18th July 2016, the day of the hearing.

17. It is accepted that the  Appellant  had  requested  a  Kurdish  Bahdini
    interpreter to attend the hearing and this was the language and dialect
    used when he was interviewed in connection with his claim  for  asylum.
    I accept that the Appellant left the Tribunal Hearing Centre before his
    appeal had been concluded, but I do not  accept  that  he  deliberately
    abandoned his appeal.

18. I  accept  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  did  not  understand  the
    interpreter who had attended,  and  that  he  believed  that  when  the
    hearing was adjourned in the morning, he would be given notification by
    post, of a new hearing date.  I am satisfied that he did not understand
    that the hearing was simply being adjourned until later in the day.

19. Credibility is an issue in this appeal.  As the FtT  proceeded  in  the
    Appellant's absence, he was not able to give evidence and  present  his
    case.  It is not clear that the bundle of documents  submitted  by  his
    previous solicitors accurately  reflected  his  case.   The  solicitors
    informed the FtT they had withdrawn because of a conflict of  interest,
    and at the request of the FtT, submitted a further fax dated 18th  July
    2016, confirming that the Appellant's instructions had changed, and the
    bundle of documents had been prepared on  the  basis  of  his  previous
    instructions, not his current instructions.  Therefore by relying  upon
    the bundle that had been submitted, it appears that the FtT relied upon
    a bundle that did not accurately reflect the Appellant's case  that  he
    wished to present.

20. For the above reasons, I find that the Appellant did not  have  a  fair
    hearing and the decision is set aside with no findings preserved.

21.  I  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statements, and found that it was appropriate to remit the appeal  back
    to the FtT (with the consent of both representatives)  because  of  the
    nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that would  be  required  in
    order for the decision to be re-made.

22. The appeal will be heard at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT judge other than Judge Row.  A Kurdish Bahdini
    interpreter is required.

23. The Appellant's current representatives should  note  that  the  bundle
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf by his  former  representatives  is
    incomplete, comprising only 33 pages, whereas the index makes reference
    to 181 pages.

24. The Appellant is to serve  upon  the  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent  a
    complete bundle of documents to be relied upon, and this bundle must be
    served within 21 days of the date that this decision is sent out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 21st November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date: 21st November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

