
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04461/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester CJC      Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 20th February 2019  On 06 March 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    K T K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown (Counsel, instructed by Forseti Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application for international protection on the basis
    of her fear as a Pakistani woman of her ex-husband, father, brother and
    father's family was rejected by the Secretary of State. The Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed for the reasons given in the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated on the 9th of November 2018. The
    Judge found that the Appellant was not at risk from her ex-husband as
    he had agreed to the divorce and that was supported by the wording on
    the divorce certificate. Her father had been investigated by the Police
    and the FIRs were genuine, the Judge found that there was sufficiency
    of protection. It was not accepted that her brother presented a danger
    to her either.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge's
    findings were not sufficiently comprehensive given the detailed nature
    of the Appellant's case which the Judge had outlined in paragraph 16 of
    the decision.

 3. Mr Brown, who did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal, observed
    that some of the documentation had been found to be reliable including
    the divorce and the FIRs. In the light of the letter from her father to
    her mother at page 23 it was argued that the threat to the Appellant
    still existed and there had been no assessment. What was relevant was
    whether there had been a whole assessment of sufficiency of protection.
    On the Appellant's case her ex-husband had influence being from a rich
    family with social contacts and so it would not be possible to get an
    FIR against him. Mr Brown accepted that it was not necessary for the
    Judge to engage with every piece of evidence but where past ill-
    treatment was accepted that raised issues of internal relocation and
    sufficiency of protection and there was no analysis of the ex-husband's
    position.

 4. For the Home Office submissions proceeded on a different interpretation
    of the grant of permission. After referring to paragraph 16 it was
    submitted that the Judge had made findings on the core of the claim and
    concluded there was no risk from her ex-husband. It was clear that the
    Judge was aware of the risk of honour killings in Pakistan. The
    Appellant's maternal family had helped the Appellant to come to the UK.
    With regard to the Appellant's father storming into the family home the
    Judge took the view that the Police did investigate and the Judge also
    found that there was no risk from the Appellant's brother. With regard
    to any danger from the father's family there was no evidence of action
    taken against the Appellant's mother and sister who were visiting a
    Paternal uncle at the time the threats were made, his relatives did not
    side with him. The threat did not equate to risk if returned. The grant
    focussed on paragraph 16 of the decision, threats had been made but the
    Judge did consider the current position.

 5. Paragraph 16 of the decision records the Appellant's evidence that her
    father, with friends and armed with guns stormed into the family home
    hurling abuse and threatening to kill the Appellant and her mother but
    that they left when neighbours gathered. A second incident in April
    2015 was when her sister received a phone call from their father when
    he used abusive language and repeated the threats. In both instances
    complaints were made to the Police but no progress appears to have been
    made.

 6. Having read and re-read the grant of permission it is not clear where
    the Judge granting permission considered that findings had not been
    made. The principal events of the Appellant's case were clearly
    accepted. The claim that any members of either side of the family had
    any interest in harming the Appellant had been rejected, the maternal
    family paid for the Appellant to come to the UK and the terms of the
    divorce certificate spoke for themselves. The paternal side of the
    family did not support the father in threats that he made.

 7. The issue was whether the Appellant could safely return to Pakistan.
    Although threats had been made the first, with back-up and guns, was
    stopped simply be neighbours gathering, the second made over the phone
    with no information about where the father was when the call was made.
    the Judge found that the Appellant's father had no family support from
    either side and that is relevant because if any family had been
    offended it would have been the maternal side and not his. Their
    assisting the Appellant to come to the UK underlines what their
    attitude to this was.

 8. The Judge found that there would be sufficient protection for the
    Appellant on return to Pakistan. In making that finding that Judge had
    effectively put the Appellant's case at its highest and had analysed
    what supporting features there were for the Appellant's father in
    furthering the threat compared to the support that the Appellant had
    received and the demonstrated attitude of her ex-husband and both sides
    of the family. In paragraph 41 the Judge considered the ability of the
    Appellant to be located if she moved and rejected that as a possibility
    and the ability of the Appellant to relocate if she chose and to obtain
    appropriate support.

 9. The decision has to be read fairly and as a whole without taking
    matters out of context. In light of the grant I have read the decision
    and do not follow where it could be said that the Judge had erred.
    Having accepted that threats had been made the Judge considered whether
    the Appellant would be at risk on return and found for entirely
    justified reasons that she would not. Alternative findings were made
    that the Appellant could relocate if she wished and would have support
    in doing so. The decision was open to the Judge for the reasons given
    and contains no error of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 4th February 2019

