
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04372/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   Mr E.K.
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sandhu (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.  However  as
this is a protection claim, I consider it appropriate to do so



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Paul (hereinafter "the judge") who  in
    a decision promulgated on  28th  December  2018  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision of 15th  March  2018  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.



Background

 2. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Turkey.   He  claimed  international
    protection on the grounds that he will be at real risk  of  persecution
    and ill-treatment in Turkey on account of his Kurdish ethnicity and his
    support for the People's Democratic Party (HDP).

 3. In summary, his claim is that he was  arrested  in  November  2014  and
    detained for three days on account of HDP activity.  He ceased activity
    for the HDP at that time but started again in 2016.  In July  2017  the
    authorities came to his home and arrested  and  detained  him  for  two
    days.  He was released on condition that he provided information  about
    the HDP to the police on a weekly basis.  He did  so  on  a  number  of
    occasions before leaving the country in August 2017.

 4. He then travelled to the UK via Sweden.  He claims that whilst  in  the
    UK he has participated in  demonstrations  regarding  the  conflict  in
    Afrin.  Furthermore, he was due to report for military service  on  1st
    January 2016, and his failure to do so means he is an absconder.

 5. The judge after hearing  evidence  from  the  Appellant  dismissed  the
    appeal.



Permission to Appeal

 6. The grounds seeking permission took issue with  the  judge's  decision,
    essentially saying that the Appellant had been denied a fair hearing in
    that the judge had not applied anxious scrutiny to  his  decision  when
    analysing  the  evidence  before  him.   The   grounds   went   on   to
    particularise that the judge had simply failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant parts of the Appellant's story and failure to do  so  amounted
    to a significant error of law.  Permission to appeal was granted in the
    following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected herself  by  failing
         to (a) give any analysis of findings about the two arrests that the
         Appellant underwent on 1 November, 2014 and 24 July, 2017; (b) take
         into account the Appellant's family history of  support  for  left-
         wing politics and the fact that the Appellant was arrested at home;
         (c) make any findings concerning the Appellant's political activity
         in the UK in that he is an active member of HDP which means  he  is
         perceived as a left-wing Kurdish supporter and PKK sympathiser  and
         (d) by failing to give any adequate analysis of the IK risk factors
         and the current  situation  in  Turkey  re  the  current  state  of
         emergency which will amount to  questioning  of  the  Appellant  on
         return and who is likely to be detained on arrival  in  Turkey  and
         his background checked."

 7. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the judge discloses such material error, that the decision must be  set
    aside and re-made.



Decision on Error of Law

 8. Before me Mr Sandhu appeared for the Appellant and  Mr  Duffy  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Sandhu's submissions relied upon  the  grounds  seeking
    permission which point out that the judge's decision is brief  and  the
    findings failed to deal  with  evidence  which  was  before  her.   The
    credibility assessment therefore, could not be said to be a  fair  one.
    The matter should therefore be set aside and remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 9. Mr Duffy on behalf of the Respondent, whilst not formally conceding the
    matter, acknowledged that there was a lack of findings and  reasons  on
    evidence which had been presented on the Appellant's behalf.

10. After hearing from the representatives, I announced my decision that  I
    was satisfied that the judge had erred in law and I now give my reasons
    for this.  I accept that the judge failed to show that  she  had  taken
    into account and  considered  material  evidence  which  had  been  put
    forward on the Appellant's behalf.  This included  a  failure  to  give
    findings about the two arrests that the Appellant said he underwent,  a
    failure to take into account the Appellant's claimed family history  of
    support  for  left-wing  politics,  and  a  failure  to  make  findings
    concerning the Appellant's political activity in  the  UK  in  that  he
    claims to be an active member of HDP which means he would be  perceived
    as a left-wing Kurdish supporter and PKK sympathiser.  Thus it  follows
    that there is a failure to  give  adequate  analysis  of  the  IK  risk
    factors and the  current  situation  in  Turkey.   These  are  material
    errors.

11. For all the above reasons, I set aside the decision of  the  FtT.   The
    effect of my decision is that the appeal will need to be determined  on
    the merits on all  issues.  Nothing  is  preserved  from  the  original
    decision.

12. In view of the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding which  is
    necessary, I agree with the Representatives  that  a  remittal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal is the right course of action in this case.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.   This
matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on  all
issues and is to be heard by a judge other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal N M Paul.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
