
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04848/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2019                          |On 6th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   Ms s b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nicolau of Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 6th February  1989.   The
    Appellant made application in the United Kingdom to be recognised as  a
    refugee based on  a  purported  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Algeria on the basis of her membership of a  particular  social  group,
    namely that she is a  woman.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by notice dated 29th March 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brewer sitting at  Taylor  House  on  4th  October  2018.
    Judge Brewer  made  an  anonymity  direction.   The  direction  is  not
    challenged and remains in force.  In a decision and reasons promulgated
    on 30th October 2018  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal having been settled
    by Counsel on or about 13th October 2018.  Those Grounds of Appeal  are
    extensive. On 26th November  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    granted permission to appeal.  It is important to consider the grant of
    permission.  At paragraph 3 Judge Lambert states:

         "The  decision  discloses  adequate  evidence  based  reasons   for
         concluding that the Appellant's evidence was not credible, that she
         would not be at risk on return to Algeria despite  being  a  single
         mother of an illegitimate child, and that  taking  account  of  the
         child's best interests there was no breach of Article 8.

         The over lengthy grounds take issue with the findings made  by  the
         judge on the  evidence  but  appear  to  amount  to  no  more  than
         disagreement with those findings and an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
         Appellant's case ...."

 4. The grant of permission focuses on Ground 3 which states:

         "The Tribunal was procedurally unfair in not allowing the Appellant
         to rely  on  medical  evidence  pertaining  to  her  son's  medical
         condition."

    Judge Lambert notes that whilst the judge at paragraph 17 records  that
    Counsel did not in fact apply for one, Counsel's note  of  the  hearing
    indicates her understanding that the judge had considered  and  refused
    an adjournment at the 'housekeeping' stage prior to commencement of the
    hearing.  This is  directly  at  odds  with  the  judge's  comments  at
    paragraph  17  that  'upon  resumption  of  the  hearing  Ms  Griffiths
    indicated that she  was  content  to  proceed  today'.   Judge  Lambert
    considered  that  this  conflict  made  arguable  the   contention   of
    procedural unfairness at Ground 3.

 5. By way of a letter dated 20th December  2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was invited to comment upon the grounds  seeking  permission.   I
    note and fully consider Judge Brewer's response which is set out  in  a
    memorandum from Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor who  concludes  that  the
    matter would now be listed for hearing.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Ms Nicolau.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Preliminary Issue

 7. It is raised by Ms Nicolau  that  there  is  a  clear  steer  from  the
    decision in Safi and others (permission  to  appeal  decisions)  [2018]
    UKUT 388 (IAC) as to guidance on interpreting the scope of decisions in
    which permission to appeal from the First-tier to the Upper Tribunal is
    granted.  She refers me to the headnote:

         "(1) It is essential for a judge  who  is  granting  permission  to
             appeal only on limited grounds to say so,  in  terms,  in  the
             section of  the  standard  form  document  that  contains  the
             decision, as opposed to the reasons for the decision.

         (2)  It is likely to be only in very exceptional circumstances that
             the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission
             that a decision which,  on  its  face,  grants  permission  to
             appeal without  express  limitation  is  to  be  construed  as
             anything other than a  grant  of  permission  on  all  of  the
             grounds   accompanying   the   application   for   permission,
             regardless of what might be said in the reasons  for  decision
             section of the document."

 8.  I  have  consequently  taken  that  authority  into  account  and  the
    submission made to me by both legal representatives and have given  due
    consideration  to  what  Judge  Lambert  has  said  in  the  grant   of
    permission.  I am however in this matter prepared to give consideration
    (and the parties were notified of this) to all grounds  of  permission.
    As I agreed it is best in this matter that the Upper Tribunal is seized
    of the matter.

Submission/Discussion

 9. Ms Nicolau refers me to the witness statement of Ms  G  which  contends
    that an adjournment application was made which is contrary to the  view
    expressed by the Immigration Judge that one was not  made.  It  is  her
    submission that separate events in any event constituted an adjournment
    request and submits that it is procedurally unfair for the judge not to
    have granted  it.   She  refers  to  Ms  G's  witness  statement.   She
    reiterates in submission that a request was made and it was refused and
    that there had thereafter been a failure to give adequate reasons as to
    why it was refused.

10. She goes on to contend  that  the  judge  made  a  number  of  findings
    regarding the best interests of the child without evidence  that  would
    have been essential to  that.   She  specifically  directs  me  to  two
    paragraphs of the decision.  Firstly to paragraph 42 where she contends
    that the judge has made a finding that  the  Appellant's  child  has  a
    medical issue  but  that  "it  is  not  particularly  significant"  and
    secondly at paragraph 63 the judge has concluded the only real issue is
    the child's overall welfare and that he is  satisfied  the  Appellant's
    medical treatment would not be  impaired  should  he  return  with  his
    mother to Algeria and made a finding that it is  in  the  child's  best
    interest to remain with the mother.  It is Ms Nicolau's submission that
    the judge has failed to grasp the value of the medical evidence  sought
    and that by doing so the judge falls into error.

11. Ms Nicolau further makes a brief submission solely relating to Ground 1
    that the judge has made unsafe findings in respect of  the  Appellant's
    evidence and credibility, referring me  to  the  witness  statement  of
    Counsel at paragraphs 14, 15 and 17  contending  therein  that  as  the
    judge has, it is submitted, made mistakes of fact  there  are  material
    errors of law.

12. In response, Mr Tufan comments that he has seen the note of the Counsel
    and it has nothing to say or add with regard to the adjournment request
    and that neither the judge nor Home Office Counsel can remember it.  He
    submits that if it was made and refused it is on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's son's condition is  not  serious  and  that  the  treatment
    connected to it is not available in Nigeria.  If that were  to  be  the
    case he submits that the condition approaches the threshold set out  in
    N.  So far as the final contention regarding the facts are concerned he
    is not sure what the judge has got wrong.  The judge made  findings  of
    fact on  the  evidence  which  the  judge  was  entitled  to  and  made
    conclusions that  were  sustainable.   He  submits  that  the  decision
    discloses no material errors of law.

The Law

13.   Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings of Error of Law

15. Whilst it seems clear that the  way  in  which  Judge  Lambert  granted
    permission was restricted to the refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  I
    have, following the guidance in Safi as indicated above, considered  it
    in the best interests of the Tribunal  to  adjudicate  on  all  grounds
    albeit that Ms Nicolau quite properly limits the  amount  of  arguments
    she makes with regards to the alternate ground.  I find that there  are
    no material errors of law disclosed in this decision.

16. I start with the main ground, namely the contention that the judge  has
    acted procedurally unfairly in refusing to grant an adjournment for the
    obtaining of a  medical  report.   It  is  clear  from  Judge  Brewer's
    observations on 27th September 2018 the issue was discussed.  I am also
    of the view that the judge has set out clearly  as  to  when  the  case
    might get relisted,  that  there  was  a  break  for  Counsel  to  take
    instructions  on  whether  to  pursue  the  application  and  that  the
    Appellant wanted to proceed.  I am satisfied that the judge  has  given
    this matter the fullest of consideration and I am  not  satisfied  that
    there has been any procedural unfairness  whatsoever  in  the  approach
    adopted by the judge.  I accept  the  judge  and  Counsel  may  have  a
    different recollection.  Firstly, I preferred the view expressed by the
    judge.  It seems to me to clearly reflect the issues that  were  before
    him.  Secondly, I agree with the lack of materiality as set out  by  Mr
    Tufan in his submissions that even if a medical report were obtained it
    is not going to reflect an  issue  that  can  in  any  event  begin  to
    approach the threshold as set out in N.

17. The judge has made clear findings that the Appellant's evidence was not
    credible.   The  proper  approach  to  credibility  would  require   an
    assessment of  the  evidence  and  the  general  claim,  including  the
    internal consistency, the inherent plausibility and  factors  found  in
    country guidance.  Consideration of what  is  a  very  well-constructed
    decision shows that this is exactly the approach  that  the  judge  has
    adopted and that the judge has given adequate  evidence  based  reasons
    for reaching his conclusions that the Appellant was not credible and as
    Judge Lambert sets out in the grant of permission the  Appellant  would
    not be  at  risk  on  return  despite  being  a  single  mother  of  an
    illegitimate child and that taking account of all the factors there  is
    no breach of Article 8.   However,  giving  due  consideration  to  the
    reported factual errors which were  set  out  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    Grounds of  Appeal,  firstly  Mr  Tufan  rejects  that  any  exist  and
    secondly, having given due consideration to them, if they do  exist  as
    set out, I do not consider that they materially affect the findings  of
    the judge.

18.  Consequently,  having  given  full  and  due  consideration   to   the
    submissions made in this matter I am satisfied that the judge has  made
    findings upon which he was entitled to and has set  out  full  reasons.
    This is a decision that for all the above reasons discloses no material
    error or law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 06/03/19

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
