
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04555/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 January 2019                    |     On 8 March 2019                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     N D
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Wood instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  anonymity  order,  despite  the   Joint
Presidential Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders at [13] which  states
that protection appeals should be anonymised on issue and before  the  Upper
Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal therefore  of  its  own  motion  has  made  an
anonymity order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, dismissing her appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse  her  international  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Albania.

 2. Permission was granted on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    properly to apply the country guidance in TD and AD (Trafficked  women)
    Albania  CG  [2016]  UKUT  92  (IAC)   to   this   appellant's   likely
    circumstances as a returning lone woman, and that  at  [59]  the  judge
    committed the classic error of applying negative  credibility  findings
    already reached to his assessment of the medical evidence of Dr Melanie
    Wood contained in two letters of 11 and 18 September 2015 (see  Mibanga
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367).

 3. There is merit in both grounds.  The country guidance in TD and  AD  is
    not properly summarised and is misapplied by the Judge.  At [62] in the
    First-tier Tribunal decision in this appeal, the  Tribunal  found  that
    none of the appellant's core account was accepted, and it is  right  to
    say that there are no  findings  of  fact  at  all  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  Nor did the Judge refer to the appellant's  witness
    statement, although much was made of  the  contents  of  her  screening
    interview, adopted in the appellant's witness statement, and  there  is
    also mention of some elements of the oral evidence she gave before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Judge at [59] placed little weight on the medical evidence  because
    he had already concluded that the appellant was not a credible witness.
    The Mibanga error was considered by the Upper Tribunal in  HH  (medical
    evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164

         "19  Finally, the grounds assert that the Immigration  Judge  erred
         in law in failing to treat  the  medical  report  as  part  of  the
         overall evidence in this case, to  be  considered  "in  the  round"
         before coming to any conclusion as to the appellant's  credibility.
         Reference is made to the  Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  Mibanga
         [2005] EWCA Civ 367, in particular paragraph 24 of the judgment  of
         Wilson J:

             "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a  fact-finder  must  not
             reach his or her conclusion before surveying all the  evidence
             relevant  thereto.  Just  as,  if  I  may  take  a  banal   if
             alliterative example, one cannot make a  cake  with  only  one
             ingredient, so also frequently one cannot make a case, in  the
             sense of establishing its truth, otherwise than by combination
             of a number of pieces of evidence"."

 5. Overall,  and  particularly  because  the  country  guidance  has  been
    incorrectly applied and the  judge  has  made  a  Mibanga  error,  this
    decision is irrational and cannot stand.

 6. I set aside the decision and allow the appellant's appeal remitting  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for decision afresh with no findings of fact
    or credibility maintained.


DECISION

 7.      For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.  The  decision  in
    this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Date:         26 February 2019               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
