
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04519/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                   M H A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1985. He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent on 26 April  2017  to  refuse  his
    asylum claim.  His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    J Bartlett ("the FTTJ") who, in a decision  promulgated  on  17  August
    2017, dismissed his appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  on  12
    February 2018 who considered it arguable that  the  FTTJ,  despite  her
    statement that she had considered all the evidence in  the  round,  had
    not assessed the reliability of the contents of the documents from  the
    court in the round with the  remainder  of  the  evidence.  Judge  Gill
    considered it was arguable the FTTJ had  rejected  these  documents  as
    being unreliable because she had found the claimant not credible. Hence
    the matter came before me.

 3. At the outset of the hearing I indicated that I considered the  grounds
    for permission to appeal may have some merit, particularly with  regard
    to the analysis of the court documents, for the reasons set out in  the
    permission to appeal. Ms Pal, for the  respondent,  told  me  that  she
    would not be making submissions contrary to my  preliminary  view.  She
    accepted that the FTTJ may have misdirected herself as to the law  with
    regard to the analysis of the documentary evidence.

 4. Mr Karim, for the appellant, submitted that if the  FTTJ  had  taken  a
    holistic approach, as  was  required,  her  findings  might  have  been
    different; proper analysis of the documents, in isolation, irrespective
    of her findings on credibility elsewhere, might have led her to find he
    was at risk on return.  Those documents might have been found reliable;
    they included an outstanding warrant for  the  appellant's  arrest.  He
    submitted that the FTTJ should not have  "cherry-picked"  the  evidence
    when assessing credibility. It was further submitted that, as  set  out
    in the grounds of appeal, the FTTJ should have addressed "whether  lack
    of verification added or detracted from the documents".  The respondent
    had not been invited to  verify  them.  Had  she  verified  the  arrest
    warrant, it would have gone some way to  establishing  the  appellant's
    case. These documents were at the centre of the asylum  claim.  In  any
    event the FTTJ had given inadequate reasons for rejecting the court and
    other documents.  It was also the appellant's case that  the  FTTJ  had
    taken Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 as the starting point contrary to SM (Section 8: Judge's
    process) Iran  [2005]  UKAIT  00116.  Finally  there  was  insufficient
    engagement with the appellant's sur place activities.

 5. For the respondent, Ms Pal submitted, that the respondent had  no  duty
    to  verify  documents  adduced  in  beach  asylum   claim;   this   was
    particularly the case when the claimant was alleging persecution by the
    state; those enquires would result in the state knowing  the  appellant
    had claimed asylum in the UK.  It was accepted that  in  certain  cases
    the respondent would make enquires but there was a limit  to  the  Home
    Office resources.  It  was  accepted  the  FTTJ  had  to  consider  the
    documents in the round  with  the  remaining  evidence.   It  was  also
    accepted it was difficult to argue that the FTTJ's apparent failure  to
    do so would not have impacted  on  the  outcome.  Her  misdirection  in
    approach to the assessment of the documentary evidenced  was  material,
    she conceded.

Discussion

 6. The FTTJ notes at [19] in a preamble  to  her  decision  that  she  has
    "considered all of the evidence in the round in coming to  my  decision
    even if it is not referred to expressly in this judgement".   She  then
    goes on to make a specific finding, in the  next  paragraph,  that  the
    appellant "falls within section 8 of the 2002 [sic] Act  and  that  his
    delay in claiming  asylum  damages  his  credibility".  She  noted  the
    appellant claimed to have  left  Bangladesh  for  his  safety  in  2010
    because of acts occurring before  his  departure;  she  also  noted  he
    claimed to be the subject of further accusations in 2015. She did  "not
    consider that any of this is a plausible reason for the  delay  in  his
    claim.  The appellant's evidence as that before he was detained he  had
    tried to call the Home Office to claim asylum and was given a reference
    number. However he provided no other evidence, not even  the  reference
    number, at the hearing. Therefore I give little weight to his  evidence
    in this regard."  To some extent the manner in which the FTTJ has dealt
    with section 8 is contradictory in that on the one hand she  finds  his
    behaviour falls within s8 and that his credibility is damaged;  on  the
    other she attributes little weight (but by inference, some  weight)  to
    his evidence that he had sought to call the  Home  Office,  before  his
    detention, to claim asylum.  Taking the analysis as a whole,  the  FTTJ
    appears to reject the appellant's evidence of trying to make an  asylum
    claim earlier (albeit  she  indicates  she  ascribes  "weight"  to  it)
    because she has already stated she finds his credibility is damaged  by
    his failure to claim asylum earlier.  Irrespective of  these  concerns,
    the FTTJ has  not  followed  SM  (Section  8:  Judge's  process)  which
    provides guidance, summarised in the headnote as follows

         "Even where section 8 applies, an Immigration Judge should look  at
         the evidence as a whole and decide which parts are  more  important
         and which less. Section 8 does not require the behaviour  to  which
         it applies to be treated as the starting-point of the assessment of
         credibility."

    In that case the Tribunal concluded that the  behaviour  identified  in
    that section is a factor to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  overall
    assessment of credibility and its importance will  vary  from  case  to
    case.

 7. Similarly, in the later case of JT (Cameroon) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    878 the Court of Appeal said that section 8  factors  should  be  taken
    into account in assessing credibility and were capable of  damaging  it
    but the section did not dictate that  the  relevant  damage  inevitably
    results.  It was possible to read the adverb "potentially" into section
    8(1) before the word "damaging".  In that  case  the  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded that there was a real risk that section 8 matters were  given
    a statement and compartment of  their  own  and  were  not  taken  into
    account as part of a global assessment of credibility.

 8. The terms of paragraph 20 suggest the  FTTJ  made  a  specific  adverse
    finding on credibility as a result of the s8  factors  she  identified.
    This was before she had considered the remaining evidence.  That is  an
    error of law.

 9. The FTTJ's assessment of the documentary evidence, which  is  extensive
    and detailed, is woefully inadequate and she has misdirected herself on
    the issue. She states:

         "As I have found the appellant not to  be  credible  I  have  given
         consideration to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439."

      This sentence is difficult to follow.  The earlier  finding  that  the
    appellant lacks credibility does  not  warrant  consideration  of  this
    authority.  Nor does the earlier adverse  credibility  finding  warrant
    consideration of the documentary evidence pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed (if
    that is what  the  FTTJ  intended  to  state).  Rather,  Tanveer  Ahmed
    requires consideration of the documentary evidence in  the  round  with
    the remaining evidence, including that of the  appellant  himself.  The
    FTTJ appears to have misconstrued Tanveer Ahmed which required the FTTJ
    to look at the appellant's documents, not  in  isolation  after  having
    made her finding on the appellant's credibility as a witness, but  with
    the other evidence, including that of the  appellant  himself,  in  the
    round.

10. The  appellant  produced  a  significant  number  of  court  and  other
    documents, as listed, in summary form, at paragraph 16  of  the  FTTJ's
    decision. The only  suggestion  of  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    documentary evidence is the following (which  follows  the  sentence  I
    cite in my preceding paragraph):

          "I am not satisfied that the documents from the  court  including
          but not limited to the first information  report,  charge  sheets
          and order sheets can be relied upon. I am also not satisfied that
          the documents from individuals in Bangladesh an be relied upon."

    This displays  a  misunderstanding  of  the  nature  of  the  documents
    themselves. By way of example, the first information report  is  not  a
    court document; it is a document issued by the Pakistani police, as  is
    clear from its heading.   Furthermore,  this  brief  reference  to  the
    documentary  evidence  cannot  be  considered  to  be  an   appropriate
    analysis: it is the appellant's case that these are at the crux of  his
    asylum claim.

11. Irrespective of this misdirection in law, the FTTJ has failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding the  documentary  evidence  unreliable.  I
    bear in mind the guidance at paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC
    49, that  "Where  a  tribunal  has  referred  to  considering  all  the
    evidence, a reviewing body should be very slow to  conclude  that  that
    tribunal overlooked some factor,  simply  because  the  factor  is  not
    explicitly referred to in the determination concerned".    However,  as
    was said in MK (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),
    "If a tribunal found oral evidence to  be  implausible,  incredible  or
    unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not  believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons."  The same might be  said  of  documentary
    evidence.  In the present case the only reasons given for rejecting the
    appellant's documentary evidence was the  earlier  adverse  credibility
    finding.

12. I accept the submission for the appellant, which was not opposed by the
    respondent, that the errors of law in the FTTJ's decision are  material
    to the outcome. As was said by Keene LJ in IA (Somalia) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 323:


         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

13. I accept that, had the FTTJ not misdirected herself with regard to  the
    assessment of  credibility  and  the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
    documents,  she  might  have  reached  a  different  conclusion.    Her
    credibility findings are tainted by these  errors  of  law  and  cannot
    stand.

14. For these reasons, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    material errors of law in the assessment of the evidence and the FTTJ's
    decision must be set aside in its entirety.  All  parties  were  agreed
    that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate for the  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.  The decision is set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,  pursuant
    to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from  FTTJ  J
    Bartlett.

16. Given the nature of this appeal, the appellant is entitled to anonymity
    in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 27 April 2018



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 27 April 2018
                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.


 2. The appellant and/or his representative is to file  and  serve  on  the
    respondent a chronology of such events, including the court proceedings
    in which he has been involved in Bangladesh, as  are  relevant  to  his
    asylum claim.

 3. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 4. A Bengali (Sylheti) interpreter is required.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 27 April 2018

