
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04885/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2017                           |On 18 December 2017           |



                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Saifolahi, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill, promulgated on 27 June 2017, in which  he  refused
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I have made an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "It is arguable that the Judge may have materially erred in his/her
         assessment  of  the  evidence  regarding  the  Appellant's  claimed
         sexuality and made unfair assumptions.  All grounds may be argued."




 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  At the outset of the hearing,  Mr.
    Jarvis indicated that he had spoken to Ms Saifolahi and that there  was
    some agreement on the way forward.  I heard brief submissions from  Mr.
    Jarvis who accepted that the decision involved the making of a material
    error of law.  I announced that my full reasons would  follow  but,  in
    agreement with the submissions of Mr. Jarvis, I allowed the appeal  and
    set the decision aside.  I remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    remade.


Error of Law


 5. Mr. Jarvis's submissions focused on the first ground of appeal, and the
    Judge's approach to the manner in which the Appellant had grappled with
    his sexuality.  He accepted that the Judge  had  not  properly  engaged
    with the Appellant's account, or with his explanations for his delay in
    claiming asylum.  He submitted that the Judge should have engaged  with
    the Appellant's own description of  why  he  had  delayed  in  claiming
    asylum.  With reference to paragraph [23], the Appellant's evidence was
    that  he  was  personally  conflicted  rather  than   just   culturally
    conflicted.


 6. Paragraph 23 states:


         "The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2012  and  would  have
         quickly have (sic) become aware that being gay and  openly  gay  in
         the United Kingdom is completely acceptable.   The  Appellant  does
         not suggest that he started to explore his sexuality  in  any  way.
         He was, by that time, 23 years of age.  He states he had no further
         sexual relations with another man until  February  2016.   This  is
         unlikely.  It is even more unlikely when one takes into account the
         fact that the Appellant states to have formed a romantic and sexual
         relationship with his now divorced wife in 2014 and married her  on
         18 March 2015.  He was 25 years of age when he  met  his  wife  and
         almost 26 years of age when he married her.  It  is  unlikely  that
         despite understandable confused feelings  regarding  his  sexuality
         given his cultural upbringing, the Appellant would continue to have
         had confusion over his sexuality and marry a woman."


 7. I find that there is an assumption on the part of the  Judge  that  the
    fact that being gay, and openly so, is acceptable in the United Kingdom
    meant that the Appellant would have been able to express his  sexuality
    freely on arrival.  It was the Appellant's evidence that he was not  in
    a position where he was able to throw himself into the gay scene and be
    open about his sexuality.  The Judge has failed to take the Appellant's
    evidence into account.  I find that he has failed  properly  to  engage
    with the reasons given by the  Appellant  for  his  delay  in  claiming
    asylum, and I find that he has erred  in  so  doing.   His  supposition
    that, if he were gay, when he arrived in the United Kingdom  everything
    would be fine went against the factual matrix in the Appellant's  case.
    I find that the Judge erred in failing to give proper consideration  to
    the Appellant's evidence.


 8. The judge finds that it is unlikely that the  Appellant  did  not  have
    sexual relations with a man until February 2016 [23].  No  reasons  are
    given for why this is unlikely given the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    confusion around his sexuality.  No reasons are given  for  why  it  is
    "even more unlikely" because the Appellant formed a romantic and sexual
    relationship  with  a  woman.   The  Appellant's  age  is  clearly   of
    significance to the Judge, but he has failed to explain why a  25  year
    old would not continue to have  confused  feelings  of  his  sexuality,
    especially  given  his  acceptance  of  the  "understandable   confused
    feelings regarding his sexuality".  He has once again  failed  to  take
    into account the Appellant's own evidence.


 9. The other ground of appeal that  was  drawn  to  my  attention  at  the
    hearing was that in relation to  the  treatment  of  the  corroborative
    evidence, particularly surrounding the  Appellant's  previous  marriage
    and divorce.  I find that the Judge  failed  properly  to  assess  this
    evidence.  The  Family  Court  accepted  the  reason  for  the  divorce
    petition, in which the Appellant's wife stated her suspicions about his
    sexuality, but the Judge failed to place any weight on this.  The Judge
    did not explain why he rejected this evidence which had  been  accepted
    by the Family Court.


10. Further, in finding that his wife was part of the deception, as pointed
    out in the grounds of appeal, if the marriage had been entered into for
    the purposes of assisting an immigration application, there would  have
    been no reason for the Appellant and his wife not to have attended  his
    appeal in 2016.  There is no consideration of this in the assessment of
    the Appellant's marriage and subsequent divorce.  Neither  is  there  a
    proper assessment of the Appellant's reasons for getting married, which
    he raised at his asylum interview.  It was submitted that his marriage,
    and the reasons for it, formed a large part of his claim, yet these had
    not been properly considered.


11. I find that the Judge has failed properly to assess the evidence before
    him, either that of the Appellant in relation to the  reasons  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum, or the corroborative evidence  provided.   He
    has  adopted  an  approach  which  does  not  take  into  account   the
    complexities of an individual coming to terms with their sexuality.  He
    has assumed rather that, on coming to the United Kingdom, the Appellant
    would quickly have been able to express his sexuality, failing properly
    to take into account the Appellant's own evidence of his  feelings  and
    confusion towards his sexuality.

12. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I find that the  errors  affect  the  credibility
    findings, and therefore given the nature and extent of the fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


13. I am grateful to Mr. Jarvis for his approach to this appeal.


Notice of Decision


14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


