
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04402/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 July 2020                               |On 27 July 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of El Salvador born in 1976,  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 12 December 2018 and claimed asylum.  The appellant's
    claim to be in need of international protection arose from his asserted
    fear of being perceived by the "the notorious MS13 Gang" in El Salvador
    as a government informant.  The  MS13  Gang  were  concerned  that  the
    appellant had deliveries made to his home by a government vehicle.   On
    the last occasion when he had met what he assumed to be members of  the
    MS13 Gang, the  appellant  had  been  asked  what  he  did  by  way  of
    employment.  When he said that  he  was  in  sales,  his  interlocutors
    accused him of telling lies.

 2. The appellant reported the matter to the police,  who  said  that  they
    would investigate it.  The police would make contact with the appellant
    when they had more information.   The  appellant  went  to  live  in  a
    hostel.  Two days later he telephoned the police for an update, but was
    told that they were very busy.

 3. The appellant considered asking family members if he  could  live  with
    them but they also lived in gang-controlled areas and so he decided  it
    would not be safe there for him or  the  family  members.   Considering
    that he had nowhere in El Salvador to which he could go, the  appellant
    decided to leave the country and claim asylum abroad.

 4. On 24 April 2019, the respondent  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.  At paragraph 36  of  the  decision
    letter, the respondent noted that background information on  MS13  said
    that dozens of El Salvador police had been killed  in  the  past  three
    years, mostly, it was thought, by MS13 "an international street  gang".
    At paragraph 37, the respondent stated that if the appellant  had  been
    investigated by MS13 and told that he was a police  informant,  it  was
    inconsistent with  the  background  information  about  MS13  that  the
    appellant had not been threatened or harmed in any way.

 5. At paragraph 41, having set out  other  matters  which  the  respondent
    considered to comprise inconsistencies in the appellant's  account,  it
    was "not accepted that you have received death threats  from  MS13  and
    this part of your claim is rejected".

 6. The  respondent,  nevertheless,  went  on  to  consider  whether  state
    protection was available to the  appellant  in  respect  of  MS13.   At
    paragraphs 51 to 59, background evidence  was  cited.   The  respondent
    concluded that there was a functioning police  force  in  El  Salvador.
    Since the appellant contacted  the  police  only  two  days  after  his
    initial report and had  not  contacted  them  further,  the  respondent
    considered that the appellant had not given the  police  "the  adequate
    opportunity to investigate your  report,  and  as  such  you  have  not
    substantiated your claim that the police would be unwilling  or  unable
    to offer you protection" (paragraph 61).

 7. The letter then noted evidence regarding the conviction of  members  of
    MS13  in  El  Salvador,  and  the  imposition  of  long  sentences   of
    imprisonment.  A report mentioned in the letter described El Salvador's
    "Iron Fist" crackdown on gangs.

 8. Overall, at paragraph 71, the respondent concluded that  the  appellant
    had failed to establish a  sustained  and  systemic  failure  of  state
    protection on the part of the authorities in El Salvador.

 9. Beginning at paragraph 72, the letter considered  the  availability  of
    internal relocation.  The appellant told the respondent that  he  could
    not relocate because  the  gangs  were  all  over  the  neighbourhoods.
    However, the respondent considered that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish he would be at heightened risk from rival gangs or that  MS13
    members would have the means or motivation to seek out  the  appellant,
    if he were to relocate to another area of El Salvador.

10. At paragraph 83,  the  respondent  decided  that,  in  any  event,  the
    appellant had not put forward a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  by
    reason of race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
    social group or political opinion.  Furthermore, the appellant was  not
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

11. Having concluded that the appellant was not entitled to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom by reference to Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR, the  letter
    turned to the Article 8 private/family life of the appellant.   It  was
    the respondent's conclusion that the  appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    leave by reference to  Article  8,  either  within  the  ambit  of  the
    Immigration Rules or outside them.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent.  His appeal was heard at Manchester on 14 June 2019.
      The  resulting  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   was
    promulgated on 1 July 2019.

13. At paragraph 20, the judge noted the submission of Ms  Patel,  for  the
    appellant, that challenging the authority of the gang was sufficient to
    cause him to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  them.   Some  10%  of  the
    population of El Salvador are affiliated to gangs.

14. At paragraph 22, the judge noted the UNHCR  report,  contained  in  the
    material submitted on behalf of the appellant, which stated at page  86
    of the bundle that gangs in El Salvador are reported to  exercise  high
    levels of social control over all aspects of life  of  members  of  the
    population in the areas under the gang's control.   Paragraph  22  then
    notes the UNHCR  report  as  giving  examples  of  types  of  behaviour
    considered to be expressing a challenge to  the  gang's  authority.   I
    observe here that these are said to include:

         "criticising the gang; refusing a request or  "favour"  by  a  gang
         member; arguing with or looking mistrustfully  at  a  gang  member;
         refusing to participate in gang activities or  to  join  the  gang;
         rejecting the sexual attention of a gang member; having (perceived)
         links with a rival gang or a  zone  controlled  by  a  rival  gang;
         refusing  to  pay  extortion  demands;  wearing  certain  clothing,
         tattoos or other symbols;  participating  in  civil,  religious  or
         other organisations viewed as undermining the gang's authority; and
         passing on information of other gangs  to  rivals,  authorities  or
         outsiders."

15. The  passage  continues  by  noting  that  in  some  cases  a  stranger
    accidentally turning up uninvited in a gang zone is reportedly taken as
    a serious affront  to  the  gang's  authority.   Persons  who  live  in
    localities that serve as "invisible" boundaries between the territories
    of rival gangs, or where the control of one gang is being  disputed  by
    another gang, also face a heightened risk of being perceived as  having
    links with the rival gang.

16. At paragraph 23,  the  judge  concluded  that  a  person  perceived  or
    suspected of being a police informant by a gang  such  as  MS13  "could
    depending on their particular circumstances potentially fall within the
    definition  of  refugee  due  to  their  actual  or  imputed  political
    opinion".

17. At paragraph 24, the judge turned to the analysis  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  The judge was concerned by the  suggestion  that  gang  members
    adversely interested in the appellant would not just  approach  him  in
    the street twice and visit his apartment  once;  "they  would  actually
    take some action in the form of threats and actual physical  violence".
    In this regard, the judge considered that the events described  by  the
    appellant "are not consistent with the country information and what  is
    known about the activities of the prominent gangs such as MS13".

18. At paragraph 25, the judge noted that the appellant had not feared  for
    the safety of any of his family members or friends  and  they  had  not
    been approached by the gang or threatened or intimidated by them.  That
    too,  according  to  the  judge,  was  inconsistent  with  the  country
    information.

19. Paragraph 28 records evidence given by the appellant to  the  judge  of
    examples of circumstances in which one could fall foul of a gang.   The
    appellant mentioned hairstyles. He  also  said  that  if  someone  wore
    clothing that displayed a number "6", that  number,  if  turned  upside
    down to look like a "9", meant "twice nine is eighteen"  and  "18"  are
    the opposing gang to MS13, so wearing a "6" suggests support  for  Gang
    18".

20. In paragraph 28, the judge said that he had gone into  some  detail  in
    this regard as the appellant's evidence, in the judge's view "does  not
    stand up to scrutiny" even to the lower standard.

         "To suggest that a person would be harmed  or  even  killed  solely
         because of his/her hairstyle or solely because of the fact they are
         wearing something displaying a number "6" is not supported  in  the
         country information and I find it is evidence  of  the  appellant's
         somewhat furtive imagination."

21. At paragraph 29, the judge questioned the appellant's interaction  with
    the police.  On his own account, the appellant had failed  to  wait  to
    see if the police could identify the persons he had referred to in  his
    complaint.  If the appellant  did  not  believe  the  police  could  do
    something about the complaint, the judge could not understand  why  the
    appellant decided to make the complaint to them  in  the  first  place.
    The judge did not find the appellant's evidence to be credible in  this
    regard.

22. At paragraph 30, the judge noted that the appellant's  family  had  not
    been approached or threatened by any gangs, let alone harmed.  This too
    struck the judge as problematic.  The  UNHCR  evidence  suggested  that
    contraventions were dealt with severely and that the family members  of
    those regarded as "informants" could be targeted.

23. At paragraph 33, the judge considered the issue of internal relocation.
     He noted the appellant's evidence of gangs being influential in La Paz
    and Chalatenango.  The judge was not satisfied that the appellant would
    be perceived as a police informant.  At paragraph 34, the  judge  noted
    the appellant's evidence that "all the country  is  controlled  by  the
    gangs".  The judge, however, found  that  this  influence  varied  from
    place to place and that gangs do not have total "control" throughout El
    Salvador.  The judge did  not  find  the  appellant  credible  in  this
    regard.

24. Having applied his factual findings  to  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules relating to humanitarian protection
    and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, the judge dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of the appellant's international  protection
    claim.  So far as private and family  life  was  concerned,  the  judge
    noted that the appellant had no family in the United Kingdom,  that  he
    was single and relatively healthy and  could  find  work  again  in  El
    Salvador.  The  judge,  accordingly,  also  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal by reference to Article 8.

25. The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Following the refusal by the  First-tier
    Tribunal  for  permission  to  appeal,  Ms  Patel,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, renewed her application to the Upper Tribunal.  The first of
    the grounds took issue with paragraph 24  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.  As we have seen, there the  judge  stated  that  the
    events described by the appellant were not consistent with the  country
    information regarding gangs such as MS13.  The  ground  contended  that
    the judge was here "simply agreeing with the respondent"  and  that  an
    appellant was "entitled to know the exact basis and reasons why he  has
    lost his appeal".

26. The second ground concerned paragraph 26, where the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge found it not credible that the  MS13  gang  would  "not  actually
    challenge [the appellant] as to what they  believe  he  is  capable  of
    informing the police against them or question him about any  activities
    he has with the police".  The ground contended that the judge  had  not
    engaged with the background evidence about  El  Salvadorian  gangs  and
    their behaviours.  Reference was made to the information in  the  UNHCR
    report, at page 86 of the appellant's bundle, to which I  have  already
    made reference.

27. This led to  the  criticism  of  paragraph  28,  where  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge considered  it  to  be  an  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    "somewhat furtive [sic] imagination" that a person could be  harmed  or
    even killed solely because of his or her hairstyle or wearing something
    like a number "6".  The evidence at page 86 of the bundle had not  been
    considered.

28. The grounds  also  challenged  the  judge's  finding  regarding  family
    members.  The judge had failed to notice that  the  appellant's  family
    members were not living with him at the same address  or  in  the  same
    area.  This was the reason they had not been targeted by the MS13 Gang.



29. So far as internal relocation was concerned, the grounds submitted that
    the judge had failed to consider that,  by  moving  from  one  area  to
    another, which might be controlled  by  a  rival  gang,  the  appellant
    risked  serious  harm,  according  to  the  background  evidence.   The
    appellant could be "perceived to be a spy for the gang  from  his  home
    area".

30. The  next  ground  submitted  that  the  judge  had  misunderstood  the
    appellant's case, in  saying  what  he  did  at  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision.  The fact that  government  vehicles  were  arriving  at  the
    appellant's address suggested  to  the  gang  that  the  appellant  was
    involved with the government.  At paragraph 27, the  judge  had  missed
    the point.  The fact that, in reality,  the  appellant's  job  did  not
    involve sensitive information harmful  to  the  criminal  gangs  in  El
    Salvador was irrelevant.

31. The last ground submitted that the judge had failed to take account  of
    the evidence of the appellant, in his witness statement, that he feared
    that he might have been threatened by the gang as a means of  extorting
    money from him.

32. Following the refusal by the Upper Tribunal of  permission  to  appeal,
    the  appellant  sought  a  judicial  review  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision.  In granting permission, HH Judge Pearce, sitting as a  Judge
    of the High Court, found it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not identified the country evidence that led him to  conclude
    the appellant's account was  not  credible.   Following  the  grant  of
    permission, the decision of the Upper Tribunal was quashed.

33. The hearing on 10 July 2020, which took place from open court at  Field
    House with the representatives attending remotely by means of Skype for
    Business, was listed as an oral hearing of the appellant's  application
    for permission to appeal.   Mr  Melvin,  however,  helpfully  confirmed
    that, were I to find an arguable error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the respondent would  be  content  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed immediately to determine  whether  that  error  was
    material, such that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision should  be
    set aside.  In the light of this, I heard  submissions  regarding  what
    might ensue in the light of such a finding.

34. I am not persuaded that the ground which caused the High Court to grant
    permission to bring judicial review has  any  arguable  merit.   It  is
    quite manifest that, in saying what he did at paragraph 24, the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was referring to the background evidence referenced
    at paragraph 36 of the respondent's letter of refusal,  concerning  the
    many killings by MS13 of police officers in El Salvador.  The judge was
    plainly referring  also  to  the  UNHCR  material  highlighted  by  the
    appellant at pages 86 and 87 of the bundle.   The  point  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    interactions with MS13 members (as he perceived  them)  involved  those
    members taking a remarkably restrained attitude,  that  was  wholly  at
    variance with the appellant's own background evidence, as well as  that
    referred to by the respondent.

35. There is, however, plain merit in the  criticism  of  the  findings  in
    paragraph 28 of the judge's decision.  As we have seen, the  judge  did
    not regard the appellant's evidence of the adverse reaction of gangs to
    such matters as hairstyles  and  dress  as  supported  in  the  country
    information.  It is clear from paragraph 28 that this  was  a  material
    reason  why,  overall,  the  judge  decided  that  the  appellant   had
    fabricated his claim to be in need of international protection.

36. I have already set out the passage from the UNHCR report at page 86  of
    the bundle.  The non-exhaustive list, which includes  "wearing  certain
    clothing,  tattoos  or  other  symbols"  shows  that  the   appellant's
    assertions, far from being merely a product of the  appellant's  fecund
    imagination, were  entirely  in  line  with  the  background  evidence.
    Indeed, the finding at paragraph 28 is, I consider,  inconsistent  with
    the judge's finding at paragraph 24.  The  gangs  in  El  Salvador  are
    capable of, and prone to, immediate and extreme hostile reactions to  a
    wide range of things, which on any objective view are of little  or  no
    significance.

37. I also find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's family is flawed.  If the family were living with or  close
    to the appellant, within the area of MS13,  what  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 30 regarding the absence of evidence that the family had been
    threatened, would be justifiable.  However, the  judge  had  not  dealt
    with the fact that the family were not living in the same  part  of  El
    Salvador.  In so far as the judge considered that, wherever the  family
    might be, MS13 could reach them, this appears to be  inconsistent  with
    the judge's own finding, at paragraph 34, regarding the extent  of  the
    power and control of El Salvador gangs.

38. These errors mean that it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  criticisms
    advanced by the grounds of  the  judge's  findings  regarding  internal
    relocation.  I consider that there is merit in the challenge  that,  in
    finding the appellant could relocate, the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
    not engaged with the background evidence concerning the  problems  that
    may be faced by people moving from one part of El Salvador  to  another
    part, where that other part is under the control of a  different  gang,
    which may be hostile towards a newcomer.

39. For these reasons, I conclude that there are not only  arguable  errors
    of law in the decision but that those errors are actual  and  material.
    Thanks to the position adopted by Mr Melvin, it is, therefore, possible
    for the Upper Tribunal to proceed immediately to set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

40. Ms Patel submitted that it might be useful to retain the  case  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, with a view to giving country  guidance  regarding  the
    position of gangs in El Salvador.  The problem  with  this  submission,
    however, is that the upshot of my findings is that the appellant's case
    will  need  to  be  reconsidered  afresh,  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.  Experience suggests that this can pose difficulties for the
    giving of country guidance.

41. In all the circumstances, I consider that the appropriate course is  to
    remit this case to be  re-decided  on  all  issues  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                      Signed Mr Justice Lane          Dated:  17 July 2020






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

