
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04367/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December  2017                         |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  14th
    November 2016, dismissed her claim  for  protection.   The  Appellant's
    immigration history is set out within the determination at paragraphs 4-
    6, namely that the Appellant and her husband had arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 25 November 2010 and made a claim for asylum on  1  February
    2011. A decision was made refusing that application and  the  Appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. At a hearing on 11 July  2011  the
    appeal was dismissed. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  lodged.  The
    Tribunal found the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error  of  law  and
    substituted the same decision again refusing the appeal by  a  decision
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins dated 19 June 2012.

 3. The Appellant became appeal rights exhausted on the 12th November 2012.
    She was not removed from the United Kingdom and  on  the  12th  January
    2016 she lodged further submissions. The respondent treated this  as  a
    fresh claim.

 4. Thus for the present application, her claim was considered but  refused
    in a detailed decision letter of the 7th April 2016.

 5. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the  3rd  November  2016.
    The judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  Appellant
    and her spouse and for their evidence  to  be  the  subject  of  cross-
    examination.  The judge in the determination did not find that  she  or
    her husband were of any interest to the Sri Lankan authorities,  either
    on account of their history or on account of any sur  place  activities
    in the U.K and dismissed her appeal.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient  or
    sustainable reasons for the adverse findings that were contained within
    the determination. Furthermore that the judge had failed to engage with
    paragraph 4.15 of Appendix C of GJ as to questions asked on arrival. It
    was further submitted that the Court of Appeal had  granted  permission
    to appeal in UB (Sri Lanka)  C5/2015/0753  relating  to  membership  of
    proscribed organisations.

 7.  Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)  on
    the 3rd January 2017. Upon renewal to the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch
    granted permission on the 16th February 2017 on limited grounds as  set
    out below:

    "The First-tier Tribunal  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  most  of  the
    findings and was not required to give further detail and  many  of  the
    findings were open  to  her  on  the  evidence  before,  including  her
    assessment of the oral evidence appeal hearing. However,  paragraph  44
    her decision and reasons the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that
    the Appellant's husband given a sworn statement  to  the  International
    Centre for Prevention  and  Prosecution  of  Genocide  about  the  past
    activities of the Sri Lankan authorities. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    then failed to consider this aspect of  the  Appellant's  case  in  the
    context of GJ and others  (post  -  Civil  War:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka
    CG[2013] UKUT 319 where the Upper Tribunal held that current categories
    of persons at risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise includes:  "  individuals  who
    are given evidence to the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation  Commission
    implicating the Sri Lankan security forces, armed  forces  or  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may  have
    witnessed war crimes during conflict, particularly in the No-Fire zones
    in May 2009, only those  who  have  already  identified  themselves  by
    giving such evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and
    therefore only they are a real risk of adverse attention or persecution
    on returns potential or actual war crimes witnesses."

 8. At the hearing before the Tribunal, Mr Mozham relied upon  the  grounds
    and had provided a skeleton argument.  He submitted that  the  Tribunal
    at paragraph 44 failed to consider whether the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk by her husband having given a sworn statement to the  ICPPG.  This
    was a risk recognised in the head note of GJ  and  that  the  Appellant
    fell into the category of a person  would  be  at  a  risk  of  adverse
    attention by the authorities. Whilst the Respondent made reference to a
    difference between the two organisations, the judge  did  not  consider
    that issue as to whether the Appellant would be at risk.

 9. He further submitted that UTJ Perkins made a finding  at  paragraph  15
    where he accepted that the Appellant may be  of  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  due  to  her  past  ill-treatment.  He   therefore
    submitted that there was a likelihood that she and her husband  may  be
    stopped at the airport  and  questioned  on  return.  In  this  context
    attendance at demonstrations and as a  volunteer  for  the  TGTE  would
    become known. The judge  did  not  consider  the  material  and  policy
    guidance referred to in the decision of  UB  (Sri  Lanka)  (as  cited).
    Therefore the judge made no  consideration  risk  on  return  based  on
    material that should have been provided. In line  with  HJ  (Iran)  the
    Appellant could not be expected to lie  as  to  any  involvement  in  a
    proscribed organisation.

10. Mr Bates on behalf of the respondent made  reference  to  his  skeleton
    argument which attached to it the  relevant  guidance  as  at  November
    2016. It was accepted by the Respondent that the TGTE was a  proscribed
    organisation. However he submitted that  the  error  was  not  material
    because the judge made a distinction as to her role in the  TGTE  which
    was as a volunteer ( and not a member of the TGTE) and that she was not
    genuine in that respect. Whilst the Appellant cannot be expected to lie
    (see HJ (Iran)) as the judge found that she  was  not  genuine  in  any
    support, she would not seek to deceive the authorities because she held
    no genuine beliefs (see findings at paragraphs 41 and 45).

11. He made reference to the relevant guidance and drew  attention  to  the
    annexed document at B3 of the CPIN which was a letter dated the 30th of
    November 2015. It made clear that the "new government" now in power had
    de-proscribed a selection of Tamil groups however this did not  include
    the TGTE. However because the judge had  found  that  she  acted  as  a
    volunteer this would  not  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
    assessment of risk on return because they were  not  members  and  that
    their activities were prompted by a desire to bolster an asylum  claim.
    Thus he submitted it resolved the issue in UB (Sri Lanka).

12. As regards the issue set out in the grant of permission, he  relied  on
    the Rule 24 response which expressly dealt with this. He submitted that
    there had been a misunderstanding as there is a difference between  the
    ICPPG and the LLRC as set out in the objective material handed  to  the
    Tribunal. Whilst the Appellant's husband had given a statement  to  the
    ICPPG this was an organisation  administered  in  the  UK  and  had  no
    connection to the Sri Lankan authorities and that there was no evidence
    to suggest that the organisation and the UNHCR did anything other  than
    protect people's anonymity. Thus  the  risk  factor  concerning  giving
    evidence in Sri Lanka did not apply to the ICPPG.

13. Mr Mozham by way of reply submitted that the  judge  had  accepted  the
    activities carried out by the Appellant and her  husband  and  did  not
    state that it was fabricated. Therefore even if it were right  that  it
    was to bolster a claim for asylum, it would still lead  to  a  risk  on
    return. The guidance makes reference to returnees being interviewed and
    therefore the judge should have made  a  full  assessment  of  risk  on
    return. Therefore he submitted there was an  error  of  law  which  was
    material to the outcome and therefore should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to reconsider the point concerning risk on return.

Decision on error of law:

14. I have given careful consideration to the submissions made by  each  of
    the advocates when reaching my conclusions on whether the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an error on a  point  of
    law. Whilst  the  original  grounds  made  reference  to  the  lack  of
    reasoning in the judge's findings, permission to appeal was  not  given
    on those grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch who considered that  the
    Tribunal had given sufficient reasons for the findings of fact made  (I
    refer to the grant permission set out earlier in  this  determination).
    There has been no application to enlarge the grounds before the hearing
    or before the Tribunal.

15. There is no dispute between the  parties  that  when  the  appeal  came
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  starting  point  were  the
    findings of fact made by UT Judge Perkins which the judge  set  out  at
    paragraph 29 and that  the  issue  to  be  determined  related  to  the
    Appellant's activities and risk on return due to such  activities  (see
    paragraph 6 of the FTT  decision).  The  judge  listed  the  issues  in
    dispute at paragraph 28;

      i) Has the Appellant/husband been involved  in  significant  political
         activities in the UK such that they will have a  high  profile  and
         will come to the notice of the Sri Lankan authorities?

     ii) Is the Appellant/husband perceived to be a threat to the  integrity
         of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or  are  perceived
         to have a significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
         separatism within the diaspora?

    iii) Have the authorities maintained an interest in the Appellant?

     iv) Is the Appellant/husband risk on return to Sri Lanka of arrest  and
         persecution by  the  authorities  due  to  her  activities  or  the
         perception of her activities?

16. The judge made  reference  to  the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ  at
    paragraphs 25 - 27 and had been provided with  a  bundle  of  objective
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant but  reached  the  conclusion  that
    there  was  nothing  that  persuaded  him  that  matters  are   changed
    materially such as to depart from the established guidance.  The  judge
    also made reference to the further  documentary  evidence  provided  on
    behalf of the Appellant at paragraphs 30  -  36  of  the  determination
    which included a letter from the TGTE dated 7 October 2015, letter from
    the ICPPG, the letter from  the  Appellant's  father,  medical  letters
    relating to the child and family and photographs of the Appellant at  a
    demonstration.

17. The judge's findings of fact are set out paragraphs 41 - 48.  They  can
    be summarised as follows:-

      i)  The  Appellant  and  her  husband  have  attended  at  least   one
         demonstration in United Kingdom and acted as volunteer  helpers  of
         the TGTE but neither are members of the organisation.

     ii) The activity is of a low-level and neither are prominent activists.

    iii) He found that her activities in the UK been prompted by a desire to
         bolster her asylum claim and is not  consistent  with  firmly  held
         political opinions. They can explain such  to  the  authorities  if
         they would be questioned about activities if they wished.

     iv) The judge rejected the evidence in the form of a  letter  from  the
         Appellant's father (see paragraph 42) and thus did  not  find  that
         they were of any current interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

      v) UTJ Perkins had  found  that  she  had  left  the  airport  without
         hindrance (paragraph 112) and obtained visas without difficulty  or
         payment of large bribes, as had her husband. The Appellant had  not
         shown that she was of interest to the authorities and was only able
         to leave by the use of bribery and corruption. He therefore did not
         depart from the finding that she was of no interest the authorities
         on leaving Sri Lanka.

     vi) The judge accepted that the Appellant and her husband had  attended
         demonstrations and acted  as  volunteers  for  the  TGTE.  He  also
         accepted that the Appellant's husband had given a  sworn  statement
         to the ICPPG.  However  attendance  the  demonstrations  would  not
         constitute  a  destabilising  threat  and  do  not  fall  into  the
         categories of those who would be of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
         government.  The  sur  place  activities  are  not  such  that  the
         Appellants will be of interest now.

    vii)  The Appellants may be interviewed on return.  They  can  say  that
         they are concerned about the treatment  of  Tamils  and  have  been
         demonstrations and have volunteered if they so wish.  Or  they  can
         say they became involved  in  activities  bolster  their  claim  to
         remain in the UK (see paragraph 47).

18. The basis upon which permission was granted  relates  to  the  risk  on
    return based on the Appellant's husband having given a sworn  statement
    to  the  ICPPG.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  a  letter  from   that
    organisation dated 2 November 2015 stating that the Appellant's husband
    had provided evidence under oath  (see  paragraph  31  and  40  of  the
    determination). Mr Mozham submitted that the Appellant would be at risk
    on return having given a sworn statement (see paragraph 5 of the  first
    skeleton argument). Whilst the country  guidance  decision  of  GJ  and
    others sets out categories of those at a real risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm which includes individuals who had given evidence  to  the
    Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission it is plain  from  reading
    the material that the LLRC is a wholly different organisation from  the
    ICPPG and the Appellant's representatives  have  provided  no  evidence
    that there is any connection between them.

19. Whilst I would accept that the judge did not expressly  deal  with  any
    risk based on having given such a statement to the ICPPG as a  discrete
    issue, there was no evidence  before  the  judge  that  concerned  that
    particular organisation. The respondent has provided objective material
    in the form of a newspaper article relating to the LLRC  and  it  makes
    reference to a report which was handed to the  president  in  2011.  It
    sets out the ambit of the commission and the public sittings which were
    held in various cities in Sri Lanka. The respondent  also  produced  an
    article from the UK Tamil line  relating  to  collecting  evidence  and
    witness  statements  by  the  ICPPG.  The  article   demonstrates   the
    organisation is based in and administered in the UK and passes material
    to the UNHCR. There is no evidence before the FTT or this Tribunal that
    the organisation or the UNHCR  provide  the  names  of  those  who  are
    provided  any  statements  or  otherwise  compromise   any   anonymity.
    Furthermore there is no evidence that the Sri Lankan  authorities  have
    been provided with this information. Nor has it been shown  that  there
    is any obvious way for  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  to  connect  any
    statement made to this Appellant.

20. Therefore it is not been  demonstrated  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in reaching its conclusion  that  having  given
    such evidence it would not create a risk on return in the light of  the
    factual findings previously made by UT Judge Perkins.

21. The second issue relates to an issue raised in the  grounds  but  which
    was not dealt with by the Upper Tribunal when  granting  permission.  I
    therefore heard argument from the advocates on this issue.  It  relates
    to the Appellant's sur place activities and in particular her status as
    a volunteer for the TGTE and  her  attendance  at  demonstrations.  The
    original grounds made reference to the grant of permission in  UB  (Sri
    Lanka).  Since the grounds were filed, the Court of Appeal  issued  its
    decision reported at [2017] EWCA Civ 85 on 22 February 2017  which  was
    after the First-tier Tribunal had promulgated its decision.  The  Court
    of Appeal in that decision considered the implications of  neither  the
    First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper Tribunal being referred to  the  Home
    Office policy guidance of 28 August 2015 entitled  "Tamil  Separatism".
    The Court considered that there had been an obligation on the Secretary
    of State to serve that material on the parties and to produce it before
    the Tribunal.

22. However as set out in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 5, the Appellant's  representatives  had  produced  the  most
    recent country information and guidance (CIG)  on  Sri  Lanka  entitled
    "Tamil separatism" dated August 2016. Further  reference  was  made  to
    this document at paragraph 7 of the determination. Whilst it appears to
    be provided by Counsel for the  Appellant,  it  demonstrates  that  the
    judge did have the material  available  which  is  different  from  the
    factual situation in UB (Sri Lanka).

23. I am further satisfied that the material was before the judge  and  was
    considered by him as the judge refers to the content of  that  guidance
    at paragraph 27 and at paragraph 47 where there  is  reference  to  the
    possibility of the Appellant  and  her  husband  being  interviewed  on
    return and is therefore a reference to the material in the CIG and  the
    reference in UB(Sri Lanka) to the letters from the BHC  dated  25th  of
    July 2014 which makes reference to returnees  and  that  they  "may  be
    questioned on arrival by CID, SIS and TID."

24. The question is whether the judge properly considered that evidence  in
    the light of  his  findings  of  fact  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities and the general profile  of  this  Appellant  as  previously
    found by UTJ Perkins.

25. Mr Mozhan submits that as the FTTJ accepted that the Appellant attended
    a demonstration  and  was  a  volunteer  for  the  TGTE  (a  prescribed
    organisation) she therefore will be  at  risk  on  return.  He  further
    submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  their
    participation sufficiently. Mr Bates on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that the findings of fact  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and that whilst the TGTE remain a proscribed organisation, the
    judge had properly made a distinction as to the Appellant's position.

26. It is plain from reading the determination that  the  judge  considered
    the country materials before him and did so in the light of the country
    guidance decision of GJ and others (see paragraphs 25 - 27 and 43 -  44
    and 47). It has not been submitted on behalf of the Appellant that  the
    judge was wrong to reach the conclusion that the  material  before  him
    was such that it was unnecessary to depart from  the  country  guidance
    decision. As the case demonstrates, the concern of  the  government  of
    Sri Lanka now is not past membership or sympathy but whether  a  person
    is a destabilising threat in post conflict  Sri  Lanka  (see  paragraph
    311). It had not been established that  previous  LTTE  connections  or
    sympathies (whether direct or via family links) are  perceived  by  the
    government authorities as indicating now that  an  individual  poses  a
    destabilising threat in post conflict Sri Lanka  (see  paragraph  325).
    Furthermore an individual's past history will be relevant only  to  the
    extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating
    a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state (see paragraph 356).

27. I accept the submission made by  Mr  Bates  that  the  onus  is  on  an
    Appellant to demonstrate that their involvement was of such  a  profile
    and nature to equate to a "significant role" such as to  make  them  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities or  that  their  activities  are
    such that they will be likely to be perceived as being a threat to  the
    integrity of the state. The decision of GJ and others  makes  reference
    to the Sri Lankan authorities approach  being  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence as to  the  activities  in  the  Diaspora  (see  paragraph
    356(8)) and did not consider that attendance  at  demonstrations  alone
    would be sufficient to create a real risk or  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that such a person  would  attract  adverse  attention  (see
    paragraph 336 of GJ and others).  Furthermore  at  paragraph  351,  the
    attendance at demonstrations is not of itself evidence to person  is  a
    committed Tamil activist seeking to promote Tamil separatism within Sri
    Lanka and that it will be a question of fact in each case dependent  on
    the Diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

28. I am satisfied that the judge properly identified the issues in dispute
    at paragraph 28. It was open to the judge on the evidence before him to
    conclude that the Appellant and her husband had been involved  in  low-
    level and limited sur place activity in the United Kingdom as  set  out
    in the findings of fact at paragraph 41 and 45, namely  that  they  had
    attended at least one demonstration and had acted as volunteer  helpers
    for the TGTE, and that as a consequence were unlikely to  be  perceived
    as having a  "significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism within the Diaspora"(see paragraph 356(7a).  In reaching his
    overall findings the  judge  had  regard  to  the  photographs  of  the
    Appellant at a demonstration (see paragraph 36). The  material  in  the
    CIG at 6.9.3 made reference to the ITJP  report  and  that  in  several
    cases witnesses mentioned that they or their family  members  had  been
    questioned about their participation in anti-government protest or  war
    commemoration events abroad. It goes on to state "some reported the Sri
    Lankan security forces had showed them, or their families,  photographs
    of themselves at these protests. This indicates the Sri Lankan security
    forces are monitoring these gatherings outside the country."

29. However the judge rejected the Appellant's evidence of their being  any
    current interest in either her or her husband for the reasons  set  out
    at paragraph 42 and rejecting the  evidence  which  was  said  to  have
    emanated from a family member in Sri Lanka.

30. As the CIG and GJ set out, participating in Diaspora activities such as
    attending demonstrations is not in itself evidence that a  person  will
    attract adverse attention. Neither would a person's past history.

31. As to past history, the previous Tribunal had found that the  Appellant
    was a nurse and  that  in  the  turmoil  of  post-war  Sri  Lanka  LTTE
    activists were brought to the hospital where she had worked. Whilst  it
    was accepted that she was suspected of assisting in the escape of  some
    LTTE personnel, the judge found that this was  because  she  was  Tamil
    (see paragraph 110). The judge also found that she  was  released  from
    detention because she was not  a  high-profile  activist  and  was  not
    subject to intense scrutiny. The Tribunal also found that she was  able
    to leave Sri Lanka freely through the airport and that the most  likely
    explanation for leaving the airport without hindrance was the  same  as
    the explanation of her being released after interrogation that "she  is
    not a terrorist and no one thinks she is. She is Tamil." (See paragraph
    112).

32.  The FTT judge considered the issue  further  and  made  the  following
    finding of fact that the Appellant "not only exited  without  hindrance
    but obtained visas without difficulty or payment of  large  bribes,  as
    had her husband. I accept that GJ shows there is bribery and corruption
    but I find that the Appellant has not shown to the  lower  standard  of
    proof that she was of interest to the authorities and was only able  to
    leave by the use of bribery and corruption. Not only was  she  able  to
    leave the airport on her  own  passport,  that  both  herself  and  her
    husband obtained visas without claiming problems in doing so.  This  is
    not consistent with her being a person of interest to the  authorities.
    It is consistent with UTJ Perkins'  findings.  I  find  that  there  is
    nothing produced to me that  leads  me  to  depart  from  UTJ  Perkins'
    finding that she was not of interest to the  authorities  on  leaving."
    (At paragraph 43).

33. It was therefore open to the judge to  conclude  that  she  was  not  a
    person of adverse interest to the Sri Lanka authorities when  she  left
    Sri Lanka with her husband and that neither she nor  her  husband  were
    likely to be on a "stop list" or "watch list".

34. The letters referred to in UB (Sri Lanka) and which were annexed to the
    CIG dated 25 July 2014 (see paragraph 30), states that returnees may be
    questioned on arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID  and  that  this
    was normal practice for returnees to be asked about their activities in
    the country they were returning from,  including  whether  it  involved
    activity in any Tamil Diaspora groups.  The  material  also  refers  to
    their being no  known  arrests  based  on  membership  of  one  of  the
    proscribed groups.

35. The more recent CIG (which was before the judge) made reference to  the
    government having de-proscribed a number of Tamil groups which indicate
    that involvement with such organisations is not of itself likely to  be
    seen as a threat to the integrity of the state although it is right  to
    observe that the TGTE still remains a proscribed organisation.  As  set
    out earlier the judge found that their  low-level  sur  place  activity
    (which did not include membership of the TGTE) had been "prompted by  a
    desire to bolster their asylum claim. The delay in becoming involved is
    not consistent with firmly held political opinions, but  is  consistent
    with the wish to bolster a claim that has already been rejected  once."
    (See paragraph 41).

36. The judge considered the risk at  the  airport  in  the  light  of  his
    findings of fact and the CIG at paragraph  47  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant and her husband may be interviewed on return (although not at
    the airport) and found that "they can say that they are concerned about
    the treatment of Tamils and that they have been  on  demonstrations  of
    the UK and have volunteered if they so wish. Or they can say that  they
    became involved in activities to bolster their claim to remain  in  the
    UK as I have found. My decision does not  force  a  lie  upon  them  if
    questioned." Therefore it was open to the judge to conclude  that  they
    would be of no adverse interest to  the  authorities  as  it  would  be
    become clear that they would not be involved in ay  activities  in  Sri
    Lanka. Furthermore, even if photographic  evidence  had  been  gathered
    about the Appellant and her husband (from  a  demonstration)  it  would
    show them as having the role the judge found them to have  and  nothing
    to indicate to the  authorities  that  they  either  had  or  would  be
    perceived to have, any "significant role in any Diaspora activities."

37. Consequently I am satisfied that it was open to the judge to reach  the
    overall conclusion that there  was  nothing  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Appellant and her husband  were  those  who  either  had  or  would  be
    perceived as having a significant role in Diaspora  activities  in  the
    light of their past history as found by  UTJ  Perkins  and  any  recent
    activity and that they had not demonstrated that they  would  be  at  a
    real risk of harm on return. Therefore it  has  not  been  demonstrated
    that the judge's decision is vitiated  by  an  error  of  law  and  his
    decision shall stand.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                Date: 11th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

