
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2018                  |On 11 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              MN (Afghanistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal, of Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  born  on
    1 January 1972 against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    his appeal against the respondent's decision of 11 March 2018  refusing
    his application for asylum and humanitarian protection.





Background

2.   The basis of  the  appellant's  claim  can  briefly  be  summarised  as
    follows.  He claimed that  he  left  Afghanistan  in  2006,  travelling
    through various countries before entering the UK hidden in a lorry.  He
    came to the attention of the UK authorities when he was arrested on  30
    March 2017.  He was notified that he was liable to be removed from  the
    UK under immigration powers and he signed a disclaimer stating that  he
    wished to make a voluntary departure  as  soon  as  possible.   He  was
    detained but subsequently released and on 11 July 2017 he was  arrested
    again at a carwash as a person liable to be detained and  removed.   On
    14 July 2017 he applied for asylum.

3.   He said that he was in fear of  returning  to  Afghanistan  because  of
    problems with a cousin and he wished to claim asylum.  At his screening
    interview on 29 September 2017 he said that he  came  from  Kabul,  was
    married with four children whose ages were between 7 to 11  years  old.
    He was asked about his health and he said that he had an  ache  in  his
    leg and suffered from migraines, dizziness and depression.  He was  not
    on any medication but his condition affected his memory  as  he  forgot
    everything.  He had come to the UK because his country  was  not  safe:
    everywhere was covered in landmines  and  he  could  not  walk  freely.
    There were lots of problems in Afghanistan, including suicide  bombers,
    he feared Daesh, the Taliban and many other groups.   He  feared  being
    recruited by the Taliban and the government  was  also  telling  people
    that they should fight the Taliban.

4.   The respondent's reasons for  refusing  the  application  are  set  out
    fully in the Reasons for Decision annexed to  the  decision  letter  of
    11 March 2018.  While the respondent accepted that the  appellant  was
    from Afghanistan, he did not accept that he would be at any  risk  from
    the  Taliban  or  Daesh  or  that  he  would  be  unable  to  integrate
    successfully back into Afghan society on his return to Kabul.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant relied  not
    only on his statements but also on evidence  showing  his  NHS  patient
    record from the surgery he registered with on 8 June 2017 and a medical
    report by Dr Hajioff who assessed the appellant on 31 August 2018.   At
    [32] of the decision, the  judge  said  that  the  medical  report  had
    independent probative value as the doctor confirmed that the  appellant
    had scarring on his body typical of or consistent with his  account  of
    past mistreatment.  The judge has summarised the appellant's account of
    what he claimed had happened to him in Afghanistan in [16]-[18]: he had
    been abducted by the Taliban and forced to carry out  suicide  attacks,
    had then escaped and in the process got hit in the leg.   He  had  then
    been picked up by the Taliban in Kabul but had been able to escape from
    the pickup truck while the vehicle was moving and had then run for  ten
    minutes when he had been shot in the leg.  He could  not  remember  any
    more but had later woken up in hospital.  He also recalled being beaten
    by the Taliban when he tried to escape.

6.   He had been taken to a private hospital and after he recovered, he  had
    crossed the border into Pakistan where  he  had  spent  three  to  four
    years.  It was put to him that this was inconsistent  with  an  earlier
    answer that he had arrived in the UK in 2006 but  he  replied  that  he
    could not remember things correctly.  The  judge  also  noted  in  this
    context that the appellant had said that he had  been  beaten  in  Iran
    when he had been detained there and commented that the  medical  report
    also supported the appellant's account of suffering  from  memory  loss
    due to traumatic past experiences, which in the doctor's view supported
    the diagnosis of PTSD.

7.   On this issue of PTSD, the judge noted that the patient  record  showed
    that the appellant only complained of the signs and  symptoms  of  PTSD
    relatively recently, despite having first consulted a GP on 30 November
    2008.   On  that  occasion  and  also  in  2009,  2012  and  2013   his
    consultations were about routine matters and it was not until 24 August
    2017 that he first complained of suffering from PTSD.  The judge  noted
    that on 11 December 2017 the appellant had told the same GP that he was
    stressed about Afghanistan politics and  on  3  January  2018  he  told
    another GP that he had dreams of being pursued by  men  who  wanted  to
    kill him.  He also said that a friend who had been with him was shot at
    the time that he had been shot and later  died  in  hospital,  but  the
    judge commented that this account bore no relation to the  account  the
    appellant had given to the respondent which  made  no  reference  to  a
    friend being shot at the same time.  At a further session on 24 January
    2018 he gave a further account which corresponded more closely  to  the
    account he relied on for his asylum claim but did not feature a  friend
    being shot at and killed or of being abducted and then jumping  from  a
    moving vehicle.

8.   The judge's conclusions set out in [38] were that the appellant in  his
    dealings with the medical profession had displayed the same pattern  of
    mutation and embellishment that he had displayed in his  dealings  with
    the respondent and the Tribunal.  The judge said that  far  from  being
    consistent in his core  claim,  the  appellant  had  been  consistently
    inconsistent and internally contradictory and that his core  claim  ran
    counter to the objective evidence that the Taliban fell from  power  in
    2001 and ceased to have any presence in Kabul for many years thereafter
    [41].

9.    For  these  reasons  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proving to the lower standard  of  proof  that
    his account of past persecution was true.  He found that the  appellant
    did not have a profile which would stimulate adverse interest in him on
    the part of the Taliban and that his claim of ongoing adverse  interest
    ran counter to the country guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan
    CG [2018] UKUT 118.

10.  The judge went  on  to  consider  issues  of  humanitarian  protection,
    finding that the appellant did not qualify under  that  head  and  that
    returning him to Afghanistan would  not  be  in  breach  of  his  human
    rights.  There were no substantial grounds for believing that he  would
    have significant obstacles in reintegrating  to  life  and  society  in
    Kabul and that the decision to remove him struck a fair balance between
    his rights and the wider interests of the country's economic  wellbeing
    and the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

11.  In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that:

     (1) The judge recognised that the appellant was  a  vulnerable  person
         but failed to accept the policies in place for  the  way  he  could
         give evidence.  He had failed to consider  the  Joint  Presidential
         Guidance about vulnerable adults giving evidence.

    (2)  He failed to consider the evidence in the  light  of  the  medical
         evidence available to him and failed  to  give  the  appellant  the
         benefit of the doubt in an asylum matter.

    (3)  The appellant had stated his account of PTSD recently as this  was
         the  first  time   it   had   been   ventilated   via   his   legal
         representatives, to the medical expert and the  Tribunal.   He  had
         been consistent in his account regarding the  Taliban  and,  having
         found the appellant to have scars, the judge should have gone on to
         consider the risk to him in future on return.

    (4)  The judge failed to consider the appellant's evidence in the round
         or to apply the requisite standard.  The appellant's  central  core
         claim had remained consistent.

    (5)  At [41] the judge had said that the appellant had failed  to  give
         the correct dates about when the Taliban fell from  power  but  the
         judge had had the medical report and in substance had  adopted  the
         position of the respondent.  This was an easy position to adopt but
         ensured that proper findings could not  be  made  on  the  material
         evidence.

    (6)  The judge had failed in giving reasons beyond his primary  finding
         that the appellant had not been  consistent  before  the  Tribunal.
         The medical report had been brushed aside and as the appellant  was
         a vulnerable adult, the findings  made  in  the  decision  must  be
         vitiated.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that one of  the  reasons
    that the  judge  found  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible  was  his
    inconsistent account and it was arguably an error of law not to proceed
    in accordance with the guidance on vulnerability or at the  very  least
    explain why the same did not apply. It was arguable that he should have
    been treated as a vulnerable witness by reason  of  his  mental  health
    with the hearing conducted and his evidence assessed in accordance with
    the Joint Presidential Guidance.

13.  Mrs Mughal focused her submissions on an argument that  the  judge  had
    not dealt properly with the medical evidence or  applied  that  to  his
    assessment of the  credibility  issues.   The  guidance  in  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance should have been followed and the failure  to  do
    so tainted the judge's findings.  The judge had failed to consider  the
    evidence  about  the  appellant's  memory  loss  when   assessing   his
    credibility.  Mrs Mughal accepted that the issue of  vulnerability  had
    not to her recollection been  raised  at  the  hearing.   However,  the
    appellant had only recently obtained medical help.

14.  Mr Whitwell submitted that according to the Presidential Guidance,  the
    primary responsibility  for  identifying  vulnerability  lay  with  the
    representatives.  No issue had been raised at the hearing.   The  judge
    had considered the medical evidence and explained his concerns.  He had
    also fully explained why he did not accept the appellant's account  and
    why he would not be at risk on return to Afghanistan.

Assessment of the Issues

15.  The issue I must assess is whether the judge erred in  law  in  such  a
    way that the decision should be set aside.  Ground 1 raises  the  issue
    of vulnerability and argues that the judge  should  have  followed  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance and had erred by  failing  to  do  so.   Mr
    Whitwell is right to point out that  in  the  guidance  says  that  the
    primary responsibility for identifying vulnerable individuals lies with
    the party calling them,  but  representatives  may  fail  to  recognise
    vulnerability.  The guidance  also  makes  it  clear  that  before  the
    substantive hearing, in so far as it is possible, potential issues  and
    solutions should be identified at a CMHR or prehearing review  and  the
    case papers noted so that the  substantive  hearing  can  proceed  with
    minimal exposure to trauma or further trauma for  vulnerable  witnesses
    or appellants.  If there has not been a prehearing review or  the  case
    has been inadequately prepared, such matters should  in  any  event  be
    considered at the commencement of the substantive hearing.

16.  No issue was raised in the present  appeal  at  either  the  prehearing
    review or the hearing before the judge.  However, the judge was clearly
    aware of the potential significance of the medical  report  summarising
    it at [25]-[28], and when evaluating the evidence, the  medical  report
    was the first matter that the judge considered [32]-[37].  He was  also
    entitled to take into account as he did,  the  fact  that  the  patient
    record showed that the appellant had only complained of  the  signs  of
    PTSD relatively recently, 24 August 2017 and I  note  in  this  context
    that the appellant only claimed asylum on 14  July  2017  after  having
    been arrested on two occasions.

17.  The judge was also entitled to take into account the contradictions  in
    the  medical  evidence  at  [35]-[37]   in   addition   to   the   many
    contradictions in the appellant's own evidence such as whether  he  had
    arrived in the UK in 2006 or he  had  spent  three  to  four  years  in
    Pakistan after leaving Afghanistan and the fact that he  had  initially
    said that his cousin was the reason why he fled to the UK but  in  none
    of the other Taliban  narratives  given  by  the  appellant,  which  in
    themselves were contradictory, was there any reference to a cousin.

18.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  by  not  on  his  own
    initiative treating the appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness.  In  any
    event, neither in the grounds nor in submissions were  any  suggestions
    made as to what adjustments the judge should have made in  the  conduct
    of the hearing.

19.  Ground 2 argues that the appellant failed to consider  the  appellant's
    evidence in the light of the medical evidence.  There is  no  substance
    in this ground.  It is clear that the  judge  properly  considered  the
    medical evidence, taking it into account in the  round  when  assessing
    whether the appellant had discharged the onus of showing that he  would
    be at real risk of serious harm on return.

20.  Ground 3 raises the point that the appellant had given his  account  of
    PTSD recently as this was the first time it had been ventilated via his
    representatives and the medical expert but it was a  question  of  fact
    for the judge to decide what inferences could properly  be  drawn  from
    this issue being raised no earlier than 2017.  It is also  argued  that
    the appellant had been consistent in his account about the Taliban  but
    this was not the case.  The judge identified inconsistencies and it was
    for him to decide what weight should be attached to them.   The  ground
    also refers to scarring but, as the judge commented, the appellant  had
    also asserted at one stage that he had been  beaten  when  detained  in
    Iran [32].

21.  Ground 4 argues that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    evidence in the round and to apply the requisite standard.   The  claim
    that the appellant's account is consistent is repeated.   There  is  no
    substance in this ground.  The judge clearly did consider the  evidence
    in the round and properly directed himself on the standard of proof and
    there is no reason to believe that did not apply that standard.

22.  In ground 5 issue is taken with the judge's comment that the  appellant
    had failed to give correct dates about when the Taliban fell from power
    and that he had in essence adopted  the  position  of  the  respondent.
    There is no substance in this ground.  It was for the judge  to  decide
    what inferences should be drawn from errors made by the appellant about
    dates and far from adopting the position of the respondent, it is clear
    that the judge reviewed the evidence for himself.

23.  In ground 6, there is a challenge to the judge's primary  finding  that
    the appellant had not been consistent  with  the  Tribunal  and  it  is
    argued that he brushed aside the medical evidence and  failed  to  take
    the appellant's vulnerability into account.  This ground simply repeats
    matters covered by the other grounds and, in substance, is  an  attempt
    to re-argue issues of fact.

24.  In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me that the judge erred  in  law
    in any way requiring the decision to be  set  aside.   I  am  satisfied
    that, having reviewed the evidence,  the  judge  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly open to him for the reasons he gave.

Decision

25.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity direction made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains  in
    force until further order.


Signed   H J E Latter  Dated:  3 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

