
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/04910/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 January 2021               |           On 4 February 2021    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HOO (Nigeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hawkin, instructed by Clyde Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson, against a decision which was
    issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on 9 April  2020.   By  that
    decision, the judge  allowed  HOO's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.


 2. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the FtT: HOO as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.



Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK as a student in 2006 and was  subsequently
    granted periods of further leave to remain which ran until 26 September
    2014.  On 10 November 2015, he was convicted of  six  offences  in  the
    Crown Court at Birmingham.  The convictions followed a two-month trial.
     He was  convicted  of  making  false  representations;  concealing  or
    transferring  criminal   property;   two   counts   of   making   false
    representation; and two counts of possession of  articles  for  use  in
    fraud.  On 11 November 2015, HHJ Stacey sentenced the appellant to five
    years and six months' imprisonment.


 4. The respondent decided to deport the appellant on  14  July  2016.   He
    made a human rights claim, which was refused, and he  appealed  against
    the refusal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  relying  principally  on  his
    right to a family life with his son, T.  His appeal  was  dismissed  by
    FtT Judge Raikes and his appeal rights were exhausted on 25  May  2017.
    The appellant made two unsuccessful attempts  at  judicial  review,  in
    March 2017 and May 2018, and the respondent took steps  to  deport  him
    from the United Kingdom.  An emergency travel document was obtained and
    his deportation was scheduled for the  end  of  January  2019.   On  29
    January 2019, less than 24 hours prior to his  removal,  the  appellant
    claimed asylum, stating that he  was  in  fear  of  return  to  Nigeria
    because he was a bisexual man who could not live openly there.

 5. The respondent refused the  protection  claim  on  13  May  2019.   For
    reasons she gave at [7]-[18] of the letter of refusal,  the  respondent
    issued a certificate under s72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002,  thereby  concluding  that  the  Refugee  Convention's
    protection against refoulement could not be claimed  by  the  appellant
    for the reasons given in Article 33(2).  In any event, for reasons  she
    gave at [41]-[54] of that letter, the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant - who had a propensity for dishonesty and had failed to raise
    his claimed fear despite 'innumerable opportunities' -  had  fabricated
    his claimed bisexuality in an attempt to frustrate his removal from the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  second  time.
    His appeal came before Judge Pooler ("the judge"),  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 10 March 2020.  The appellant was represented by counsel,  the
    respondent by a Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence from
    the  appellant  and  submissions  from  both   representatives   before
    reserving his decision.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The reserved decision is logically sub-divided, carefully reasoned  and
    clearly the product of considerable thought.  The  judge  set  out  the
    appellant's immigration history and his offending history  at  [8]-[11]
    and [12]-[21].  The latter section included a careful analysis  of  the
    offending and the sentencing remarks of HHJ Stacey.  The material parts
    of s72 were set out at [22].  The judge directed himself  at  [23]-[24]
    that the  statutory  presumptions  (of  the  crime  being  particularly
    serious and the appellant  representing  a  danger  to  the  community)
    applied but that they were rebuttable.  At [26],  the  judge  concluded
    (unsurprisingly) that the first presumption was not rebutted.  At [27]-
    [30], the judge accepted, in reliance on an OASys report dated 29 March
    2018,  that  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the  presumption  that   he
    represented a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.


 8. At [30], the judge turned to the appellant's claim that his removal  to
    Nigeria would expose him to a risk of ill-treatment on account  of  his
    sexual orientation.  He began by citing what  had  been  said  by  Lord
    Rodger at [82] of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31; [2011] 1 AC 596.   He  then
    turned to consider whether the appellant was bisexual as  claimed.   In
    considering that question, the judge bore carefully in  mind  what  was
    said against  the  appellant's  claim,  and  noted  in  particular  the
    respondent's understandable reliance on the way in which the claim  had
    been made so shortly  before  removal.   He  noted  at  [35]  that  the
    appellant had dealt with the reasons for late disclosure at some length
    in his witness statement.  The judge noted that the appellant relied on
    adverse treatment he had suffered as a result of same sex  experiences,
    from university to his time in prison in the  UK:  [35]-[37].   He  had
    only felt able to disclose  his  sexual  orientation  when  he  was  in
    detention as a result of discussions with other detainees and a welfare
    officer: [39].  The judge noted that the appellant was  not  challenged
    on these matters in cross-examination:  [40].   The  judge  noted  that
    there was supporting evidence  form  two  gentlemen  but  that  neither
    attended the hearing,  thereby  reducing  the  weight  which  he  could
    properly attach to their written evidence: [41].  Taking  into  account
    the low standard of proof  and  the  fact  that  nothing  in  his  oral
    evidence  had  caused  the  judge  concern  as   to   the   appellant's
    credibility, he was prepared to  accept  that  the  appellant's  sexual
    orientation was as  claimed.   He  resolved  the  remaining  HJ  (Iran)
    questions in the appellant's favour and determined the  appeal  in  his
    favour on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.  I need not refer  to  his
    assessment of Article 8 ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The grounds upon which the respondent relied  in  her  application  for
    permission to appeal were as follows.  Firstly, she submitted that  the
    judge had misdirected himself in law in relation to  s72  of  the  2002
    Act.  Secondly, she submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take  the
    appellant's propensity for dishonesty into account in  concluding  that
    his sexual orientation was as claimed.  Judge Wilson granted permission
    to appeal on both grounds.

10. I heard a very brief submission from Mr Jarvis.  He withdrew the  first
    ground, noting  that  it  disclosed  no  legal  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment and failed to  engage  with  the  judge's  perfectly  proper
    reliance on the OASys assessment of  risk,  which  indicated  that  the
    appellant represented a low risk of  reoffending  and  a  low  risk  of
    serious harm.  I should  record  that  this  concession  was  not  only
    correct; it  was  inevitable.   As  Mr  Jarvis  noted,  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to rely on the  Probation  Officer's  assessment  of
    risk and to conclude that the appellant did not pose a  danger  to  the
    community of the UK.

11. Mr Jarvis did rely on the second ground, but did not  wish  to  develop
    it.  He relied upon it as pleaded and added nothing further.

12. I indicated to Mr Hawkin that I had received his  helpful  response  to
    the respondent's grounds, under rule 24 of  the  Procedure  Rules,  and
    that I did not need to call upon him to make oral submissions.   I  was
    able to indicate that the respondent's appeal would  be  dismissed  for
    reasons which would follow in writing.

Analysis

13. The gravamen of the respondent's second ground  amounts  to  this:  the
    appellant is a man with a series of serious convictions for offences of
    dishonesty and the judge failed to take that, or the delay in  claiming
    asylum, into account.  Insofar as  the  criticism  is  that  the  judge
    failed to take the delay into account, I cannot immediately  understand
    how that came to be  suggested  in  the  grounds.   The  judge  plainly
    considered the delay in claiming asylum at  length  but  he  considered
    that it  had  been  addressed  by  the  appellant,  who  had  not  been
    challenged on the point in  cross-examination.   Many  would  not  have
    resolved the issue in that way but that is nothing to the  point.   The
    judge did not err in law in reaching the conclusion that he did.


14. The respondent has a glimmer of a point in respect of  the  appellant's
    background of dishonesty, and I suspect it was the judge's omission  of
    express reference to that background in his analysis of the appellant's
    claim which caused Judge Wilson to  grant  permission  to  appeal.   On
    analysis, however, it is wholly unsurprising that Mr  Jarvis  chose  to
    say nothing in  support  of  this  ground.   The  judge's  decision  is
    obviously to be read as a whole and it is not desirable for a judge  to
    repeat that which has gone before.  Equally, it is trite that  a  judge
    need not spell out every facet of their reasoning process in coming  to
    findings of fact.  No authority need be cited for  these  propositions,
    and it might also seem superfluous to remind myself that the FtT is  an
    expert Tribunal tasked with administering a difficult body  of  law  in
    challenging circumstances and that it is likely that it  will  get  the
    law right.

15. Reading the judge's decision in that way, it cannot  properly  be  said
    that he lost sight of the appellant's criminality and his background of
    dishonesty.  There is a significant section  of  the  judge's  decision
    dedicated to an analysis of  that  criminality,  as  described  in  the
    sentencing remarks of HHJ Stacey.  There is also citation, at  [19]  of
    the judge's decision, of the very passage in those  sentencing  remarks
    which is said by the respondent to have been left out of account.   The
    judge clearly took a great deal of care to  inform  himself  about  the
    appellant's offending and to understand precisely what had been made by
    the sentencing judge of his manipulative behaviour during the offending
    in question.   It  cannot  sensibly  be  submitted  that  this  careful
    analysis escaped the judge's attention when he  came  to  consider  the
    appellant's claim to be a bisexual man.  It might have been  better  if
    he had made  brief  reference  to  the  history  of  deception  in  his
    subsequent analysis but I must firmly reject the  submission  that  the
    history was left out of account.

16. For these reasons, I come to the clear  conclusion  that  there  is  no
    error of law disclosed by the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal.   Her
    appeal is therefore dismissed and the decision of the FtT shall  stand.




Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  FtT,
allowing the appeal on asylum grounds, stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             22 January 2021



















