
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04457/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On July 18, 2019                     |On August 6, 2019                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    M A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Zimbabwean national and entered the  United  Kingdom
    with her mother in April 2007.  On June 22,  2007  her  mother  claimed
    asylum with the appellant as her dependant.  On August  23,  2007  that
    claim was withdrawn.

 2. On November 20, 2007 the appellant applied in her own right  for  leave
    to remain as the dependent relative of her sister, but this was refused
    with no right of appeal on February 11, 2008.  On December 8, 2009  the
    appellant  claimed  asylum  after  being  encountered  by   Immigration
    Officers the previous day.  Her application was refused on January  11,
    2010 and her appeal against that decision was dismissed by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on November 1, 2010.   Subsequent  appeals  to  both  the
    Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal  were  rejected  with  the  most
    recent rejection being on January 6, 2012.

 3. The appellant subsequently lodged further submissions  in  relation  to
    her asylum claim on July 13, 2012  and  April  29,  2015.   These  were
    refused by the respondent on November 28,  2012  and  October  7,  2015
    respectively.  The appellant challenged the most  recent  decision  and
    following judicial review proceedings, and by consent,  the  respondent
    agreed to withdraw the latter decision on January 31, 2017  and  agreed
    to reconsider the application.

 4. The respondent subsequently refused that application on April 18,  2017
    and on May 10, 2017  the  appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on
    November 27, 2017.  In a decision promulgated on February 18, 2018  the
    Judge accepted her appeal and allowed her appeal on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on February 20,  2018
    and permission to appeal was granted on March 6, 2018 by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Wright and the matter came before me on  7  January
    2019.

 6. The key argument that the appellant would be identified  for  a  second
    interview at the airport was erroneous against the conclusions  in  the
    more recent Country Guidance cases that made it clear that even persons
    with a substantial MDC profile could safely relocate to Bulawayo  which
    was not something the Judge had considered

 7. I found there was an error in law because no country evidence supported
    Mr Draycott's submission, placed before the FTT Judge, that members  of
    Restoration of Human Rights (ROHR) have been targeted by the CIO as the
    Country Guidance decisions of HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00094, EM and Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT
    98 (IAC) and CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 59 (IAC) were concerned with persons linked to the MDC and did not
    appear to relate to persons linked to ROHR.  I also noted the FTT Judge
    had not considered the question of internal relocation.

 8. I adjourned the appeal for further country evidence and this  case  was
    listed on 3 April 2019. That  hearing  was  adjourned  administratively
    because an expert report, from Dr  Diana  Jeater,  on  whether  persons
    connected to ROHR faced a real risk of persecution in Zimbabwe was  not
    available.

 9. I preserved for today's hearing the findings  made  by  the  FTT  Judge
    about the appellant's activities as set out in paragraph 15 of the  FTT
    Judge's decision and indicate that the issue for  today's  hearing  was
    two-fold:

      a) Would the appellant face either persecution or serious harm for her
         accepted activities as a member of ROHR?

      b) Was internal relocation available?

10. These findings are:

      a) The appellant is the branch secretary of the Nottingham  branch  of
         ROHR.

      b)  They  are   involved   in   arranging   protests   and   attending
         demonstrations.

      c) The appellant attended meetings of the ROHR NEC in London.

      d) She has attended various vigils on  London  arranged  by  ZHRO  and
         Zimvigil.

      e) Photographs  of  those  attending  and  protesting  at  vigils  are
         available online on various  sources  including  Nehanda  Radio  an
         online newspaper, the Flickr pages of ZHRO and  ROHR  and  Zimbabwe
         Vigil page.

      f) The appellant created a weekly blog, Urthought, in 2014 but she  is
         no longer in control of the blog.

11. The respondent indicated in a letter dated 2 April 2019 that  he  would
    be relying on the February 2019 Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    "Zimbabwe: Opposition to the government".

12. The appellant's representatives have provided the following material:

      a) Bundle A which contained:

          i) Expert report of Professor Diana Jeater dated  10  April  2019
             and an addendum.

         ii) Four witness  statements  from  the  appellant  including  two
             recent statements dated 18 March 2019 and 9 July 2019

        iii) Emails and letters exchanged between the appellant and CM.

         iv) Statements from CC, ROHR UK secretary.

          v) Other evidence identifying the appellant's activities  on  the
             internet.

         vi) Evidence about the activities of ROHR

      b) Bundle B which contained country evidence.

      c) Bundle C which contained the case of HS (returning asylum  seekers)
         Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008



13. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    ORAL EVIDENCE

14. The appellant adopted her two recent statements and gave oral evidence.



15. The first statement  described  what  happened  to  a  friend  who  had
    returned to Zimbabwe in January 2019 to visit  family  on  her  British
    passport but was detained by soldiers as she left  the  airport.  Video
    evidence was provided to support the account put  forward.  Her  friend
    was eventually taken to  the  British  Embassy,  at  her  request,  who
    arranged for her to leave Zimbabwe the following day. The friend stated
    she was repeatedly asked whether she supported the ruling party.

16. Her second statement confirmed she had continued  to  attend  meetings,
    demonstrations and vigils to express her views about the  situation  in
    Zimbabwe. She went on to clarify that she had recently  started  a  new
    blog, having finished her exams, which highlighted killings, abuse  and
    questioning of bystanders. If she was returned to Zimbabwe, she  stated
    she would want to continue with her  activities  and  consequently  she
    would be in danger in Zimbabwe because on  return  she  would  face  an
    interrogation and it was reasonably likely she would be detained within
    the airport. If she made it out of the airport unharmed, she  submitted
    that she would continue her opposition to the government by  expressing
    her views in a similar manner to how she has here and  would  therefore
    be at risk of persecution from the authorities. She confirmed  she  had
    attended a vigil on 12 July 2019 when  a  Zimbabwean  minister  was  in
    attendance. It was reported on the news on 16 July 2019 that whilst the
    government accepted people could  protest  the  government  wanted  the
    people recorded as throwing water at the minister be prosecuted by  the
    UK authorities. She confirmed that she was not shown as doing  anything
    on the CCTV.

17. She claimed she would be unable to relocate outside of  Harare  due  to
    her ethnicity and she has no family remaining in Zimbabwe as they  have
    either left the country or died.

    SUBMISSIONS

18. Ms Aboni relied on the original reasons for refusal letter  and  stated
    that whilst the respondent accepted the appellant was actively involved
    with ROHR, she submitted ROHR was not an opposition party and would not
    be considered by the authorities to have a political profile. There was
    no evidence that persons involved with ROHR faced any  risk  on  return
    and whilst there may be video footage at  a  recent  protest  there  is
    nothing to say she would be identified on it or would face  persecution
    on return. She placed  reliance  on  CM  and  submitted  failed  asylum
    seekers, with no substantial profile with MDC,  would  not  face  risk.
    There was little evidence of human rights abuse against ROHR activists.



19. The recent country policy information note, from 2.4 onwards,  assessed
    the risk to opposition party members. At 2.4.14 and 2.4.18  the  report
    suggested that problems had declined since 2008 and smaller  opposition
    parties faced less risk of discrimination because they did not  pose  a
    significant threat to the Zanu-PF.

20. ROHR was not a political party and the appellant  had  failed  to  show
    members of ROHR would face any risk.

21. There was the option of internal relocation to another area  especially
    as the Tribunal found people linked to the MDC were able to relocate to
    areas of lower density such as to Bulawayo.

22. Mr Draycott adopted his skeleton argument and invited me to  allow  the
    appeal. He emphasised that a person who  was  forcibly  returned  would
    face facing a  deteriorating  situation  as  evidenced  by  the  recent
    evidence in the bundle (see statement of C M) and the situation was now
    worse than that considered in HS.

23. Mr Draycott referred to the expert evidence  of  Professor  Jeater  and
    pointed to the problems facing failed asylum seekers on their return to
    Zimbabwe. There were articles printed in Zimbabwe (Sunday  Mail)  which
    attacked ROHR for links to Kate Hoey MP. The  expert's  conclusion  was
    Zimbabwean nationals were detained and foreign nationals were deported.
    There was recent evidence that bloggers were targeted, and  this  would
    also affect this appellant.

24.  In  the  latest  CPIN,  Mr  Draycott  accepted  simply   attending   a
    demonstration would not place you at risk or lead to you  being  viewed
    as an opponent, but he submitted organisers of  such  events  could  be
    perceived as political agitators. Paragraph 2.4.25 of CPIN  highlighted
    that if a person held a prominent position within a civil society  then
    that person may be at risk of serious harm and persecution.

25. The FTT Judge had accepted the appellant held  office  from  2012.  The
    appellant was no longer able to sign into her  blogs  and  Mr  Draycott
    submitted this was evidence she  had  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities or the CIO. A search for her on Google  links  her  to  the
    ROHR and to her vocal criticism of the regime. Her blogs could be found
    from page D48 onwards.

26. Mr Draycott submitted:

      a) The respondent's approach was inconsistent  with  the  approach  at
         103, 104 and 153 in HS. The CIO has invested considerable resources
         to infiltrate such groups and to identify  activists.  It  was  not
         disputed that such people, in the  United  Kingdom,  work  for  the
         government. At page 44-45 CC confirmed as much in his own statement
         provided in the appellant's bundle.

      b) She would be forcibly returned to Zimbabwe. Even  if  she  was  not
         identified as an activist she will still be  questioned  about  her
         activities in the United Kingdom as been  here  a  long  time.  The
         respondent accepts people are not expected to lie  in  the  airport
         and the CIO will ask why she claimed  asylum  and  her  involvement
         with ROHR will come out.

      c) At 4.2 of Ms Jeater's main report details  ROHR's  activities.  She
         states there is evidence that its leader was identified to  replace
         the  MDC  leader  at  one  stage  it  would  be  inconceivable  the
         government would not view them as a threat.

27. Turning to Bundle B, he  highlighted  several  reports  that  supported
    Professor Jeater's claim that there was increasing paranoia within  the
    government and it was becoming brutal and restrictive. Articles between
    320-327 highlight ROHR activists having been assaulted and their  human
    rights trampled on.

28. The CPIN reports accepted it may be unduly harsh to  expect  people  of
    Shona ethnicity (like this appellant) to go to Bulawayo or Matabeleland
    for the reason given by Professor Jeater in her  report.  Even  if  she
    were to be able to leave the airport, she would be  returning  with  no
    family and no support in Zimbabwe and would face risk of  serious  harm
    as unlikely to find employment except for jobs that would place her  at
    serious risk and would face destitution.

    ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS

29. The issues facing this Tribunal followed on from the findings  made  by
    the FTT Judge about the  appellant's  activities  in  Zimbabwe  and  my
    previous findings on what needed to be provided  by  both  parties  for
    this resumed hearing.

30. The FTT Judge found the appellant  to  have  generally  given  credible
    evidence and inconsistencies did not go to the heart of her claim.  Her
    account was corroborated by documents.

31. In assessing whether the appellant will face a risk of  persecution  or
    serious harm as a result of her  activities,  I  must  consider  former
    decisions of the Tribunal/Courts and  the  further  evidence  that  has
    adduced.

32. The Tribunal in CM confirmed that the earlier  guidance  given  by  the
    Tribunal in EM and Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)
    was not vitiated.  The only  change  to  that  guidance  arose  from  a
    decision issued by the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38.
    The Tribunal in CM stated:

         (1) As a general matter, there is  significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN. In particular, the evidence  does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

         (2) The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of
         a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control. The adverse attention may well involve a  requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure. Persons who have shown themselves not
         to be favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled to  international
         protection, whether or not they could 2 and would do whatever might
         be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe)).

         (3) The situation is not uniform across the  relevant  rural  areas
         and there may be reasons why a particular individual,  although  at
         first sight appearing to fall within the category described in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

         (4) In general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.

         (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         (6) A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

         (7) The issue of what is  a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with  a  wellfounded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

         (8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general, more 3  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.

         (9) The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.

         (10) As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.

         (11) In certain cases, persons found to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

33. Whilst this appellant is not directly  connected  to  the  MDC,  it  is
    accepted she is  connected  to  a  civil  society  organisation  which,
    according to the evidence now adduced, has challenged the  regime.   Mr
    Draycott's submission is that such behaviour was sufficient  to  engage
    both the Refugee Convention and ECHR  legislation.   Mrs  Aboni  argued
    that there was no evidence that persons connected to this  organisation
    have been targeted by the authorities.

34. The appellant's representatives have adduced a large bundle of  country
    evidence about the ROHR. This evidence can be found in Bundle A of  the
    folders  submitted.  At  C46  there  is  a   letter   from   ET,   ROHR
    President/Founder, who confirmed this appellant's involvement  in  ROHR
    and stated the appellant spoke  out  against  human  rights  abuses  in
    Zimbabwe and on behalf of ROHR as well as spearheading the campaign  to
    create greater awareness and participation in ROHR by the use of fliers
    and public speaking. She believed that prominent ROHR  activists,  such
    as the appellant, faced imminent threats when returned to Zimbabwe.

35. Evidence contained in Section D of Bundle B highlighted her presence in
    the public domain. Her original and current blog remain visible on  the
    internet and therefore readable by anyone who cares to search for  such
    documents. Searches on google highlight her name, position (secretary),
    telephone number, meetings attended but the search results do  not  say
    anything about what happened at the meetings or what she said or did.

36. Her most recent blog entry described her as a "human  rights  activist"
    and outlined her opposition to the present  government  and  questioned
    whether the people were free from the old Zanu  PF  because  there  was
    evidence, she  reported,  that  unarmed  civilians  were  shot  by  the
    Zimbabwe National Army, CIO and Zanu PF militia in Harare, Bulawayo and
    other locations in Zimbabwe. Her previous blog  criticised  the  health
    facilities in the country and attached the actions of the Zanu  PF  and
    former President Mugabe. Her articles are not a "call to  arms"  or  an
    attack on the government itself. Her articles criticise the government.



37. ROHR  have  expressed  concern  over  the  deteriorating  human  rights
    situation in Zimbabwe and condemned the shooting of  unarmed  civilians
    set out above, the blocking of social media platforms like WhatsApp and
    Facebook, the detention of children with their  parents,  the  planting
    ZANU  PF  youths  amongst  peaceful  demonstrators  with  a   view   to
    instigating and leading looting and violence.

38. Mr Draycott urged me to accept that her activities and  those  of  ROHR
    are akin to her being a member of the MDC and therefore covered by  the
    country guidance decisions set out above.

39. Ms Aboni argued that being a member of a civil liberties group  is  not
    the same as being a member of a political party. She placed reliance on
    ROHR's description of itself, on its own website, in which it described
    itself  as  being  a  non-political  organisation,  whose  members  are
    passionate and committed to bringing about  change  in  Zimbabwe.  They
    strongly subscribed to the founding principles of returning Zimbabwe to
    the apex of  human  rights  vanguard  and  an  economic  powerhouse  on
    regional and international levels. ROHR  Zimbabwe  is  founded  on  the
    following objectives:

      a) To educate and encourage Zimbabweans to stand together  and  demand
         that their human rights issues be addressed.

      b) To encourage active  participation  of  Zimbabweans  in  governance
         issues including their constitutional rights.

      c) To work closely  with  other  organizations  that  share  the  same
         objectives and values nationally, regionally and internationally.

40. The two reports of Professor Jeater were provided to  give  an  updated
    position of what the appellant  may  face  were  she  to  be  returned.
    Professor Jeater based her report on regular trips  to  Zimbabwe  (last
    was August 2018), correspondence with  residents,  scrutiny  of  online
    press reports and social media reports. Professor Jeater  concluded  as
    follows:

      a) The army, rather than the police or  Zanu  PF  affiliated  militia,
         exerts more political control since Mnangagwa assumed power.

      b) The state has used internet blackouts to assist operations  against
         targets.

      c) The airport manifests were monitored as evidenced by the  fact  two
         high-profile opposition activists were arrested on arrival  at  the
         airport in January 2019 although all charges were later dropped.

      d) Activists  have  been  taken  to  the  airport  for  detention  and
         interrogation indicating there is still a CIO interrogation  centre
         operating at the airport.

      e) Person with significant profiles (President  of  Amalgamated  Rural
         Teachers Union, family members of the Chairperson of the Crisis  in
         Zimbabwe Coalition, Secretary-General  of  Zimbabwean  Congress  of
         Trade and MDC MP) have been detained and interrogated.

      f) In January 2019 a well-known social media activist was driven  into
         exile which indicates it is not necessary to be a member of the MDC
         to be regarded as an enemy by state-forces.

      g) Detentions in May 2019 were part of a  larger  crackdown  on  civil
         society  organisations  framed  around  a  plot  to  overthrow  the
         President. ROHR was named in the newspaper report but  the  actions
         against the other groups indicate the government is  determined  to
         silence any form of outspoken criticism.

      h)  There  is  evidence  that  Ndebele  nationalism  is  growing  with
         increasing anti-Shona sentiment in Matabeland.

      i) The situation based on previous Country Guidance appears  to  still
         be in place.

      j) ROHR is a well-known human rights group, closely associated to  the
         London Vigil, has a presence in both the United  Kingdom  where  it
         provides support for  asylum  seekers  and  in  Zimbabwe  where  it
         represents the concerns of the Zimbabwean diaspora.  Following  the
         appointment of Mnangagwa ROHR has become  more  confrontational  in
         its demands that the government should  be  subject  to  sanctions.
         ROHR has been attacked in Sunday Mail (Zimbabwe) for  it  links  to
         Kate Hoey MP.

      k) She would be unable to live in rural lands without access to  land.
         There is negligible work  for  women  in  rural  areas  apart  from
         schools and clinics. The economy  is  facing  hyper  inflation  and
         wages are low.

      l) The army has a countrywide presence whereas the Zanu PF  were  only
         affective in certain areas (not Bulawayo where the MDC was  notably
         strong) there was evidence of a  crackdown  by  soldiers  in  these
         "safer areas". The Zanu PF has recently won a seat on the  Bulawayo
         council.

      m) Internal relocation has  fundamentally  changed  during  2019.  The
         relative security offered in Bulawayo, where the  Zanu  PF  were  a
         minority, no longer exists. The army, as  against  the  police  and
         Zanu PF militias, now carry out most acts of politically  motivated
         violence.

      n) The appellant's profile aligns closely with the profiles of many of
         the activists who have been detained.

41. The CPIN February 2019 provides the government's view on "Opposition to
    the government". It concludes:

      a) Though the political landscape has remained relatively stable since
         CM and EM were promulgated, largely as a result of the threat posed
         by the state security apparatus and relative weakness of opposition
         groups, there is a lack of  clear  and  cogent  evidence  that  the
         government has, in practice, fundamentally  changed  the  political
         environment or how it treats those opposed to the state.

      b) The political space is controlled by the ruling ZANU-PF which  uses
         the state security apparatus to  harass  and  intimidate  those  in
         opposition to it. While levels of  politically  motivated  violence
         and human rights violations committed by the  security  forces  and
         ZANU-PF supporters against opposition party members have  generally
         declined since 2008, these fluctuate, with recent peaks being  seen
         in the 2018 post-election period and in  response  to  the  current
         economic situation. Most violations take place in  areas  dominated
         by the ZANU-PF, including  Manicaland,  Mashonaland  and  parts  of
         Harare. There  is  evidence  that  members  of  smaller  opposition
         parties face lower  levels  of  official  discrimination  than  the
         larger MDC factions because they do  not  represent  a  significant
         threat to the ZANU-PF. There have also  been  incidents  of  intra-
         party human rights violations within MDC and ZANU-PF factions.

      c) A person who is, or perceived to be, a supporter of the MDC-T is in
         general not likely to be at risk of persecution or serious harm  in
         low or medium density areas of  Harare,  Bulawayo  or  Matabeleland
         generally.

      d) However, MDC-T members or those perceived to support the MDC are in
         general likely to face serious harm or persecution in high  density
         areas of Harare and rural  areas  (other  than  Matabeleland  where
         there have been fewer incidents recorded).

      e) Persons belonging to other, smaller opposition political parties  -
         including MDC-N, MDC-R/Peoples Democratic Party  and  the  National
         People's Party - are in  general  less  likely  to  be  of  adverse
         interest to the state and its proxies than supporters of the MDC-T,
         and therefore are unlikely to be subject to treatment that  by  its
         nature and repetition amounts to persecution.

      f) Each case, however,  needs  to  be  considered  on  its  individual
         merits, taking into account the person's profile, activities,  area
         of origin and proposed area of return, with the onus on the  person
         to demonstrate that may face a risk of persecution.

      g) Demonstrations about the government's management of the economy are
         seen by the  authorities  as  politically  motivated,  even  though
         people without strong political views have taken part.  During  the
         January 2019 demonstrations, there have been reports that  security
         services used excessive  force  on  protesters  and  those  in  the
         vicinity. Those  perceived  to  have  been  in  opposition  to  the
         government at this time have  faced  harassment,  arrest  and  ill-
         treatment including assaults,  gun-shot  related  injuries  and  at
         least 8 deaths. Further direct targeting  of  the  opposition  (and
         perceived opposition) including NGOs continued  after  the  initial
         violence,  through  house  raids,  arrests   and   detentions.   be
         considered on  its  individual  merits,  taking  into  account  the
         person's profile, activities, area of origin and proposed  area  of
         return, with the onus on the person to demonstrate that may face  a
         risk of persecution.

      h) Although there have been recent  protests  and  civil  unrest,  the
         House of Lords has established that a state of civil war  or  civil
         instability and/or where law and order has broken down does not  of
         itself give rise to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
         Convention reason. The onus is on the  person  to  demonstrate  why
         they face a risk above and beyond  the  general  inherent  incurred
         during a time of civil unrest.

      i) It is unlikely that a person will be at risk on return  purely  for
         having taken part in demonstrations. However,  those  organising  a
         demonstration may be at risk if the government perceives them to be
         political agitators. This will depend on their profile,  activities
         and past experiences with the authorities, with each  case  needing
         to be considered on its own facts.

      j) The authorities use legal restrictions to impede or interfere  with
         the activities of civil  society  organisations  and  human  rights
         defenders perceived to be Page 11 of 79 critical of the government.
         Prominent activists, who  are  vocal  in  their  criticism  of  the
         government, may be at risk of serious harm or persecution.

42. The view of the courts and many commentators appears  to  be  that  the
    guidelines given in CM remain and simply being an opposition member  or
    member of a civil society organisation or human rights  defender  would
    not place a returning failed asylum seeker at risk of persecution.

43. Against the above background, I make the following findings:

      a) The appellant would be returned and treated as  a  person  who  has
         been  absent  from  Zimbabwe  since  April  2007.  If  she  had   a
         significant profile she may  be  detained  and  questioned  in  the
         airport. If that happened, she would not be expected to  lie  about
         her activities and the authorities would become aware, if they were
         not already, of what she had been doing  following  questioning  at
         the airport. Whether  this  would  happen  depended  on  individual
         circumstances. In SSHD v MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797  it  was
         held that the guidance in  CM  covers  what  happens  in  terms  of
         screening at the airport [202] - [205].  There was no  scrutiny  at
         the airport for positive indications of loyalty to ZANU-PF and "low
         level MDC supporters" were not the sort of activists who would fall
         foul of the authorities at the airport.  The  important  point  was
         that a real risk  of  ill-treatment  depended  on  an  individual's
         profile as an MDC supporter being significant.

      b) The appellant has campaigned for peoples' rights and has written  a
         number of blogs and her name can be found using google. Whilst  the
         "google links" tell me  little  of  her  activities  they  do  make
         reference  to  her  personal  details  and  position  which   would
         highlight to the authorities her role  within  ROHR  albeit  little
         evidence of her actions are within the public domain.

      c) Having considered all the evidence adduced I find it is  reasonably
         likely that the appellant does have a  profile,  but  I  reject  Mr
         Draycott's submission that her profile is  significant  or  mirrors
         the profiles of persons who have been reported  as  recently  being
         detained. The fact C M was detained  and  then  released  does  not
         necessarily mean this appellant would be detained.

      d) If returned to Harare, she will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area  but
         the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density  areas   is   more
         challenging. I find the socio-economic circumstances in Bulawayo or
         Harare facing this appellant would make life more difficult for her
         but having concluded she does not have a significant profile it  is
         not reasonably likely she will be targeted for harassment.

      e) She has stated she would engage in political activities  likely  to
         attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF or  the  authorities,  but
         she would be able to relocate to an area where  the  Zanu  PF  have
         little or no influence. The fact the Zanu PF won a seat in a recent
         election near Bulawayo  does  not  mean  they  have  established  a
         powerbase in that area.

      f) Her sex, the length of time she has spent in  the  United  Kingdom,
         her lack of qualifications or anyone to turn  to  may  create  some
         problems for the appellant but these  are  insufficient  to  engage
         article 3 or article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.

      g) Whilst I note the views of Professor Jeater, I  find  that  nothing
         she has highlighted differs from the view of the  Tribunal  in  CM.
         The significant change is the person  in  power  and  the  evidence
         adduced does not persuade me that  this  appellant's  circumstances
         would entitle her to any form of protection from this country.

44. Based on my findings above, I do not find it is reasonably likely  that
    given this  appellant's  personal  and  individual  circumstances  that
    returning her to Zimbabwe would engage the Refugee Convention or in the
    alternative article 3 ECHR.

45. As regards any private life claim, I find that  any  private  life  has
    been  established  whilst  she  has  been  here  without   leave.   Her
    immigration history,  above,  demonstrates  numerous  rejections  since
    2007. She has effectively been here  unlawfully  throughout.  The  only
    private life advanced centres around her  activities  in  light  of  my
    earlier findings I find removing the appellant  in  such  circumstances
    would not be disproportionate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I remake the decision and dismiss the  appellant's  appeal  under  both  the
Refugee Convention, the Qualification Directive and ECHR legislation.


Signed                              Date     29/07/2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal no fee award can be made.


Signed                              Date     29/07/2019
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

