







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04976/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 23 April 2019                    | On: 01 May 2019                     |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                    [S J]

                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms F Harris, counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS









      Direction Regarding Anonymity

      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  17  July  1990.  She
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Talbot dismissing her  asylum  and  human  rights  claims  in  a
      decision promulgated on 20 February 2019.

   2. She claimed that she faced persecution in Pakistan on account  of  her
      religion and her membership of a particular social group, namely women
      in Pakistan. Her marriage to  her  husband,  Imran  Rafique,  was  not
      accepted by his family as she is an Ahmadi Muslim. She  was  verbally,
      physically and sexually abused by various members of their families in
      Pakistan when their secret marriage came to light.

   3. She also claimed to have been openly practising her  Ahmadi  faith  in
      the UK. Her husband had also now converted to the Ahmadi faith. On  20
      December 2018, she and her husband had a  meeting  with  His  Holiness
      Mirza Masroor Ahmad. On 24 December 2018 she shared  a  photograph  of
      this meeting on Facebook. This she claims led to her in  laws  finding
      out about it [14].

   4. On 2 January 2019 her mother in law published a notice  of  disclaimer
      of inheritance in "Har Lamha", a Pakistani daily newspaper, the effect
      of which was to bar her husband from his inheritance.

   5. There was also a notice published in the same newspaper on 10  January
      2019 regarding their opposition to their son's marriage. In  addition,
      her brother in  law  has  obtained  a  fatwa  from  a  Sunni  seminary
      declaring both the appellant and  her  husband  to  be  apostates  and
      infidels, accusing them of engaging in illicit sexual activity [14].




      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn

   6. Judge Talbot referred to  the  decision  and  findings  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated on 14 September  2017.  This  was  an
      appeal by the appellant  and  her  husband  against  the  respondent's
      decision date 8 March 2016 refusing their applications  for  leave  to
      remain. He noted his "very negative credibility assessment"  including
      the making of false statements in visit  visa  applications  [19].  He
      noted that there was no reference in Judge Quinn's decision  regarding
      their fear of return because either of them were following the  Ahmadi
      faith. It is unlikely that he would have failed to refer to this if it
      had been put forward [24].

   7. Judge Quinn did not believe the husband's claim that he had not  known
      anything about asylum or that he had been misadvised by  the  previous
      solicitors. They had changed solicitors and  still  did  not  make  an
      asylum claim. He did not find it credible that  they  would  not  have
      made an asylum claim on arrival if they had genuinely feared for their
      lives. Nor was any medical report produced  substantiating  the  claim
      that she had suffered torture [19]. Judge Talbot set out  the  reasons
      for refusal at [18].

   8. Judge Talbot stated at [35], that whilst accepting that the  appellant
      and her husband have formally joined the Ahmadi community in  the  UK,
      he was not satisfied that this was out of genuine conviction, nor  was
      he satisfied that they would have any intention to follow  this  faith
      on return to Pakistan, as their primary motivation for their behaviour
      was to advance their asylum claim.

   9. Even if the newspaper postings are genuine, he was not satisfied  that
      these postings alone, which would have been motivated  solely  by  the
      wish to pursue the asylum claim, would be sufficient to  lead  to  the
      couple suffering  any  serious  harm,  unless  they  proceeded  to  be
      actively engaged in practising and publicly propagating their  claimed
      Ahmadi faith [35].

  10. He was not satisfied that it is  the  intention  of  either  of  their
      families to actively pursue the couple or to cause them  serious  harm
      [36]. They had the option of moving to another part of Pakistan.  They
      were  both  educated  and  the  appellant's  husband  had  substantial
      business experience.

  11. He was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  face  very  serious
      difficulties in re-establishing her life in Pakistan where she and her
      husband have lived for the majority of their lives [38]

  12. Ms Harris, who also represented the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, submitted that the Judge failed appropriately to assess  the
      Facebook evidence and the newspaper articles.

  13. The original newspaper articles were produced  at  the  hearing  on  4
      February 2019. Ms Harris produced them to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  This
      includes the photograph produced of the appellant with her husband and
      His  Holiness  Mirza  Masroor  Ahmad  and  the  declaration  that  the
      appellant is Ahmadi. That photograph was published on Facebook.

  14. She referred to [32] where the Judge stated that he  treats  all  this
      recent evidence with  "...  serious  doubts  as  to  its  authenticity
      (including the newspaper articles". Further, it is highly likely  that
      this evidence has been produced simply as a very last  minute  attempt
      to bolster the appellant's asylum claim.

  15. She submitted that although the original newspapers  containing  these
      articles were provided, the Judge did not  make  a  finding  that  the
      articles were never published in Pakistan or that the newspapers  have
      been forged or produced by the appellant.  Nor  has  any  reason  been
      given to justify any such implied finding.

  16. She referred to appellant's bundle at C434, which shows the photograph
      in the newspaper published in Sri Lanka of the appellant together with
      the leader of the Ahmadiyya faith and her husband.  That  article  was
      published in a newspaper in Pakistan. There is also a large photograph
      produced at page  30  showing  the  appellant,  her  husband  and  the
      Ahmadiyya leader.

  17. That photograph showing them with the  leader  of  the  Ahmadiyya  was
      published on Facebook: C417. There are  also  comments  of  a  hostile
      nature identified on that page. This includes comments  such  as  "may
      you die with Allah's will", "these people are infidels", "liable to be
      killed".

  18. The authenticity of these publications was not challenged.

  19. Ms Harris referred to the Judge's finding at [35]  that  even  if  the
      newspaper postings are genuine, he was not satisfied that the postings
      alone, which are motivated solely by the wish  to  pursue  the  asylum
      claim, would be sufficient to lead them to  suffer  any  serious  harm
      unless they proceeded to be actively engaged in practising that faith.
      She submitted that the Judge failed to consider this against  relevant
      country information.

  20. The Home Office CPIN Pakistan: Ahmadis, June 2018,  produced  at  C28,
      noted at 6.5.10 that the Ahmadiyya  Muslim  community  explained  that
      whilst propagation of faith was important  to  them,  this  took  many
      forms from direct to indirect Tabligh. In fact, the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
      community mentioned that being identified as an Ahmadi in Pakistan  is
      Tabligh itself.

  21.  Further,  the  very  essence  of  Tabligh  is  dependent   upon   the
      circumstances. There are some circumstances where it would  be  direct
      and open, whilst in others it would be indirect or discreet. She  also
      referred to the section at page  82  of  the  CPIN,  which  is  headed
      "societal treatment" where the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MN
      and others is set out.

  22. Societal discrimination and hate speech propaganda against the  Ahmadi
      community is widespread. Further, the exclusion of Ahmadis  from  non-
      Ahmadi shops and businesses is set out from 2.4.16 and  following.  It
      is noted that societal treatment and  attitudes  towards  Ahmadis  may
      reach the threshold of persecution and/or serious  harm  depending  on
      its nature and repetition.

  23. A person who converts to another faith, or is seen to renounce  Islam,
      can be targeted  for  blasphemy  which  carries  the  death  sentence.
      Pakistani society is in general extremely hostile  to  converts,  with
      reports of converts being harassed, attacked and tortured.

  24. Ms Harris submitted that in that context, the photographs and postings
      in the newspaper as  well  as  on  Facebook  are  important.  This  is
      particularly so having regard to the fact that  it  is  a  publication
      together with the head of the Ahmadiyya group. Even if they  were  not
      intending to proselytise,  or  even  assuming  that  they  were  being
      opportunistic, those publications would nevertheless put them at risk.



  25. She referred to the fatwa at  C414.  The  marriage  is  considered  as
      illicit sexual activity. Nikkah  of  apostate  men  or  women  is  not
      permissible at all, no matter that they have the same faith.

  26. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response.

  27. He submitted that the Judge has given a careful  assessment  regarding
      their credibility. The essence of the decision was that the Judge  did
      not accept that they were committed  or  that  the  publications  were
      anything more than an attempt to bolster their asylum claim. There  is
      accordingly  insufficient  evidence  to  support  the  asylum   claim.
      Internal relocation is a safe option.

  28. Ms Harris submitted in reply that even if it is not accepted that they
      will proselytise, they will still be  subject  to  being  targeted  in
      Pakistan.

      Assessment

  29. The First-tier Judge was  not  satisfied  that  any  of  the  evidence
      regarding the appellant's experiences in Pakistan can  be  relied  on.
      This included her Ahmadi background  on  her  mother's  side,  or  the
      claimed violent persecution suffered by her and  her  husband  at  the
      hands of her in laws.

  30. However, with regard to her life in the UK he accepted the  supporting
      evidence from the Ahmadiyya  Association  that  she  and  her  husband
      formally joined the Ahmadi faith in 2018  and  attended  meetings  and
      religious events of that organisation. That he found was  not  out  of
      genuine conviction but rather as an attempt to obtain refugee status.

  31. He stated with regard to the recent evidence of Facebook postings  and
      its repercussions, that he gave no weight to the documentary  evidence
      in the form of the religious edict and the notice  of  disinheritance.
      Even if the notices were actually posted in the newspaper, this  would
      have been done purely to bolster the asylum claim [33].

  32. There had never been any challenge to the authenticity of the Facebook
      postings. With regard to the newspapers, the originals were  produced.
      The Judge accepted that if they were actually posted in the  newspaper
      or in Facebook, that would have been done to bolster the asylum claim.



  33. However, he did not adequately consider the country information  which
      I have set out. The appellant and her husband did not  merely  make  a
      public declaration of their faith as Ahmadi  Muslims,  but  there  was
      also a photograph published in the newspaper circulating  in  Pakistan
      as well as on Facebook showing the appellant together with the  leader
      of the Ahmadiyya organisation.

  34. Moreover, as noted, the respondent's guidance on proselytising  states
      at 6.5.10 that the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  community  mention  that  being
      identified as an Ahmadi in Pakistan is tabligh itself.

  35. Even assuming that their activities may have been opportunistic, there
      was no contention that the publications did not take place. The  issue
      therefore was whether the publications would create  a  real  risk  on
      return. Being identified as an Ahmadi can be sufficient to cause  such
      risk.

  36. In the circumstances, the Judge failed to properly assess whether  the
      impact that the publication of the appellant's faith as an  Ahmadi  in
      the Pakistani newspaper as well as the Facebook postings,  would  gave
      rise to a real risk on return from both the state and non-state actors
      to impute the Ahmadi religion to the appellant and her husband.

  37. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
      parties agreed that if that decision was made, the decision should  be
      set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
      to be made.

  38. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  is  extensive.  In  the
      circumstances I find that it is appropriate to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.


      Having set aside the decision, I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.


      Anonymity direction made.






      Signed                                                       Date   27
      April 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C Mailer





