
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04830/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Gardner, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born  on  [~]  1987.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom some time  in  2005  with  a  visit  visa
    issued on 17 October 2005 and valid until 17 October  2007.   Following
    the expiry of that leave, the appellant overstayed.

 3. On 1 July 2013, the appellant was convicted of conspiracy to defraud at
    the Central Criminal Court and on 6 September 2013 was sentenced to  27
    months' imprisonment.  On 21 October 2013, the appellant  was  notified
    that he was liable  to  deportation  under  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions in the UK Borders Act  2007.   On  15  September  2014,  the
    appellant was served with a deportation order.

 4. On 16 September 2014, the appellant claimed asylum.  On 21 April  2015,
    that application was refused, together with his human rights claim.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On 14  March  2016,
    his appeal was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.  He did not appeal against that decision and he  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 18 April 2016.

 6. On 12 May 2016, the appellant failed to report and  was  listed  as  an
    absconder until he was arrested and detained on 13 July 2017.

 7. On 3 August  2017,  the  appellant  was  interviewed  by  the  Nigerian
    Authorities who confirm his identity  and  nationality  and  agreed  to
    issue him with an emergency travel document.

 8. On 14 August 2017, a rule 35 report  was  prepared  on  the  appellant.
    That report was considered by the Secretary of State on 15 August  2017
    and the following day the appellant was notified that his detention was
    to be maintained.

 9. On  16  August  2017,  the  appellant's  representatives  made  further
    representation under Art 8.  Those representations were rejected as not
    amounting to a fresh claim under para 353 of the Immigration Rules  (HC
    395 as amended) on 19 September  2017.   Further  representations  were
    made on 21 September 2017.

10. On 3 October 2017, the appellant was released from detention on bail.

11. On 13 November 2017, the appellant's legal representative  submitted  a
    pre-action Protocol letter challenging the  decision  of  19  September
    2017 that the appellant's further submissions did not amount to a fresh
    claim.  In addition, further supporting  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's Art 8 claim was submitted.

12. In response to that, on 28 November 2017 the Secretary of State  agreed
    to review the decision of 19 September 2017 within three months.  On 26
    February 2018, a consent order to that effect was sealed in relation to
    the judicial review proceedings  which  the  appellant  had  previously
    commenced.

13. On 21 March 2018, the Secretary of State again refused the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the  ECHR.





The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal was heard by Judge Trevaskis.

15. The appellant's asylum claim was based, principally, upon a claim  that
    he is bisexual; had been subjected to two physical attacks when he  was
    17 and 18 in Nigeria.  In relation to the former,  he  claimed  he  had
    been stabbed with a screwdriver and beaten with sticks and hit  on  the
    head.  In relation to the latter, he claimed that after he was arrested
    by the police he was beaten with batons, his hands and ankles were tied
    and he was beaten by other inmates and raped by two or three inmates.

16. In support of his claim, in addition to his own evidence, the appellant
    relied upon a rule 35 report in which the appellant's account of  those
    two attacks was given and which identified that scars on his body  were
    consistent with his claimed mistreatment.  In addition he relied upon a
    psychiatric report by Dr Battersby which identified that the  appellant
    was  suffering  from  moderate  PTSD  and  also  reflected   that   the
    appellant's late disclosure of his claim  was  culturally  related  and
    also might be related to "avoidance" as  a  result  of  the  trauma  he
    claimed to have suffered.

17. Judge Trevaskis, as had the judge in the appellant's  appeal  in  April
    2016, found the appellant's account not to  be  credible  and  did  not
    accept that he was bisexual  or  that  he  had  been  attacked,  as  he
    claimed, in Nigeria before coming to the  UK  in  2005.   Consequently,
    Judge  Trevaskis  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

18. In relation to Art 8, the appellant relied upon his relationship with a
    British  citizen  ("ML"),  together  with  his  relationship  with  her
    children from previous relationships, as well  as  their  own  daughter
    aged 15 months and the appellant's daughter,  aged  10  with  a  former
    partner.   Judge  Trevaskis  found   that   any   impact   upon   those
    relationships  was  outweighed  by  the  public  interest   and   that,
    therefore, the appellant's deportation was a proportionate interference
    with his private and family life in the UK.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

19. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, in assessing the appellant's credibility  in  relation
    to his asylum claim based upon his claim to be bisexual, the judge  had
    failed to refer to, or indicate that he had  taken  into  account,  the
    evidence of Dr Battersby.  Secondly, in relation to the Art 8 claim,  a
    number of points  were  made,  including  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider whether the effect of the appellant's  deportation
    would be unduly harsh upon his partner and the children.

20. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    O'Brien) on 28 September 2018.

21. On 15 November 2018, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold Judge Trevaskis' decision.



Discussion

22. At the hearing, I heard oral submissions from Ms Gardner on  behalf  of
    the appellant and Mrs Aboni  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    During the course of those submissions, Mrs  Aboni  conceded  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law in dismissing the appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8.  She accepted  that  the  Judge  had  failed  properly  to
    consider whether the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" on
    both his partner and the children as required by  para  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and s.117C(5) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA Act 2002").   Mrs  Aboni  conceded  that  the
    appeal should be remitted on that basis for a de novo, a  rehearing  in
    respect of the appellant's Art 8 claim.  Ms Gardner agreed that was the
    appropriate course.

23. As a result, I need say no more than that I agree that  the  concession
    made by Mrs Aboni was properly made and that I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge materially erred in law in assessing the appellant's Art 8 claim,
    in  particular  in  considering  the  application  of  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002.

24. Mrs Aboni, however,  maintained  that  Judge  Trevaskis's  decision  in
    respect of the appellant's asylum claim was legally  sound  and  should
    stand.

25. Ms Gardner expanded upon the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that the
    judge had failed properly to take into account the rule 35 report which
    had not been before the previous judge which went, she said, beyond the
    "scarring issue"  to  which  he  made  reference  in  para  75  of  his
    determination, but also set out the  appellant's  case,  in  particular
    that he had been  raped  during  the  second  attack  he  relied  upon.
    Further, Ms Gardner relied upon Dr Battersby's  report.   She  accepted
    that Judge Trevaskis had referred to Dr Battersby's report at paras 37-
    39 of his determination but had made no reference to it  when  reaching
    his adverse credibility finding in  paras  72-79.   In  particular,  Ms
    Gardner relied upon Dr Battersby's opinion that  the  appellant's  PTSD
    might result in "avoidance" of the stresses and  so  explain  his  late
    disclosure of the sexual attacks and also that reluctance  to  disclose
    may be culturally driven.

26. Mrs Aboni, relying upon the rule 24 response, submitted that the  judge
    had adequately dealt with the new evidence in the rule 35 report and in
    Dr Battersby's report.  She submitted that the judge had considered the
    late disclose of this evidence  and  had  reached  findings  that  were
    adequately reasoned and legally sustainable.

27. The background to the appeal before Judge  Trevaskis  was,  of  course,
    that the appellant had previously made an asylum claim  in  2014  based
    upon his  claim  to  be  bisexual.   That  was  immediately  after  the
    deportation decision was made against him.  The appellant appealed  the
    rejection of that claim to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  decision  of
    Judge  Rodger  (sent  on  1  April  2016)  is  contained   within   the
    respondent's bundle and was relied on by the Secretary of State  before
    Judge Trevaskis.  In that determination, Judge Rodger made  an  adverse
    credibility finding against the appellant and rejected his claim to  be
    bisexual and at risk  on  return  to  Nigeria  as  a  consequence.   He
    rejected the appellant's claim that he had had a two year  relationship
    with a man in Nigeria and  had  been  subject  to  ill-treatment  as  a
    consequence by his family in  Nigeria.   He  rejected  the  appellant's
    account that he had witnessed one  of  his  partners  being  killed  in
    Nigeria.

28. Judge Rodger's decision and findings  were  correctly  taken  by  Judge
    Trevaskis in the  present  appeal  as  the  "starting  point"  for  his
    assessment of the appellant's claim which, in essence, turned upon  his
    credibility (see Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1).   The  judge  set  that
    position out in para 69 of his determination.

29. Of course, and Judge Trevaskis recognised  this,  he  was  required  to
    assess the appellant's credibility on the basis  of  all  the  evidence
    that was before him.  In essence, the new  evidence  was  the  rule  35
    report and Dr Battersby's report.  In the former, the appellant for the
    first time raised the two claimed attacks upon him in Nigeria  when  he
    was 17 and 18, including in the latter case when detained by the police
    that he had been raped by inmates in detention.

30. Judge Trevaskis dealt with Dr Battersby's report at paras 37-39 of  his
    determination as follows:

         "Psychiatric report by Doctor Battersby dated 13 August 2018

         37.  In the  author's  opinion  the  appellant  is  suffering  from
             moderate PTSD. He was considered to have low vulnerability  to
             mental health problems. He disclosed suffering from nightmares
             ever since watching the murder of his partner when  he  was  a
             teenager. He also got visibly distressed  when  talking  about
             being raped in  a  cell  in  Nigeria  as  well  as  physically
             assaulted.

         38.  The classification of the appellant for PTSD  was  based  upon
             persistent  remembering  or  "reliving"  the   stressor:   the
             appellant reported  nightmares  and  flashbacks  of  traumatic
             experiences; actual or preferred  avoidance  of  circumstances
             resembling or associated with the stressor: the appellant  was
             avoidant of giving details about his  experiences  and  looked
             visibly upset when he talked about them;  persistent  symptoms
             of  increased  psychological  sensitivity  and  arousal:   the
             appellant looked tired, he was irritable at times, he reported
             feeling constantly on edge and stated that he startles easily,
             and dislikes fireworks.

         39.  Throughout his interview, his non-verbal and verbal behaviours
             were consistent with someone who has moderate PTSD."

31. Then, having set out a  number  of  relevant  legal  issues  and  self-
    directions including a detailed approach to  assessing  credibility  at
    paras 61-68, the judge turned to make his findings in relation  to  the
    appellant's asylum claim at paras 71-79 as follows:

         "71. I have summarised the evidence in the preceding paragraphs  of
             this decision,  and  I have  also  referred  to  the  bundles
             provided; I have had regard, and given  anxious  scrutiny,  to
             all of the evidence, including the evidence contained in those
             bundles  which  I  have  not  summarised   in   detail;   when
             considering this decision, reference should be made  to  those
             bundles. I have considered the evidence as it is at  the  date
             of the hearing of this appeal.

         Asylum

         72.  The fresh aspect of this claim raised by the appellant relates
             to scarring which he claims was inflicted  in  the  course  of
             mistreatment in Nigeria because of his sexual orientation. All
             other  aspects  of  his  asylum  claim  have  been  previously
             considered by the respondent and rejected,  and  dismissed  on
             appeal. I have had the benefit of reading the determination of
             the judge who dismissed that appeal, and I note that, although
             the appellant has sought to  criticise  the  fairness  of  the
             hearing, no attempt was made to appeal against that  decision,
             and the appellant's appeal rights became exhausted on 18 April
             2016.

         73.  The appellant  gave  an  otherwise  detailed  account  of  his
             difficulties in Nigeria associated with his claimed sexuality,
             including reference to being attacked a couple of  times  when
             he was 17 and 18 years old. He made no mention  whatsoever  of
             any injuries caused by such attacks,  despite  the  fact  that
             these might have been supportive of his claims. In  accordance
             with  the  above  authority,  I  am  required  to  treat  with
             circumspection such evidence which existed at the time of  the
             original claim, but which was not revealed by the appellant.

         74.  The appellant is clearly an  intelligent  man,  and  has  made
             significant efforts to secure his continued  presence  in  the
             United Kingdom. I do not accept as credible his claim that  he
             declined to mention these injuries  out  of  embarrassment  or
             reluctance,  because  I  am  satisfied  that  he  would   have
             recognised the potential importance of such evidence.

         75.  In the rule 35 report the history given by  the  appellant  to
             the author of that report was that  when  he  was  17  he  was
             attacked by 5 - 10 persons; he was stabbed, including  with  a
             screwdriver and beaten with sticks and that he was hit on  the
             head with wood. When he was 18 he was arrested by  the  police
             when he was being assaulted; he was beaten with batons in  the
             van; his hands and ankles were tied together with rope; he was
             beaten by other inmates and raped by 2 - 3 other inmates.  The
             injuries found were multiple scars and they raised a hard lump
             on the top of his head, as well as to other  scars  which  the
             appellant said did not relate to the incidents described.  The
             report concludes that the  injuries  revealed  are  consistent
             with the account given by the appellant as to  how  they  were
             caused.

         76.  Of the rule 35 report, it is not suggested that  the  injuries
             observed on the appellant could only have been caused  by  the
             way he claims to have been mistreated. In  other  words,  they
             are not diagnostic, but merely consistent, and could therefore
             have  been  caused  by  other  means;  indeed,  the  appellant
             identified two scars which had been caused by other  means.  I
             therefore find as a fact that the rule 35  report  is  not  of
             itself probative of the causes of  the  appellant's  injuries.
             That evidence  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  an
             assessment of the overall credibility of  the  appellant.  His
             credibility was considered at length  and  in  detail  by  the
             judge at his  earlier  appeal,  and  the  findings  about  his
             credibility are set out in great detail in the  determination.
             In short, the judge found the appellant not to be credible  in
             relation to the asylum claim.

         77.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that, had the judge
             had the benefit of the evidence  of  the  rule  35  report,  a
             different conclusion may have  been  reached  with  regard  to
             credibility. However, the absence  of  that  evidence  at  the
             earlier hearing was due to the failure  of  the  appellant  to
             adduce it. I am  obliged  to  treat  with  circumspection  the
             excuses offered for the failure to adduce such  evidence,  and
             I also have regard to the fact that it is probative value  is
             largely dependent upon the credibility of the appellant as  to
             the causation of the injuries. I have heard no  evidence  from
             the appellant at this hearing which leads me to conclude  that
             the previous judge made any error in  the  assessment  of  the
             appellant's credibility, or  lack  thereof,  for  the  reasons
             stated in the earlier decision.

         78.  As a result, I am drawn to the conclusion,  as  identified  in
             the authority  referred  to  above,  that  the  issues  raised
             regarding the asylum claim in the earlier appeal and  in  this
             appeal are the same, and therefore should be treated as having
             been decided at that earlier hearing, and are not  to  be  re-
             litigated.

         79.  Accordingly I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds."

32. I do not accept Ms Gardner's submissions that the judge failed properly
    to consider either the rule 35 report or Dr Battersby's report.

33. First, it is  plain  that  at  paras  75-77,  the  judge  set  out  the
    appellant's claim (raised for the first time) in the  rule  35  report.
    That included the allegation of sexual assault on the  second  occasion
    when he was 18 (see para 75).  These were matters  that  had  not  even
    been raised in the appellant's previous appeal.  They were  undoubtedly
    raised late.  They were also matters which  the  appellant  could  have
    raised in the earlier appeal.  In para 77, properly  relying  upon  the
    guidance in Devaseelan, the judge had regard to the fact that  evidence
    which could have been raised in the earlier appeal but when raised  now
    had to be treated with some circumspection.  Of course,  the  appellant
    sought to explain why these matters were raised late because, and  this
    is set out at para  64  of  the  judge's  determination,  he  found  it
    difficult to talk about these matters.  The judge was clearly aware  of
    the appellant's explanation.  The "new" evidence did  not,  of  course,
    raise for the first time the sensitive issue of the appellant's claimed
    sexual orientation.  That had previously been raised,  albeit  only  in
    2014, by the  time  of  the  earlier  appeal.   Indeed,  his  delay  in
    disclosing his sexual orientation was not, of  course,  accepted  as  a
    valid excuse by Judge Rodger in the earlier appeal which had  not  been
    challenged.   I  am  unable  to  discern  any  error  in  the   judge's
    consideration of the rule 35 report and the issues it raised.

34. Secondly, Ms Gardner relied upon Dr Battersby's report to  explain  the
    non-disclosure.  To the extent that Dr Battersby sought to explain  the
    non-disclosure on the basis of "cultural" inhibitions, she  is  not  an
    expert.  Her expertise is in psychiatry.  She did, however,  raise  the
    issue of "avoidance" in the context of her diagnosis that the appellant
    suffered from  moderate  PTSD.   At  pages  20-21  of  her  report  she
    acknowledged that the appellant had been exposed  to  stressful  events
    and noted in respect of his response:

         "[a]ctual or preferred avoidance  of  circumstances  resembling  or
         associated with the stressor, which was not present before exposure
         to the stressor.  (He was avoidant  of  giving  details  about  his
         experiences and looked visibly upset when he talked  about  them)".



35. Judge Trevaskis made  specific  reference  to  Dr  Battersby's  report,
    including her  diagnosis  of  moderate  PTSD  and  of  the  appellant's
    "avoidance of circumstances" associated with describing  the  stressful
    event (at para 38 set out above).  Whilst Judge Trevaskis did not  make
    specific reference to Dr Battersby's report in the findings section  of
    his determination at paras 71-79, it  would,  in  my  judgment,  be  an
    unduly myopic  reading  of  his  determination  to  conclude  that  the
    detailed evidence that he set out in his determination (and to which he
    specifically said he had regard in para 71 of  his  determination)  was
    not part of his consideration when reaching his findings in paras 71-79
    and his conclusion that the appellant's account was not credible.

36. Neither Dr Battersby's report nor the rule  35  report  required  Judge
    Trevaskis to accept the appellant's account.  The judge  accepted  that
    the appellant suffered from moderate PTSD but the precise cause of that
    PTSD (and whether it arose as a result  of  attacks  motivated  by  his
    sexual orientation) was properly a matter for the judge on the basis of
    all the evidence.  Likewise, the rule 35 report, as  the  judge  points
    out in para 76, identified that  the  appellant  had  scars  that  were
    consistent with his account but that they could  have  been  caused  by
    other means.  This evidence also did not require the  judge  to  accept
    the appellant's account of the attacks and injuries which  were  caused
    because of his sexual orientation.

37. Standing back, and  reading  Judge's  Trevaskis's  determination  as  a
    whole, the judge fairly set out all the relevant evidence  and,  taking
    the earlier  adverse  decision  as  his  starting  point,  did,  in  my
    judgment, fully and properly take into account the "new" evidence in Dr
    Battersby's report and the rule 35 report.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge gave adequate reasons at para  71-79  of  his  determination  for
    reaching his adverse credibility finding and rejecting the  appellant's
    account based upon his sexual orientation and so dismissing his  appeal
    on asylum, humanitarian protection and Art  3  grounds.    The  judge's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on  those  grounds  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law.



Decision

38. For the above reasons, the judge materially erred in law in  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision
    is, to that extent, set aside.

39. The judge did not, however, materially err in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of
    the  ECHR.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  3  of  the  ECHR  shall
    stand.

40. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing in respect of Art 8 alone.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            26 February 2019
