
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st May 2019                     |On 10 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     J O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Harrison QC and Mr P Lewis of Counsel,
                    instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born  in  January  1988.  He
         came to the UK when he was 8 years old, in  1996.  He  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain in March 2004 when he was 16 years  old.
         He left school with a number of good GCSE passes,  and  obtained  a
         BTEC diploma in business studies at college. At  the  beginning  of
         2006 he was applying to universities to study for a degree. He  was
         also involved with youth groups who were campaigning against  knife
         crime having suffered  the  loss  of  a  friend  to  a  knife-crime
         killing.

      2. On 18th February 2006 the appellant murdered a young man by hitting
         him (described by the sentencing judge as a "karate type blow")  on
         the neck with intent to cause grievous bodily harm which caused him
         to fall to the ground, bang his head and thereby  sustain  a  brain
         injury from which he died 10 days later. The assault took place  in
         the context of an altercation between  two  groups  of  youths  but
         there was no indication that there was any gang involvement by  the
         appellant. The appellant pleaded guilty  to  manslaughter  but  was
         found guilty of murder. On 6th October 2006  the  Central  Criminal
         Court imposed a life sentence on the appellant. It was  found  that
         the appellant had not been acting in  self-defence  but  took  into
         account in his favour a lack of aggravating features to the  crime;
         the fact the appellant was 18 years old; his lack of premeditation;
         his lack of intention to kill; and his remorse.  A  minimum  prison
         term of 11 years and 169 days was initially imposed, but  this  was
         reduced to 8 years and 169 days by the  Court  of  Appeal  Criminal
         Division.  The  appellant  was  moved  to  open  prison  conditions
         following a decision of the Parole Board in December 2012 as he was
         at  low  risk  of  re-conviction,  although  he  had  later  to  be
         transferred back to closed conditions due to his being  subject  to
         deportation proceedings. The appellant's prison sentence came to an
         end on 4th September 2015 when the Parole  Board  decided  that  he
         posed a low risk of reoffending, albeit that if he did reoffend his
         risk of serious harm to the public was medium. He was then detained
         under Immigration Act powers  but  granted  bail  to  his  mother's
         address on 21st September 2015. The supervisory element of his life
         licence from the Probation Service came to  an  end  after  he  had
         spent four years in the community.

      3. On 30th July 2015 the appellant was served with notice of liability
         to automatic deportation under s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  In
         response he made a human rights claim. The respondent's refusal  of
         the human rights and protection claim is dated 7th  December  2015.
         His appeal  against  this  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Cassell in a determination promulgated on  the  19th
         April 2017.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice President of the Upper
         Tribunal on 7th December 2017 in light of the grant  of  permission
         for judicial review of the refusal by the Upper Tribunal  to  grant
         permission to appeal. The matter  came  before  The  Honourable  Mr
         Justice Sweeney and Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor who decided in  a
         decision promulgated on 16th May 2018 that the First-tier  Tribunal
         had erred in law due to a  failure  to  give  cogent  and  adequate
         reasons for the decision, and as a result the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal was set aside.

      5. The matter came before us to  remake  the  appeal.  We  heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant, his partner J, and from an independent
         social worker, Ms  C  Brown,  and  a  forensic  psychologist  Ms  J
         Lackenby. We also had a substantial amount of documentary  evidence
         in a core and supplementary bundles provided by the appellant,  and
         took note of the reasoning set  out  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
         letter from the respondent.

    Evidence - Remaking

      6. In brief summary the key facts presented in this appeal,  from  the
         evidence of the witnesses and the supporting documentation, are  as
         follows.

      7. The appellant was born in Nigeria but left when he was 8 years  old
         in 1996, and has not returned since  that  time.  He  has  no  real
         recollection of life in Nigeria and feels himself to be British, he
         would not know where to start in Nigeria if he was  deported  there
         and  believes  he  would  struggle  to  obtain  work  as  he  lacks
         connections and the information he has on Nigeria  is  that  it  is
         through connections that you obtain work. He does  not  believe  he
         would be able to support his children, and believes that they would
         suffer without their father. He was brought up by his mother in the
         UK with little contact with  his  father.  His  mother  travels  to
         Nigeria with a church group every couple of years. His  father  has
         recently spent 18 months in that  country  dealing  with  the  ill-
         health and passing away of the  appellant's  paternal  grandmother.
         Whilst in Nigeria his father has relied upon funds from one of  his
         older brothers. His father has a brother in Nigeria with  whom  the
         appellant last had contact with in 1996. The appellant has one full
         brother and a number of half-brothers  from  his  parents.  All  of
         these brothers are British  citizens,  although  his  full  brother
         currently lives in Switzerland for work.

      8. The appellant accepts full responsibility for having hit the man he
         is convicted of murdering,  and  is  aware  that  whatever  he  has
         suffered as a result of the crime it is  nothing  compared  to  the
         family, friends and others who had to deal with the  death  of  his
         victim. He says he was previously a peacemaker and had no  previous
         involvement with any gangs or violence, in fact on the contrary  he
         had been working with community groups to turn  local  youths  away
         from knife crime as one of his  best  friends  had  died  of  knife
         wounds when  he  was  16  years  old.  Ms  Lackenby,  the  forensic
         psychologist, describes the behaviour which led to the  offence  as
         being influenced by the  appellant's  hyper-vigilance  due  to  the
         death of his friend. She concludes following a full assessment that
         the risk of harm posed by the appellant is low.

      9.  The  appellant  has  worked   hard   and   completed   number   of
         rehabilitative courses in prison,  as  well  as  obtained  an  Open
         University psychology degree, doing levels 1 and 2  of  a  personal
         trainer course,  completing  courses  in  computing,  painting  and
         decorating and bricklaying,  and  assisting  other  prisoners  with
         basic literacy and mentoring and whilst in  open  conditions  doing
         work with refugees and in a children's referral unit  for  excluded
         children. He made good use of his  time  in  custody,  and  had  no
         significant adjudications there.

     10. When the appellant left custody in September 2015 on  direction  of
         the Parole Board he was exceptionally allowed  to  return  to  live
         normally with his family and did  not  have  to  spend  time  in  a
         probation hostel. On release from prison he  did  level  3  of  the
         personal trainer qualification and now teaches fitness in an after-
         school club and has private clients; he  does  volunteer  community
         football coaching with a club set  up  by  an  ex-offender  with  a
         specific  mission to divert urban  youth  from  crime  and  with  a
         programme going into prisons and trying to motivate  convicted  men
         into changing the path  of their lives.  He  always  discloses  his
         conviction to those with whom he works, and has been police cleared
         to go back into prisons for his voluntary work  and  to  work  with
         children. He  is  committed  to  his  work  via  sport  to  address
         offending behaviour as he enjoys it and it is part  of  his  giving
         back to the community. He feels that it is worthwhile if  just  one
         person is diverted from a life of crime or sees that they can  have
         a  positive  life  after  prison.   Ms   Lackenby,   the   forensic
         psychiatrist, provided evidence that the  type  of  voluntary  work
         that the appellant undertakes is a very  valuable  intervention  in
         preventing crime due to his credibility with the young  people  and
         prisoners with whom he works, and in  her  view  essential  in  the
         context of the vital work against  knife  and  gang  violence  into
         which urban young men are being increasingly drawn.

     11. The appellant is in a serious and committed  relationship  with  J,
         who is a Nigerian citizen with indefinite leave to  remain  in  the
         UK. J was born in 1993. She came to the UK in October 2004 with her
         sister to join her mother. J's sister remains in the UK and has her
         own child, and there is some contact between them, but she  is  not
         in a position to provide any significant support to J.  Her  mother
         was deported to Nigeria in 2007, and J  became  a  Social  Services
         looked after child, spending time in 13 different foster care homes
         and in children's homes. She  believes  that  this  has  negatively
         affected her feelings of identity and her connections with friends.
         The evidence of Ms Brown was that J told her that she has  recently
         received an apology and some compensation from Social  Services  in
         the UK for the failings in her care. J has a psychiatric  diagnosis
         of  having  an  emotionally  unstable  personality  disorder   with
         depression and anxiety. She was given this diagnosis when  she  was
         sectioned under the Mental Health Acts for  two  days  in  2013  at
         Goodmayes Hospital. She describes becoming manic, being  unable  to
         focus her thoughts,  losing  her  sense  of  reality,  and  feeling
         depressive  and  crying  a  lot.  Since  that  time  she  has  been
         prescribed mood stabilisers, currently  quetiapine  and  previously
         lofepramine, and has the weekly support of IMPART (a mental  health
         team  dedicated  to  the  management  for  those  with  personality
         disorders) who assist her  with  skills  to  improve  her  mood.  J
         receives two disability benefits, a Personal  Independence  Payment
         and Employment Support Allowance, as a result of her mental  health
         diagnosis. As she is pregnant she also currently  receives  support
         from the Perinatal Team which works with those with  mental  health
         problems when they are pregnant and ensures  that  medications  are
         appropriate, with the focus being on ensuring that she  bonds  with
         her twin babies when they are born.

     12. J believes that the deportation of the appellant  would  cause  her
         mental health to deteriorate because of the  stress  of  being  the
         mother of a small child pregnant with two more and the  removal  of
         his stabilising and positive presence in her life in the context of
         her not having had any stability whilst she  was  growing  up.  Her
         2013 breakdown had happened because she had  been  subjected  to  a
         number of changes of location, and it was being said she would have
         to move again. She found the two short periods when  the  appellant
         was detained under the Immigration Acts (two weeks in  August  2017
         and three days in November 2017)  very  stressful  and  she  became
         depressed, scared and cried all the time during  this  period.  She
         says that the appellant is her source of stability.  The  appellant
         explains that due to J's depression and anxiety she sometimes needs
         to call him and have him confirm that he  will  be  back  with  her
         within a period of time, and that this then  enables  her  to  calm
         herself and cope until that time. He believes that she would have a
         breakdown if he was deported as she could not cope with the loss of
         their relationship in the context of her being the mother of a  one
         year old child and being heavily pregnant with twin boys.

     13. J was initially granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK. In
         2012, prior to her grant of indefinite leave  to  remain,  she  was
         taken by Social Services to Nigeria to establish whether she  could
         be reunited with her mother. She spent 5 or 6 days in that  country
         in a hotel in Lagos, and met with her mother in the  hotel  but  as
         her mother did not have a place to live she  returned  with  Social
         Services to the UK. J's mother continues to  live  in  Nigeria,  as
         does her older married brother, but neither has  a  fixed  address.
         She has some WhatsApp contact with both of them, and some telephone
         contact with her mother. J does not believe that they could  assist
         her or the appellant if they were to be in Nigeria as  she  has  to
         send her mother money from the UK.

     14. Her relationship with the appellant has developed from a friendship
         over the past three years; she was aware of his  murder  conviction
         and the deportation proceedings after some  months  of  friendship,
         and they have also had to work through  the  fact  that  he  had  a
         child, NRO, with another woman, M, in March 2018. However,  J  says
         that the love they have for each other is very strong and that  the
         appellant is committed to looking after her and their children  and
         she says she wants to spend her life with him.  She is now 26 weeks
         pregnant with his twin boys, as well as having JJO their  son  born
         in December 2017. The pregnancy is deemed high risk as it is a twin
         pregnancy and she will have a planned caesarean birth at  37  weeks
         in August 2019. Until September 2018 the  appellant  was  bound  to
         sleep at his mother's house due to the conditions of his  bail  but
         following judicial review proceedings these conditions  were  found
         to be unlawful and since that time he has stayed over with J  on  a
         regular basis. At present he stays over about 5 nights a week,  and
         they plan for the appellant to move in fully prior to the birth  of
         the twins. He is now spending time with J and JJO almost every day.



     15. The appellant is a very committed father to JJO, who is  a  British
         citizen. He is involved in all aspects of his care: cooking for him
         and feeding him; changing nappies;  giving  him  bottles  of  milk;
         washing him; playing with him and reading to him;  putting  him  to
         bed; taking him to play centres, parks and swimming.  JJO  goes  to
         the appellant naturally and is  distressed  by  his  leaving.   The
         appellant contributes financially doing shopping  for  all  of  the
         things he needs. JJO is currently a happily developing  little  boy
         and has no health or other concerns.

     16. The appellant also has a daughter NRO, a British  citizen  born  in
         March 2018, from a relationship he  had  with  M,  who  is  also  a
         British Citizen. He is friends with M and has agreed work  together
         with her to bring up NRO. M was sentenced to three and a half years
         imprisonment for conspiracy to supply drugs, and has been in prison
         although she may be released shortly to a house  in  Southend.  The
         appellant has visited NRO regularly  in  prison  every  two  weeks,
         where she resides with her mother, M, and has had her to  stay  for
         the weekend whilst M was on weekend  release.  He  has  also  taken
         nappies, food and clothes for NRO to M, and  on  one  occasion  was
         called by the prison service to take NRO to  hospital  as  she  had
         some breathing difficulties.   J feels it  is  important  that  the
         appellant is a father to his daughter, NRO, and  sees  her  as  her
         son's sister.

    Submissions

     17. At the end of the evidence  the  following  was  agreed  as  common
         ground by the parties:

           .  That  the  appellant  had  a  low  risk  of  reoffending,  is
             rehabilitated and is involved with commendable projects  aimed
             at preventing crime and rehabilitating others.

           . That the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
             with J and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
             JJO.

           . That both of  the  appellant's  children,  JJO  and  NRO,  are
             British citizens and qualifying children.

           . The respondent accepts that J and JJO cannot  be  expected  to
             relocate to Nigeria, and to require them to  do  so  would  be
             unduly harsh.

           . The respondent accepts that the appellant had lived in the  UK
             lawfully for more than half  of  his  life  on  Ms  Harrison's
             undertaking that the High Court had found in  the  context  of
             judicial review  proceedings  that  his  indefinite  leave  to
             remain continued by virtue of s.3C  of  the  1971  Immigration
             Act, and thus that he had held ILR from 2004  to  the  present
             day.

     18. What remained in dispute was therefore:

           . Whether the appellant was socially and  culturally  integrated
             in the UK.

           . Whether the appellant would have very significant obstacles to
             integration in Nigeria.

           .  Whether  the  appellant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with his qualifying child NRO.

           . Whether J is a qualifying partner.

           . Whether it would be unduly harsh for J, JJO and NRO to  remain
             in the UK whilst the appellant is deported.

           . The extent of the public interest in deporting the appellant.

           . Whether, when an Article 8 ECHR  proportionality  exercise  is
             conducted, there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
             above the exceptions to deportation set out at s.117C  of  the
             Nationality which make the appellant's deportation unlawful.

     19. We do not set out  the  submissions  made  orally  and  in  written
         skeleton argument/submissions but we deal with the  arguments  made
         in our conclusions set out below. We find that all of the witnesses
         were credible and gave truthful evidence. The expert witnesses were
         appropriately qualified to give the evidence  that  they  provided,
         and understood their duty to  the  Court.  The  oral  evidence  was
         consistent with each other, with the written statements and reports
         and with the other documentation in the bundles.

     20.  We  received  some  further  submissions  and  evidence  from  the
         appellant's solicitors by email on 24th May 2019 but  we  have  not
         had regard to this material as there was no application to be  able
         to  submit  this  material  and  no  directions  enabling   further
         submission after the end of the hearing.

    The Law

     21. The test, which  is  embodied  in  s.117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  paragraph  398   of   the
         Immigration Rules, and which we must apply  when  determining  this
         appeal is whether there are  very  compelling  circumstances  which
         exceptionally mean that it  is  not  proportionate  to  deport  the
         appellant. As set out in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60
         this test is best approached with a balance sheet approach.  It  is
         not  necessary  for  the  circumstances  to  be  unusual,  but  the
         threshold is very high given the public interest in the deportation
         of foreign criminals. In the recent case of MS (s.117C  (6):  "very
         compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019]  UKUT  0122,  the  UT
         considered Section 117C (6) following KO (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2008] UKSC  53.   In  MS  the  Upper
         Tribunal decided  that  when  concluding  whether  there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 in sub-Sections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh
         the public interest in the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal,  a
         court or Tribunal must take into account, together with  any  other
         relevant public interest considerations,  the  seriousness  of  the
         particular offence which the foreign criminal  was  convicted;  not
         merely whether the foreign criminal was or  was  not  sentenced  to
         imprisonment of more than four years.  The UT decided that it would
         be incorrect to say that KO compels the finding that s.117C (2)  is
         merely declaratory of the distinction between foreign criminals who
         have not been sentenced to imprisonment of 4  years  or  more,  and
         those who have (see [10]). The UT said that the evaluation of  very
         compelling  circumstances  "calls  for  a  wide-ranging  evaluative
         exercise" and said: "17. Viewed in this light, it  can  readily  be
         seen that the ascertainment of what  constitutes  "very  compelling
         circumstances", such as to defeat the public interest,  requires  a
         case-specific analysis of the nature of the  public  interest.  The
         strength of the public interest, in any particular case, determines
         the weight that must then be found to lie on the foreign criminal's
         side of the balance in order for the circumstances to  be  properly
         categorised as very compelling. It would, frankly, be remarkable if
         a person sentenced to four years' imprisonment  for  fraud  had  to
         demonstrate the same circumstances as a person  sentenced  to  life
         imprisonment for multiple murders. 18.  To say this is not to  seek
         to introduce a "balancing exercise" into Exceptions 1 and 2 and the
         test of "unduly harsh". The words "over and above", as  interpreted
         by Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan), underscore the  difference  in  the
         tasks demanded by, on the one hand, section 117C(4) and (5) and, on
         the other, section 117C(6)".

     22. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and
         Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 662 in relation to Section 117C(6), Jackson  LJ
         said the following: "29.In our view, the reasoning of the Court  of
         Appeal in JZ (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase  used
         in section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014  rules  and  which  we
         have held is to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean  that  a
         foreign criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled  from
         seeking to  rely  on  matters  falling  within  the  scope  of  the
         circumstances described in Exceptions  1  and  2  when  seeking  to
         contend that "there are very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
         above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have  indicated
         above, a foreign criminal is entitled to rely  upon  such  matters,
         but he would need to be able to point to features of his case of  a
         kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A  of
         the 2014 rules), or  features  falling  outside  the  circumstances
         described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made  his
         claim based on Article 8 especially strong. 30. In the  case  of  a
         serious offender who could point to circumstances in his  own  case
         which could be said to correspond to the circumstances described in
         Exceptions 1 and 2, but where he could only just succeed in such an
         argument, it would not be possible to  describe  his  situation  as
         involving very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as a  bare
         case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand,
         if he could point to factors  identified  in  the  descriptions  of
         Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling kind in  support  of
         an Article 8 claim, going well beyond what would  be  necessary  to
         make out a bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2,
         they could in principle constitute "very compelling  circumstances,
         over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether
         taken by themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant
         to application of Article  8.  31.      An  interpretation  of  the
         relevant phrase to exclude this possibility would lead to violation
         of Article 8 in some cases,  which  plainly  was  not  Parliament's
         intention. In terms of relevance and weight for  a  proportionality
         analysis under Article 8, the factors singled out  for  description
         in Exceptions 1 and 2 will  apply  with  greater  or  lesser  force
         depending on the specific facts of a particular  case.  To  take  a
         simple example in relation to the requirement in section 117C(4)(a)
         for Exception 1, the offender in question may be  someone  aged  37
         who came to the UK aged 18 and hence  satisfies  that  requirement;
         but his claim under Article 8 is likely to be very much weaker than
         the claim of an offender now aged 80 who came  to  the  UK  aged  6
         months, who by dint of those facts satisfies that requirement.  The
         circumstances in the latter case might well be highly  relevant  to
         whether it would be disproportionate and a breach of Article  8  to
         deport the offender, having regard to the  guidance  given  by  the
         ECtHR in Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant
         to whether there are "very compelling circumstances, over and above
         those described in Exceptions 1 and 2." 33.     Although  there  is
         no 'exceptionality' requirement, it  inexorably  follows  from  the
         statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in  which  circumstances   are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation will be rare. The commonplace incidents of family life,
         such as ageing parents in poor health or the natural  love  between
         parents and children, will not be sufficient."

     23. The Upper Tribunal in MS engaged with the comments of Lord Reed  in
         Hesham Ali about  deterrence  and  concluded  that  that  there  is
         nothing in Hesham Ali that requires a court to eschew the principle
         of general deterrence, as an element of  the  public  interest,  in
         determining a deportation appeal by reference to section 117C  (6).
         In  assessing  proportionality,  the  Upper   Tribunal   considered
         rehabilitation concluding that following a serious offence, it will
         not ordinarily count as a significant factor weighing in favour  of
         an  Appellant  facing  deportation  as  a  foreign  criminal.  This
         approach to rehabilitation was confirmed by the UT in  RA  (S.117c:
         "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123. In that
         case the Upper Tribunal said that the way to approach section  117C
         remains as set out by Jackson LJ in NA.

    Conclusions - Remaking

     24. On the one side is the public interest in  the  deportation  of  an
         appellant who has committed an extremely serious, perhaps the  most
         serious, criminal offence of murder.  We  recognise  the  different
         facets of this public interest  including  the  protection  of  the
         public, the deterrents of others and the maintenance of the  public
         confidence  in  the  immigration  system   by   deporting   foreign
         criminals. Whilst the lack of a risk  of  recidivism  is  a  matter
         listed below in favour of the  appellant  his  deportation  remains
         strongly in the public interest by virtue of this deterring  others
         and maintaining public confidence in the immigration system.

     25. We accept that there is a positive benefit to the community in  the
         UK of the appellant's voluntary work, with urban  youth  who  might
         otherwise be led into a life of crime and in the rehabilitation  of
         offenders, particularly  in  the  context  of  the  current  public
         concern at the rising numbers of young victims of  knife  crime  in
         our cities. However, we do not find that the  appellant  can  reach
         the test laid out by The Hon. Mr Justice  Lane,  President  of  the
         Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber,  in  Thakrar  (Cart
         JR; Article 8: value to community) [2018] UKUT 00336 where  it  was
         said that the contribution must  be  "very  significant"  and  "One
         touchstone for determining this is to ask whether  the  removal  of
         the person concerned would lead to an  irreplaceable  loss  to  the
         community of the United Kingdom or to a significant element of it."
         We absolutely commend what the appellant has done to  pay  back  to
         the community in the UK but he  is  not  the  instigator  or  prime
         organiser of the projects addressing crime he takes part in and  we
         find that they would continue even if he were to  be  deported.  In
         these circumstances, whilst very much to the appellant's credit, we
         find that his voluntary work does not diminish the very significant
         weight to be given to the maintenance of immigration  control,  and
         thus his deportation in the public interest in deterring others and
         maintaining confidence in the  immigration  system.   Our  starting
         point is that deportation of this  appellant  is  strongly  in  the
         public interest.

     26. We find that whilst the appellant has lived in the UK lawfully  for
         most of his life and is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
         UK, for the reasons set out below, he cannot show very  significant
         obstacles to integration in Nigeria and  so  cannot  show  that  he
         meets the requirements of the first  exception  to  deportation  at
         s.117C(4) of  the  2002  Act.  We  accept  return  there  would  be
         essentially to a foreign country of  which  the  appellant  has  no
         prior knowledge with no close family  support.  However,  he  is  a
         healthy, well-educated and qualified enterprising young man who  we
         find will, with some considerable  effort,  be  able  to  integrate
         himself in his country of nationality if deported.  He  would  have
         the option to reach out for help in orientating himself and finding
         connections to his  paternal  uncle  and  other  relatives  on  his
         father's side, and to friends of his mother whom she has visited in
         recent times.

     27. The appellant does not have a  qualifying  partner  as  he  is  not
         married to J and they have not cohabited for two years,  so  whilst
         he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her  he  cannot
         meet the second exception to deportation at s.117C(4) of  the  2002
         Act by virtue of his relationship with J.

     28. We do not find that it has been shown that it would be unduly harsh
         for NRO, the appellant's daughter by his former  girlfriend  M,  to
         remain in the UK with her mother whilst the appellant is  deported.
         We accept that it must be in her best  interests  to  have  contact
         with the appellant, her father, who is  clearly  kind,  loving  and
         providing towards her, and whom we have found to have a genuine and
         subsisting parental relationship with her, for the reasons  we  set
         out below. However, we have  insufficient  evidence  to  reach  the
         conclusion it would be unduly harsh if he were deported  as  it  is
         very unclear what the other structures  and  important  individuals
         are in her life. In her case we  have  no  evidence  of  harshness,
         meaning  something  severe  or  bleak,  going  beyond  what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent. As a result the appellant cannot show that he  meets  the
         second deportation at s.117C(4) of the 2002 Act by  virtue  of  his
         relationship with his daughter NRO.

     29. On the other side of the balance sheet, and thus in the appellant's
         favour, is the fact that the public interest aspect  of  protecting
         the public from crime does not require his deportation: as  rightly
         conceded by the respondent in the  light  of  the  evidence  of  Ms
         Lackenby, the Parole Board, the Probation Service  and  others  the
         appellant has a low risk of reoffending and is rehabilitated.

     30. Whilst ultimately the appellant cannot  meet  the  first  exception
         under s.117C(4) of the 2002  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act, as he would have not very significant obstacles to integration
         for the reasons set out above, we find it is  relevant  to  confirm
         that we find he has been lawfully resident with indefinite leave to
         remain for most of his life, as is conceded by the  respondent.  We
         also find that he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK
         which was not conceded by Mr  Melvin.  Prior  to  his  offence  and
         conviction he was of good character and had clearly worked hard  to
         obtain good qualifications at school, had a normal home  life  with
         his mother and brother and a circle of friends, and had started his
         community work against knife crime. The  respondent  concedes  that
         since his release from prison in 2015  he  has  shown  that  he  is
         rehabilitated and is involved with commendable  community  projects
         aimed at preventing crime and rehabilitating others. He is a fluent
         English speaker who is supporting himself financially through self-
         employed work as a personal trainer, and is accepted as being in  a
         genuine and subsisting committed relationship with J, a person with
         indefinite leave to remain in the UK, and  having  a  genuine   and
         subsisting parental relationship with  their  son  JJO,  a  British
         citizen, and we find that he  is  providing  significant  financial
         support to them. We find that all of these factors strongly support
         his being currently socially and culturally integrated.

     31. In looking at the exception 2 to deportation under s.117C(4) of the
         2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act it is rightly conceded
         by the respondent that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
         family life relationship with his partner J, however,  as  set  out
         above, given that they have not cohabited for two years, she is not
         a qualifying partner. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of
         exception 2 via his relationship with  his  partner  therefore.  We
         find it relevant to  note  however  that  it  is  conceded  by  the
         respondent that it would be unduly harsh to expect J,  his  genuine
         and subsisting partner, to return to live  with  the  appellant  in
         Nigeria.

     32. We now turn to  consider  whether  the  appellant  can  succeed  in
         meeting the requirements of exception 2  through  his  relationship
         with his two qualifying children. It is accepted by the  respondent
         that he is the father of two qualifying children, JJO and NRO,  who
         are British citizens. With respect to JJO it  is  rightly  accepted
         that he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his
         child.

     33. It  not  been  conceded  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with NRO. We find,  however,  that
         this is the case. We find that the evidence of  the  appellant  and
         the written statements of M, NRO's mother show that he  has  played
         an extensive and committed role in the context of M's  imprisonment
         and the fact NRO has lived most of her life in  HMP  Peterborough's
         mother and baby. He was present at her birth. He has visited  every
         two weeks with supplies for NRO; he has looked after her  when  her
         mother had home leave; and has even  taken  her  to  hospital  when
         called by the prison because she needed a check up and  medication.
         He and his partner, J, intend that NRO will be part of their family
         as JJO's sister, and that he will be present in  her  life  as  her
         father, albeit a father who is separated from her mother.  For  the
         reasons set out above the appellant cannot show that he  meets  the
         second exception by showing that his deportation  would  be  unduly
         harsh for NRO.

     34. We take a different view however with respect to JJO. It is rightly
         conceded that it would be unduly harsh for him and his mother J  to
         go with the appellant  to  Nigeria.  It  is  not  conceded  by  the
         respondent that it would be unduly harsh for him to remain  in  the
         UK with J whilst the appellant is deported.

     35. We remind ourselves of the guidance on this test  provided  by  the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53,  that  unduly
         harsh is a circumstances which is particularly severe or bleak, and
         not just undesirable or difficult, and that this is  a  test  which
         focuses purely on the impact on the child. We are in no doubt  that
         the disappearance  of  the  appellant  from  JJO's  life  would  be
         extremely distressing for him but this alone  would  not  serve  to
         meet the requirements of this difficult test, as it would  be  hard
         to say that the direct impact on this normal healthy child would be
         more than the normal affects of deportation. We find however that J
         is  JJO's  primary  carer  and  that  the  impact  on  her  of  the
         appellant's deportation would be such that impact on JJO  would  be
         extremely serious and bleak. We find that J, who is  pregnant  with
         twin boys, would not be able to cope with the  deportation  of  the
         appellant, given her depression and anxiety in the context  of  her
         emotionally unstable personality disorder.

     36. Mr Melvin submitted that there was insufficient evidence supporting
         J  having  mental  health  problems.   In  respect  of  Ms  Brown's
         evidence, he stated that he took issue with it so far as it related
         to J's mental health.  He submitted that the evidence bears  little
         resemblance to the GP's notes which  have  been  disclosed.  During
         cross-examination  of  Ms  Brown  by  Mr  Melvin   challenged   her
         expertise. We accept that there was little documentary evidence  to
         support J receiving therapy and that Ms Brown  reached  conclusions
         without having sight of medical evidence; however,  this  does  not
         undermine  J's  credibility  or  the  reliability  of  Ms   Brown's
         evidence. J gave clear, coherent and consistent evidence  which  is
         supported to a significant  degree  by  the  GP's  notes.  In  this
         respect we take into account that other agencies have been involved
         with J's mental health and not only her GP. We were impressed by Ms
         Brown's evidence.  She has been a  qualified  social  worker  since
         1986. She has vast experience which  is  set  out  at  2.2  of  her
         report. It  is  not  a  tenable  argument  that  her  expertise  is
         undermined by her move into academia. Her report and oral  evidence
         indicated that she had spent time with J and there  was  no  reason
         for her to doubt what she was told by her.  There is  nothing  that
         would suggest that Ms Brown's evidence was inaccurate or  that  she
         reached conclusions that were not within her  remit  as  an  expert
         social worker. Furthermore, despite Ms Brown's report  having  been
         served on the respondent some  time  ago,  it  was  not  until  the
         hearing before us that it became known that the respondent did  not
         accept her evidence  relating  to  J's  mental  health.  We  attach
         significant weight to Ms Brown's evidence.

     37. We find, on the basis of J's credible evidence and  her  GP  notes,
         that she was previously sectioned because she had a  mental  health
         crisis due to her inability to deal with significant changes in her
         life. Deportation of the appellant  would be a  very  profound  and
         negative change, the removal of her source of stability in her view
         and that of the independent social worker Ms Brown, at a  point  in
         her life when she is under very significant physical and  emotional
         stress as the mother of one small child and pregnant with two  more
         babies.  J's  evidence  is  that  she  became  very   significantly
         distressed and unable to cope when the  appellant  was  taken  away
         from her for short periods of immigration detention  prior  to  the
         birth of JJO notwithstanding that she  would  have  been  receiving
         mental health support at that time. J's evidence is that she  would
         have a breakdown in the event of the  appellant's  deportation.  We
         accept that this is  likely.  It  is  corroborated  by  Ms  Brown's
         evidence. We have had particular regard to and  attach  significant
         weight to what Ms Brown says in her report at para 5.6-5.  8  about
         the consequences of the appellant's deportation in the light of J's
         mental health and the dire consequences for  JJO.  J  is  a  former
         looked after child, who was  let  down  and  latterly  received  an
         apology and compensation from Social Services, and  who  would,  in
         the opinion of Ms Brown, which we adopt, find it difficult to reach
         out  to  them  for  help  with  her  own  children.  We  find  that
         notwithstanding the mental health support that J receives that  the
         deportation of the appellant would be such a profound  stressor  on
         her because of her vulnerability and  the  stress  of  her  current
         circumstances that it would lead to a major  deterioration  in  her
         mental health. The inevitable result of  this  would  be  that  J's
         ability to parent JJO would be seriously  compromised  to  such  an
         extent that she would, in all probability, not be able to care  for
         him.  We have no hesitation in this case in finding that the unduly
         harsh test is met, as the loss  of  two  loving  parents  in  quick
         succession would be catastrophic for this young child.

     38. We were not addressed in submissions by either party in respect  of
         s.117B. However, we have put  into  the  balance  that  this  is  a
         precarious family life case which is a factor weighing against  the
         appellant. However, we conclude  that  the  appellant  has  a  very
         strong  Article  8  case   which   amounts   to   very   compelling
         circumstances   in   the   context   of   the   statutory   regime;
         notwithstanding that he  has  committed  a  very  serious  offence.
         Whilst there is a very strong public interest  in  his  deportation
         due to his conviction for murder and his life sentence for which he
         served over 8 years in prison, and whilst we  acknowledge  that  he
         has not shown he himself would have very significant  obstacles  to
         integration in Nigeria  we  are  satisfied  that  the  catastrophic
         impact of deportation on his British citizen child, JJO, due to the
         significant impact on his highly vulnerable and unwell partner,  J,
         combined with the best interests of his other child,  NRO,  in  his
         remaining in the UK; the  fact  that  he  has  spent  most  of  his
         childhood in the UK;  the length of his lawful  residence  and  his
         degree of integration and extent of his positive private life  ties
         in the UK, which include his commendable work against knife  crime,
         make a very compelling and truly exceptional case that  means  that
         his deportation would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
         Article 8 ECHR right to respect to family and private life.



    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside

      3. We re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  the  appeal  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to  the  appellant's  partner  and
    children.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 3rd June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

