
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04537/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 29th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [r m]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    MMK Lawrence, promulgated on 12th July 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Harmondsworth on 8th  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and he  was  born  on
    1st August 1983.  He appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 22nd September 2017, refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395,  on  the  basis
    that he is a homosexual from Bangladesh.

The Judge's Determination

 3. In a detailed and extensive determination, the judge recounted how  the
    Appellant initially had in place a witness by the  name  of  [MR],  who
    claimed to have been  granted  refugee  status  as  a  homosexual  from
    Bangladesh, but who then chose not to attend the hearing.  This was  at
    the time when the hearing had been set down for 8 June 2018.   Instead,
    a person by the name of [SA] attended.  Also in attendance was a person
    by the name [JS].

 4. The general view of the judge was that the witnesses had been primed to
    give evidence with respect to what was a bogus claim for asylum by this
    Appellant.  For example, the Appellant claimed that he was a "secretive
    homosexual in Bangladesh" but failed to explain what he meant by  this,
    (paragraph 12).  The Appellant also claimed that  his  uncle  had  been
    informed about his sexuality in Bangladesh (paragraph 13).   The  judge
    was not satisfied that the  Appellant  would  have  been  reluctant  to
    confess his sexuality to [JS], if it was  [JS]  who  had  informed  the
    uncle of the Appellant's homosexuality (paragraph  14).   A  number  of
    witnesses with witness statements,  did  not  attend  the  hearing,  as
    avoiding having their evidence tested in  cross-examination  (paragraph
    16).

 5. At the hearing, the Appellant himself gave evidence, where he was shown
    standing with other people, but the judge stated  that  photographs  in
    themselves, in the company of other male members of  society,  did  not
    suggest that he was in a homosexual relationship.  When  the  Appellant
    was cross-examined, he said  that  he  did  not  claim  asylum  earlier
    because "he did not know how".  The judge held that this  was  contrary
    to what Mr [K] had said in his written evidence (paragraph 18).

 6. Moreover, the Appellant said in his oral evidence that he attended LGBT
    clubs but did not "come out" as gay until 2016 (see question 14 of  the
    asylum interview).  The judge held that this evidence was  contradicted
    by Mr [K] himself who said the Appellant was living "openly" as  a  gay
    person in 2015.  But most importantly, the judge observed how in cross-
    examination, the Appellant said that he did not tell  the  LGBT  people
    that he was gay "because he thought they might be disgusted with  him",
    and this was contrary "to the ethos of LGBT organisation to its  core".



 7. The judge found that the  Appellant  had  not  attended  any  of  these
    meetings because if he had done he would know the  views  of  the  LGBT
    people in terms of their ethos (paragraph 21).  Insofar as this  appeal
    is concerned, in terms of the evidence of [SA], who, when asked  as  to
    where  the  Appellant  lived,  said  that  he  believed  he  lived   in
    "Portsmouth".  The judge held that this "is clearly not the  case"  and
    that this "was pointed out to him", to which [SA] said  that  "he  does
    not have the Appellant's  address  and  "but  only  has  his  telephone
    number, from that he deduced he lived in Portsmouth" (paragraph 22).

 8. The judge then went on to consider whether the Appellant and  [SA]  had
    been  in  touch  by  telephone  looking  at  the  telephone  codes  for
    Portsmouth and for Southampton, as well as for Christchurch in  Dorset.
    He observed that "the witnesses never used  the  Appellant's  telephone
    ever to call him" (paragraph 24).

 9. Against this background, the judge went on to look at what the  essence
    of the claim to homosexuality was between [SA] and the  Appellant.   He
    observed that [SA] lived in Ilford and the Appellant himself  lived  in
    Dorset.  He went on to conclude that "it is far-fetched to  claim  that
    they both incurred the expense of travelling from Essex and  Dorset  to
    have a casual tryst in a sauna in Vauxhall, London.  This  is  not  for
    real" (paragraph 26).  The judge then proceeded to say that, "there  is
    no reference in the Appellant's witness statement, dated 10th May 2018,
    meeting anyone in a sauna in London for sex".  It did not end there.

10. This is because the evidence before the judge was that

         "The Appellant claims he is not in a relationship with anyone  now.
         However, he brought [SA] to  give  evidence  on  his  behalf.   His
         evidence is that they meet in a sauna in Vauxhall for sex.  This is
         relationship.  Casual.  But a relationship.  The Appellant makes no
         reference to it in his witness statement or in his  oral  evidence"
         (paragraph 28).

11. Thereafter, the judge cited relevant case law  (paragraphs  29  to  37)
    before dismissing the appeal, on human rights grounds, as  well  as  on
    asylum grounds.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of  application  state  that  the  judge  misconstrued  the
    evidence.  This was particularly the case in terms of what was said  by
    Mr [K] and by the Appellant in relation to each  other.   It  was  also
    said that the judge misheard the Appellant's witness, [SA],  as  having
    said that the Appellant lived in Portsmouth, when in fact the Appellant
    lived in Bournemouth.

Grant of Permission

13.  In  the  grant  of  permission,  that  is  particularly  helpful   and
    significant, the judge stated that there was nothing  to  the  argument
    that the judge misunderstood the evidence in relation to the  Appellant
    and Mr [K], and their  relationship,  but  they  may  be  a  "potential
    materiality to refer" insofar as the judge got the name of  Bournemouth
    mixed with Portsmouth, as the place where [SA] was alleged to have said
    that the Appellant lived.  In fact, as the judge granting permission it
    is clear, "the ROP does record the witnesses  having  referred  to  the
    dialling code for Bournemouth" (see paragraph 4).  Moreover, the  grant
    of permission also makes the point that  "the  judge  found  additional
    reasons for finding the witness not credible" but for the avoidance  of
    doubt there may be a "potential materiality to refer" insofar as  there
    was a reference to Portsmouth at all (at paragraphs 22 to 24).

The Submissions

14. On 27th September 2018, the Appellant's representative, Mr Hussain, was
    late in attendance at court, and  had  not  been  able  to  inform  the
    Tribunal authorities of his late arrival, although he  does  appear  to
    have told the Appellant himself,  who  had  arrived  early.   When  the
    hearing began, I read out the grant of permission  to  Mr  Hussain  and
    reminded him that his time will be better  spent  by  highlighting  the
    "potential materiality" of the error of fact, insofar as the judge  had
    referred to Portsmouth, when considering the Appellant's  residence  at
    Bournemouth.

15. Notwithstanding my having done so, Mr Hussain launched into a  detailed
    attack on the determination of the judge, stating that  the  judge  had
    made factual errors in every  fundamental  respect.   For  example,  he
    maintained that the judge was wrong in concluding  that  the  Appellant
    had attended LGBT clubs, but did not come out as gay until 2016.  This,
    however, can simply not  have  been  the  case  because  the  judge  is
    expressly referring to the asylum  interview  at  question  14  of  the
    Appellant.  He is also referring to what Mr [K] said in  his  evidence.
    Mr Hussain also submitted that the judge  was  fundamentally  wrong  to
    have said that he did not tell the LGBT people that he was gay "because
    he thought they might be disgusted with him" (paragraph 21).   He  then
    submitted that the error of fact in relation  to  Portsmouth  when  the
    judge meant to refer to Bournemouth, plainly tarnished the  credibility
    of the witness, in a way that the judge fell into error.

16. For her part, Ms Pal submitted  that  Mr  [K]  was  a  person  who  had
    expressly written to the Respondent Home Secretary in  support  of  the
    Appellant, so the judge could not have been in error in saying that  Mr
    [K] was known to the Secretary of State, such that he would  have  been
    able to tell the Appellant that he was eligible to apply for asylum  as
    a gay person.  Secondly, even if there was an error of law, one had  to
    look at the entirety of the findings in relation to [SA], and  in  this
    respect one should not confine oneself to paragraphs 22 to 24 only, but
    go further and look at the paragraphs thereafter, up to  paragraph  28,
    where the judge had found the Appellant not to be credible  at  all  in
    terms of his relationship with [SA].

17. In reply, Mr Hussain went on to repeat himself extensively in terms  of
    submissions that he had already made, pointing out that the judge  made
    a mistake in  relation  to  the  place  where  [SA]  claimed  that  the
    Appellant lived, and this tarnished his image.  It was also not correct
    to say that the Appellant only came out in 2016.   The  fact  was  that
    some people knew about the Appellant's sexuality but  others  did  not.
    The judge was simply wrong also to have said that the Appellant did not
    tell the LGBT people that he was gay because he thought they might have
    been disgusted with him.

No Error of Law

18.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

19. First, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  there  might
    be a potential materiality to refer" insofar as  the  judge  refers  to
    Portsmouth, when he ought to have been referring to Bournemouth.  It is
    clear, as the grant of permission states, that the judge's own ROP does
    contain notes that refer to Bournemouth.  Plainly he had  not  misheard
    the evidence, and had recognised  the  Appellant's  witness,  [SA],  as
    referring to the Appellant as living in Bournemouth, but failed  to  so
    say in the determination (at paragraphs 22 to 24), referring instead to
    'Portsmouth'.  Even so, a losing party is entitled  to  know  why  they
    have lost their appeal and it may be  that  upon  closer  analysis  the
    reference to Portsmouth could be damaging to the credibility in the way
    that would not otherwise have been the case.  I have for  this  reason,
    therefore, considered this matter carefully.  I am  in  no  doubt  that
    this is not so at all.

20.  This is because the issue here at hand was not  whether  [SA]  claimed
    the Appellant to be  living  in  'Portsmouth'  or  'Bournemouth.'   The
    question here was whether they were in a relationship.   That  question
    completely fell to be decided against the Appellant for  the  following
    two reasons.

21. First, the Appellant himself claimed that he was "not in a relationship
    with anyone now" (paragraph 28).  Mr Hussain's attempt, in  his  reply,
    to seek to persuade me that there are various grounds of relationships,
    is a sterile argument, given that the Appellant's case is not  that  he
    is persecuted because he is in any kind of relationship, but because he
    was in a gay relationship.  The judge, in the  face  of  that  explicit
    claim, came to the firm view that this would not be  the  case  because
    "his evidence is that they meet in a sauna in Vauxhall  for  sex",  but
    the fact remained that "the Appellant makes no reference to it  in  his
    witness statement or in his oral evidence" (paragraph 28).   What  this
    means is that even if one leaves aside any confusion about whether  the
    Appellant lived in Portsmouth or in Bournemouth, the Appellant  himself
    had been quite clear that he was not in a relationship, and he had made
    no reference to it either in his  witness  statement  or  in  his  oral
    evidence. Yet, against  all  of  this,  [SA]  had  turned  up  to  give
    evidence, on the basis that he was  in  a  gay  relationship  with  the
    Appellant.

22. Second, insofar as there was a claim that they were in a  relationship,
    the judge was interested to know how they kept in touch.  Assuming that
    there was a confusion that [SA] had said that the Appellant  had  lived
    in Bournemouth (and not Portsmouth) the  judge  recorded  that  it  was
    clearly pointed out to [SA] that this was not the case,  and  [SA]  had
    said that "he does not have the Appellant's address", but only had "his
    telephone number and from that he deduced that he lived in  Portsmouth"
    (paragraph 22).  Yet, upon an analysis  of  whether,  not  knowing  the
    Appellant's  precise  place  of  abode,  [SA]  made  contact  with  the
    Appellant, the judge was clear that "the witness  has  never  used  the
    Appellant's telephone ever to call him" (paragraph 24), and no evidence
    was produced before the Tribunal below  that  they  were  in  telephone
    contact at all.  As against this, the judge was entitled to come to the
    view that the explanation that they met  in  a  sauna  in  Vauxhall  in
    London for a "casual tryst" (paragraph 26) was simply untenable.

23. Finally, and in any event, what is entirely overlooked in the claim, as
    put before this Tribunal, is that under HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31  which
    the judge refers to (at paragraph 31) the Appellant can only succeed if
    he is  determined  to  have  an  "open  relationship"  upon  return  to
    Bangladesh.  However,  his  evidence  was  that  he  was  "a  secretive
    homosexual in Bangladesh" (paragraph 12).  The claim, even  if  it  was
    taken at its highest as being credible on the part  of  the  Appellant,
    simply would not have got off the ground.  There is absolutely no error
    of law in the determination of the judge below.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                   20th October 2018




