
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/04689/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester CJC      Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th November 2018  On 10th January 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              MARVIN AHMAD ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G Madabuke (Legal Representative, Broudie Jackson
& Canter)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's asylum appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Siddiqi at Manchester on the 9th of May 2018 and dismissed for the
    reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 31st of May 2018. The
    Judge declined to depart from AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] EWCA
    Civ 944. The Judge went on to find that the Appellant would be able to
    get assistance from his family and to relocate to the IKR and that it
    would be in the best interests of the Appellant to live with his aunt
    and uncle in the IKR.

 2. The grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal assert that the Judge erred in finding that with his profile
    the Appellant was not eligible for international protection. It is also
    argued that the Judge erred in finding that the Appellant as a Sunni
    Kurd from a contested area would not be at risk where there was
    evidence that Sunni men were targeted. The finding that the Appellant
    could be returned to the IKR was contrary to the guidance in AA and the
    Appellant would be removed as a minor. Permission was granted largely
    on the basis that the Appellant was a minor and that his removal as
    such had not been properly considered. the question was whether it was
    reasonable for the Appellant to relocate.

 3. At the start of the hearing Mr Madabuke observed that there had been 2
    fundamental changes since the appeal had been heard and permission to
    appeal had been granted. The first was that the case of AAH (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 (IAC) had been
    promulgated on the 6th of June, the second was that the Appellant had
    turned 18 and so now an adult. It was argued that from headnote 7 in
    AAH as the Appellant was from a contested area he would not be welcome
    in the IKR and that AAH provided the answer as to how the case should
    be decided. In short where it was found that an Appellant was from a
    contested area then they should receive article 15(c) protection.

 4. For the Home Office it was observed that reliance could only be placed
    on the grounds that had been submitted. The Judge had recognised that
    the Appellant was 17 but he is now an adult. So far as grounds 4 and 5
    were concerned it was not for the Judge to look policies that could
    have been applied. In paragraph 52 section 55 had been considered. The
    main issue was internal relocation, ground 6 referred to
    proportionality which was not the test. In this case we were talking
    about a minor returning to the IKR and being provided for by relatives,
    that dealt with the protection issue.

 5. The Appellant is now 18 and if his case were to be considered now,
    however it got to that stage, he would be treated as an adult with all
    that that entails. The fact that he was a minor at the date of the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is a hollow point which in my view
    takes the case no further.

 6. The grounds treat the decision and the Appellant's history in
    disjointed fashion. The Appellant may have originally come from a
    contested area but he left there years ago and lived with his aunt and
    uncle in the IKR for 2 years. In going to the IKR the Appellant would
    be returning to the area he had last lived in and there is no
    suggestion he had to leave the IKR from any danger that he faced there
    at that time or there is a danger to him beyond an assessment of any
    relevant risk factors.

 7. Headnote 7 in AAH states: "Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-
    treatment during the security screening process must be assessed on a
    case-by-case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
    (i) coming from a family with a known association with ISIL, (ii)
    coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single male
    of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent
    arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of having
    arrived directly from ISIL territory."

 8. With regard to the final sentence the Appellant would not be arriving
    directly from ISIL territory, a point that the grounds do not address.
    Not only would the Appellant be able to point to his being returned
    from the UK he would also be able to point to his having actually lived
    in the IKR for a considerable period of time before he left for the UK
    and would be able to rely on family support, as the Judge found. The
    Appellant is a Sunni Muslim but equally importantly he is Kurd with
    links to the IKR, factors which the Judge was entitled to take into
    account in the decision and which are reflected in the decision that he
    made.

 9. On the facts as found in the decision the Judge was entitled to find
    that the Appellant would be returned at the age of 18 and that he could
    return to the area where last lived, the IKR, where he would have
    family support. The overall consideration of his circumstances was that
    the Appellant did not have a profile that would place him at risk in
    Iraq and that relocation, if it can properly be called that, to the IKR
    was both reasonable and feasible. It is not a question of
    proportionality.

10. The decision has to be read as a whole and fairly without taking
    aspects out of context. It also has to be read in the light of the
    overall circumstances which in this case include the basic and
    unavoidable fact that the Appellant is now an adult. Placing that into
    the context of the findings that the Judge was entitled to make, I am
    not satisfied that the Judge did make an error in the decision but in
    if there was an error with regard to the approach taken in the light of
    his age I am satisfied that such an error could not be regarded as
    being material.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th December 2018
