
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04962/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2019                           |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  imam [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his
    application for asylum and humanitarian protection in the  UK.   First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4th June  2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal, with  permission  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman on 12th November 2018.

 2. There are four Grounds of Appeal which are somewhat interconnected.   I
    deal firstly with Ground 3 as I find that it is that ground  which  has
    been made out in the appeal before me.

 3. It is contended in the third ground that the judge failed to take  into
    account significant documentary evidence on core material  matters.   I
    do not accept that the judge failed to take  account  of  all  relevant
    documents in  relation  to  allegations  as  to  the  shooting  of  the
    Appellant's brother in pages 47 to 69  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  as
    contended in the grounds.

 4. However, I do accept that, reading the decision as a whole, it is clear
    that the judge failed to take account of documentary evidence at  pages
    77, 78  and  79  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.   These  relate  to  the
    Appellant's claim that the authorities had been looking for  him.   The
    judge set out the Appellant's claim and evidence at paragraph 7 of  the
    decision.  This included the  Appellant's  claim  made  in  his  asylum
    interview (7.a), in his witness statement (7.i), and in  oral  evidence
    (7.k) that the authorities visited  his  family  home  just  after  his
    visits in 2012 and 2013 and that he obtained this information from  his
    brother and from neighbours.

 5. The judge considered this matter at paragraph 23 and 26.  At  paragraph
    23 the judge said:

         "He maintains that when he did go back to Pakistan for  two  family
         reasons, arising from the shooting of his brother and, year  later,
         from the death of his mother, the security forces went to his  home
         address to ask about him.  He has not produced any confirmation  of
         these visits, particularly from the family members to whom they are
         said to have spoken.  That evidence should be readily available  to
         the Appellant and yet he has not put it forward".

 6. At paragraph 26 the judge said "Firstly, he has produced no evidence to
    confirm his claim that there have been continuing enquiries  about  him
    in Pakistan, particularly since he left the country now more than eight
    years ago".  However, the three letters at pages 77, 78 and 79  purport
    to come from neighbours of the Appellant in Pakistan and  each  of  the
    authors claim that police came looking for the Appellant on a number of
    occasions since 2011.  It may be of  course  that  the  judge  did  not
    accept the evidence contained in these  letters.   However,  the  judge
    made a clear finding that no evidence on this issue had  been  provided
    when some evidence had in fact been provided.  In my view  the  failure
    to take into account this evidence  impacts  directly  on  the  judge's
    findings that the authorities in  Pakistan  have  no  interest  in  the
    Appellant.  This is important  given  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    Appellant was involved in activities in Pakistan before he came to  the
    UK [28]. In my view the failure to take into account  this  documentary
    evidence undermines the safety of the credibility findings.

 7. The first Ground of Appeal goes to the assessment of risk on return  on
    the basis of the Appellant's claimed involvement with  the  Balochistan
    movement as does the fourth ground which  relates  to  the  Appellant's
    claimed sur place activities.  In my view these findings flow from  the
    credibility findings.  The second ground alleges that the judge made  a
    fundamental error in relation to the Appellant's ethnicity.  I  do  not
    consider that this has been made out given that  there  was  no  direct
    evidence from the Appellant in relation to this matter.  In any  event,
    this is not necessarily material to any of the other findings.

 8. I indicated to the parties at the hearing that, should I agree that the
    third ground was made out,  I  considered  that  as  this  error  would
    undermine the credibility findings it would  be  appropriate  in  these
    circumstances to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined afresh.  The parties agreed with my proposal in relation  to
    this matter.

 9. In these circumstances as material matters have  not  been  taken  into
    account in the assessment of credibility, in light of the  Presidential
    Practice Statements the nature or extent of the judicial  fact  finding
    which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the asylum appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.  No findings are preserved.

I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable, therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
