
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04129/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2018                          |On 28 September 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S S
                                                (Anonymity has been
    directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan for Abbey Law, St Albans


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 18 November 1976.   He
    appealed the Secretary of State's decision of 9 March 2018 refusing him
    asylum and humanitarian protection and  on  human  rights  grounds  and
    under the Immigration Rules.  His appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Herbert on 1 May 2018 and the  appeal  was  allowed
    under the Geneva Convention and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of  ECHR  and
    under the Immigration Rules in a decision promulgated on 18 June 2018.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Chohan  on  16  July  2018.
    The permission states that it is arguable that the Judge erred  in  law
    by failing to give adequate reasons for finding the appellant  credible
    and that he is a homosexual.  The permission states  that  the  Judge's
    findings are short and at paragraph 34 he concludes that the  appellant
    is a practising homosexual but he fails to give any  reasons  for  that
    conclusion, so the permission states that it is open to  argument  that
    the Judge has given inadequate reasons for the findings made.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in September  2005  and  in
    2008 he claimed asylum as a stateless person.  This was refused and the
    appeal was dismissed.  This decision was  promulgated  on  7  September
    2010.  There is therefore a Devaseelan issue in this claim and the 2010
    decision is in the file.

 6. The Presenting Officer made his submissions, submitting that there is a
    lack of reasoning in the Judge's decision as to whether  the  appellant
    is a practising homosexual or not.  I was referred to paragraph  34  of
    the decision.  In this  the  Judge  states  that  the  appellant  is  a
    practising homosexual on the lower standard of proof  and  the  medical
    reports which are on file.

 7. At paragraph 32 of the decision the Judge states the starting point  is
    the lack of credibility in relation to the appellant  and  the  finding
    that there was no merit in his asylum claim to be a stateless person in
    the decision in 2010.  The Judge however at paragraph  33  states  that
    this  claim  is  significantly  different  as  this  relates   to   the
    appellant's sexuality.

 8. He submitted that the Judge refers to the  medical  reports  which  are
    actually the General Practitioner's notes, and he submitted that  these
    appear. to be the  only  reason  for  finding  that  the  appellant  is
    homosexual apart from the evidence from the appellant and  his  partner
    which the Judge refers to at  paragraph  33.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the General Practitioner's notes come  from  information
    given to the General Practitioner by the appellant and that  inadequate
    reasons are given by the Judge for  his  findings  on  the  appellant's
    sexuality.  At paragraph 36 of the decision he refers to HJ (Iran)  and
    the background evidence on Bangladesh. He submitted that  this  has  no
    bearing on the Judge's finding that the appellant is a homosexual.

 9. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's  decision  as  inadequate  reasons  have  been  given  for  his
    findings.

10. The appellant's representative submitted that the whole  decision  must
    be considered holistically.  He submitted  that  the  Judge  has  given
    sufficient reasons for his findings and at paragraph 34 of the decision
    the Judge makes reference to his reasons for finding the  appellant  is
    gay.  He submitted that there is a low standard of proof  and  this  is
    referred to by the Judge at paragraph 34 and mention  is  made  of  the
    GP's notes as these  corroborate  the  appellant's  account  about  his
    sexuality. He has clearly mentioned his sexuality to the GP.

11. The representative submitted that this case is completely different  to
    the decision in the appellant's previous claim in which  he  was  found
    not to be a stateless person and not to be of  the  Bihari  tribe.   He
    submitted that this appeal is based only on the  appellant's  sexuality
    and the Judge mentions having seen the appellant and  his  partner  and
    having heard evidence from both of them.

12. He submitted that at paragraphs 14 to 16 he deals with the  appellant's
    partner's evidence as well as the appellant's evidence and he submitted
    that the accounts were consistent.  I was asked to find  that  this  is
    important and note that the  appellant  and  his  partner  have  mutual
    friends.  The representative referred to paragraph 17 and he  submitted
    that when the appellant's and his  partner's  evidence  are  considered
    together there is clearly a genuine relationship  between  them.   They
    are a couple.  The Judge finds this at paragraph 34 of the decision and
    he also refers to the medical evidence.  I was referred to page  47  of
    the appellant's bundle which is a report from the Medical Secretary  at
    the Whitechapel Health Centre on the appellant.  It is dated 30 January
    2018 and refers to the appellant suffering from stress related symptoms
    and low  mood.   The  appellant  has  told  his  doctor  that  being  a
    homosexual is illegal in Bangladesh and he cannot go back there  or  he
    will be persecuted.  Although the appellant did  not  go  to  any  LGBT
    organisations until after March 2017 at paragraph 3 of the letter  from
    the Whitechapel Health Centre reference is made to his  fears  for  his
    life in Bangladesh relating to his sexuality.   The  doctor  refers  to
    multiple consultations and what the Judge has done is find  that  based
    on his consultations with the doctor and the doctor's findings, on  the
    low standard of proof, this appellant is homosexual.

13. He submitted that the Home Office has only looked at paragraphs 33  and
    34 where all the evidence is tied together but he submitted  that  when
    the decision is read as a whole and when  the  background  material  is
    considered, particularly at paragraphs 27 to 31, the Judge  finds  that
    based on the evidence before him there is a  real  risk  on  the  lower
    standard of proof that the appellant's return to Bangladesh could  lead
    to persecution.

14. He submitted that credibility is the issue  and  the  Judge  finds  the
    appellant to be credible.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has considered all  the
    evidence before him but has given inadequate reasons for  his  findings
    and although the Judge states that there was sufficient evidence before
    him to find that the appellant is a practising homosexual based on  the
    oral evidence and the medical evidence, that is not the case  and  that
    because the appellant's and his partner's evidence is consistent is not
    a reason for finding it to be true.

16. I was asked to find that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  this
    decision and that the decision should be set aside.
Decision and Reasons

17. I have considered the background evidence  on  Bangladesh  relating  to
    homosexuals.  I have also noted the sections of the background evidence
    quoted by the Judge but I find that he has been selective in his choice
    of the background evidence.

18. The background  evidence,  in  particular  the  COI  report,  does  not
    demonstrate that there is a reasonable  likelihood  of  persecution  of
    homosexuals in Bangladesh.   There  are  LGBT  networks  in  Dakar  and
    although homosexuality is against the law it  is  rarely  enforced  and
    what gay people in Bangladesh may suffer is harassment.  As  stated  by
    the Presenting Officer this does not affect the  Judge's  finding  that
    the appellant is a homosexual but it is worth  mentioning  relating  to
    the decision.

19. Although this claim is different from the  appellant's  previous  claim
    which was decided in 2010 credibility was an issue at that time  and  I
    find that credibility is an issue still.  The Judge has noted  all  the
    evidence before him but after noting it he has failed  to  give  proper
    reasons for finding the appellant to be homosexual and I  do  not  find
    that the medical evidence helps  the  appellant's  case.   The  medical
    evidence is purely based on what the appellant told  his  GP.   He  may
    well be anxious and  depressed  and  he  may  well  have  had  multiple
    consultations with his doctor but what the doctor's notes  are  stating
    are that the appellant has told him that he is  anxious  and  depressed
    because of his sexuality and his fear of persecution in Bangladesh.   I
    find that the doctor  has  repeated  what  he  has  been  told  by  the
    appellant and this is not sufficient for the Judge  to  find  he  is  a
    homosexual. The fact that the appellant's and his partner's evidence is
    consistent carries little weight.  The appellant was only able to  give
    a vague description of his relationship with the person  in  Bangladesh
    and the respondent finds that the photographs etc, of the appellant  in
    nightclubs do not prove his sexuality and that must be correct.   There
    is also the Section 8 issue.  Section 8 applies as  he  did  not  claim
    asylum for some 11 years as a result of his sexuality  and  because  of
    this, credibility again is an issue.


20. The appellant's claim to be of the Bahari Tribr was not accepted at the
    previous hearing but the judge in this  decision  has  made  a  finding
    about the appellant being of this tribe at paragraph 35  so  the  claim
    does have similarities to the appellant's previous  claim  where  there
    were serious credibility findings.

21. The Judge may have believed  the  appellant  and  his  partner  at  the
    hearing but he has not given adequate reasons  for  believing  them  or
    believing that the  appellant  is  a  practising  homosexual.   I  have
    considered the  appellant's  partner's  statement  in  the  appellant's
    bundle at paragraph 6.  He admits that he has no links with Bangladesh.
    He states that if the appellant  returns  there  he  is  likely  to  be
    tortured and beaten, he may even be killed, but again he  is  repeating
    what the appellant must have told him.


Notice of Decision
Because of inadequate reasoning I find that there are material errors of
law in the Judge's decision and that the decision must be set aside.  None
of its findings are to stand other than as a record of what was said on
that occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the
2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to include Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Herbert.

22. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date 21 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


